Partnerships


IQ
 A product of




                                            Grain Storage
                                            Public-Private Partnerships
                                            India has a number of early lessons to offer in the devel-
                                            opment of grain storage PPPs: from specific bid require-
                                            ments and clauses in draft contracts, the importance of
                                            ensuring early understanding and acceptability of proj-
                                            ect structures by investors, to the critical role of trans-
                                            parency.




Intelligence and Insights on public-private partnerships
Standard Disclaimer
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank and
International Finance Corporation. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory
or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank encourages dis-
semination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.
For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.

Photo & Illustration credits
Cover, Inside Cover, page 6, page 32, page 50: © Pingwin/istockphoto. Used with permission. Further permission required for
reuse.; page 3: Nico Crisafulli/Creative Commons license, creativecommons.org;licenses/by-sa/2.0; page 7: Seth Sawyers/Creative
Commons license, creativecommons.org;licenses/by-sa/2.0; page 13: IFC; page 33: © DaydreamsGirl/istockphoto. Used with per-
mission. Further permission required for reuse.; page 41: Curt Carnemark/World Bank; page 51: Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank;
page 53: © LT Food Limited.




2 • The World Bank Group
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper was co-authored by Shyamala Shukla, Senior Consultant, Public-Pri-
vate Partnerships Group of the World Bank and Neeraj Gupta, Principal Invest-
ment Officer, IFC Advisory Services in Public-Private Partnerships, with contribu-
tions by David Mckee, Grain Industry Consultant; and Brien Desilets and Briana
Gaynor White, PPP Consultants. David Mckee wrote the Appendix on modern
silos and reviewed earlier drafts, while Brien Desilets and Brianna Gaynor White
researched the initial country cases. Clive Harris, Practice Manager, Public-Pri-
vate Partnerships Group of the World Bank provided guidance.
The authors would like to thank peer reviewers Isabel Chatterton and Indira
J. Ekanayake for their very useful comments, which have helped to improve
the text.
The authors are indebted to Sheo Shekhar Shukla, ex-Managing Director,
Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and Logistics Corporation and Jai Sheel Oberoi,
Associate Director of LT Food Limited, who provided a wealth of
information on the Madhya Pradesh and Punjab silo projects. This paper would
not have been possible without their contributions.
The authors also wish to thank the following public and private practitioners:
Survesh Kumar, GM (Finance), PUNGRAIN, Punjab, India; Rashid Al Masroori,
CEO, PASFR, Oman; Anoop Kumar, ex-Executive Director and R. Bhargava,
Advisor (Silos), FCI, India; Sutura Bello and O. Akinnawo, PIU, Ministry of Fi-
nance Nigeria; Keith Smith and Christopher Helm, ADAS; Atul Chaturvedi,
CEO, Adani-Wilmar; and Ali Habaj, CEO, Atyab Investments Limited, Oman.
Thanks also to the following IFC and World Bank staff: Ritesh Vij, Julinette M.
Bayking, Yusra Baloch, Yassar Altaf, Tugba Gurcanlar, Scott Alexander Mills, Pat-
rick Macharia, and Indira J. Ekanayake, for sharing their experience and
for providing valuable insights.
The authors wish to specially thank Sheila Jagannathan, Program Manager, e-
institute and Lead Learning Specialist, who led the work on the e-learning vid-
eos. The accompanying videos were recorded and edited for the World Bank
by Jessica Clark Hoganson.
Supplemental short videos and a webinar can be found at the following links:
Video on the Madhya Pradesh silo project by Sheo Shekhar Shukla, ex-MD,
MPWLC, India, is available at https://www.kaltura.com/tiny/l4gdf
Video on the Punjab silo project by Jai Sheel Oberoi, Associate Director of
LT Foods Limited, India, is available at https://www.kaltura.com/tiny/nx1kg
Webinar on Global Trends in PPP in Grain Storage by Shyamala Shukla and
Neeraj Gupta is available at http://einstitute.worldbank.org/ei/webinar/
public-private-partnerships-grain-storage
Funding for this output was provided by the Public-Private Partnerships
Group of the World Bank and IFC Advisory Services in Public-Private
Partnerships.




                                                         Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 1
2 • The World Bank Group
Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.......................................................................................... 1

ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS............................................................................. 4

INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................ 7
	Background.......................................................................................................... 7
	Global food supply.............................................................................................. 8
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN GRAIN STORAGE.................................... 13
	Strategic considerations.................................................................................... 13
	Rationale for PPPs in grain storage.................................................................. 15
	PPP models seen globally................................................................................. 21

PROJECT CASE STUDY.......................................................................................... 33
	     MP Silo Project, India......................................................................................... 33

CONCLUSION.......................................................................................................... 41
	     Key lessons......................................................................................................... 41
DOcuments & References.............................................................................. 51

Appendix................................................................................................................ 53
	Simplified guide to modern silos..................................................................... 53



                                                                                      Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 3
             ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS

              AALL         Adani Agri-Logistics Limited
              AFMA         Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Act, Philippines
              ATA          Agriculture Transformation Agenda
              BAFPS        Bureau of Agricultural and Fisheries Products Standards
              BOLT         Build-Own-Lease-Transfer
              BOO          Build-Own-Operate
              BOOT         Build-Own-Operate-Transfer
              BOT          Build-Operate-Transfer
              BSF          Bulk Storage Facility
              CAP          Cover and Plinth, Common Agriculture Policy
              CIF          Cost Insurance and Freight
              CPI          Consumer Price Index
              CWC          Central Warehousing Corporation, India
              DA           Department of Agriculture, Philippines
              DBFOO        Design-Build-Finance-Own-Operate
              DBFOT        Design-Build-Finance-Own-Transfer
              DCP          Decentralized Procurement
              DSCR         Debt Service Coverage Ratio
              EPC          Engineering, Procurement, and Construction
              EU           European Union
              FAO          Food and Agriculture Organization
              FCI          Food Corporation of India
                           Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
              FMA & RD
                           Development, Nigeria
                           Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Water
              FMA & WR
                           Resources, Nigeria
              FRA          Food Reserve Agency
              GDP          Gross Domestic Product
              GEAPS        Grain Elevator and Processors Society
              GOI          Government of India
              ICRC         Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission
              IGC          International Grain Council




4 • The World Bank Group
 IFC                         International Finance Corporation
 IFPRI                       International Food Policy Research Institute
 IMF                         International Monetary Fund
 INR                         Indian Rupee
 IRR                         Internal Rate of Return
 LGU                         Local Government Unit
 MFI                         Multi-Lateral Financial Institution
 MOF                         Ministry of Finance
                             Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and Logistics
 MPWLC
                             Corporation Limited
 MSP                         Minimum Support Price
 MT                          Metric Ton
 NABCOR                      National Agribusiness Corporation, Philippines
 NFRA                        National Food Reserve Agency
 OBC                         Outline Business Case
 PASFR                       Public Authority for Stores & Food Reserve
                             Pakistan Agricultural and Storage and Services
 PASSCO
                             Corporation
 PDS                         Public Distribution System
 PEG                         Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee
 PHPTC                       Post-Harvest Processing and Trading Centre
 PPP                         Public-Private Partnerships
 PUN-                        Punjab Grains Procurement Corporation Limited
 GRAIN
 RBOT                        Rehabilitate-Build-Operate-Transfer
 RFP                         Request for Proposal
 RFQ                         Request for Qualification
 SGR                         Strategic Grain Reserves
 SWC                         State Warehousing Corporation
 US                          United States
 USAID                       United States Agency for International Development
 VGF                         Viability Gap Financing
 WACC                        Weighted Average Cost of Capital

All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.




                                                                   Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 5
6 • The World Bank Group
Introduction

Background
Global attention was focused on food price volatility in the aftermath of the
global financial crisis. Governments initiated policy measures to ensure food
security of populations, which included increasing food reserves as well as
measures to reduce food wastage, including wastage due to poor storage
and handling. One solution identified by countries running large food security
programs was to introduce public-private partnerships (PPPs) in food storage,
especially for storage of grain.
The positive impacts of PPPs in this sector could be huge given the inefficien-
cies in grain storage and the large proportion of post-harvest wastage espe-
cially in the handling and storage of grain in developing countries. A 2007
study estimated up to $4 billion in post-harvest losses in Sub-Saharan Africa
alone, which is equivalent to the annual calorific requirements of 48 million
people1.
PPP projects for grain storage can be done in a variety of PPP modes based
on policy imperatives of governments and the demand for storage, which is
often a natural corollary to policy. While the benefits of PPPs are undeniable in
many sectors, given the efficiencies that the private sector can bring in, there    1
                                                                                      World Bank, Natural Resources
has been little experience in PPP in grain storage. Globally, only a few projects   Institute and Food and Agricultural
have been successfully implemented in this sector, with other projects being        Organization (2011), Missing Food:
                                                                                    The Case of Post-Harvest Grain
explored in various countries. There has been some recent activity in this sector   Losses in Sub-Saharan Africa.
in the PPP space in countries like India, Pakistan, Oman, Nigeria, Philippines,



                                                                      Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 7
                                        and Zambia. However, not all of these countries have ended up adopting the
                                        PPP mode.
                                        Given substantial work in this sector in India and interest expressed by other
                                        client countries to understand more about PPP models and projects in the
                                        sector, the World Bank Public-Private Partnerships Group, jointly with IFC
                                        Advisory Services in Public-Private Partnerships, undertook this review and anal-
                                        ysis of global trends in PPP in grain storage. The methodology has consisted of:
                                        (a) interviews and discussions with public and private individuals and organiza-
                                        tions involved in work in this area as well as IFC and World Bank staff who have
                                        been involved in such projects at upstream, midstream, or downstream imple-
                                        mentation phases in different countries; (b) examination of procurement and
                                        contract documents available in the public domain; and (c) a broad literature
                                        review to supplement (a) and (b).
                                        The paper is divided into three sections. The rest of Section I deals with the
                                        issues of global food prices, strategic reserves, and food policies within
                                        countries to the extent that these provide the context for PPPs in the sector.
                                        Section II deals with public-private partnerships in grain storage with a discus-
                                        sion of the rationale for PPP, strategic considerations, and PPP models seen
                                        globally with examples from various countries. Section III details a silo project
                                        case study from Madhya Pradesh in India that will be helpful to practitioners
                                        working on structuring silo projects in other developing countries. Section IV is
                                        the concluding section, and its two sub-sections include lessons learned from
                                        current experience and a list of the documents, contracts, and references
                                        examined by the authors, along with other material which can serve as a
                                        source of knowledge for practitioners. The Appendix at the end contains a
                                        brief guide to modern silos and silo operations—a “must read” for policy
                                        makers and PPP practitioners not fully conversant with these.
                                        To supplement this paper, the World Bank Group has organized a face to face
                                        session with government and World Bank experts to discuss global trends and
                                        project cases. In addition, the authors have conducted a webinar that can be
                                        accessed at http://einstitute.worldbank.org/ei/webinar/public-private-partner-
                                        ships-grain-storage. A set of videos on the Madhya Pradesh and Punjab cases
                                        have been prepared with the help of the World Bank’s e-institute, featuring
                                        practitioners from the public and private sectors; these can be accessed at the
                                        following links: https://www.kaltura.com/tiny/l4gdf and https://www.kaltura.
                                        com/tiny/nx1kg


                                        GLOBAL FOOD SUPPLY
                                        Global food production has risen steadily in the last 50 years, more than
                                        keeping up with population growth and allowing for higher per capita caloric
  2
    See International Grain Council,    and protein intake in most countries and regions. Annual world cereals produc-
      Five Year Demand and Supply
     Projections, http://www.igc.int/
                                        tion now exceeds 2 billion tons per year (see IGC reports)2. For decades food
       en/downloads/grainsupdate/       prices had fallen steadily as agricultural productivity increased (Figure 1). How-
 igc_5yrprojections.pdf for compre-     ever, in the global expansion of 2001–2007, food prices rose substantially. On
   hensive statistical information on
grain production and consumption.       the one hand, farm yields started to plateau in part due to weather and climatic
                                        factors; on the other hand, unprecedented quantities of cereals and oilseeds



8 • The World Bank Group
were diverted to subsidized bio-fuels use, particularly in North America and
Europe.
World economic growth reached historic highs in 2007 leading up to the crash
of 2008. Higher incomes in some countries also contributed to world food price
inflation. The 2008 high for the Food Price Index was nearly double its long-
term average from 1991–2004. For barley and wheat the high was closer to                                                                    Figure 1:
triple the long-term average and for rice it was nearly four-fold (Figure 2). The                                                          Global food
increase in food prices was problematic for many countries.                                                                                supply and
                                                                                                                                             prices,
                                                                                                                                           1960–2010

  Growing global staple food supply...                                       ...with declining real food prices


  1960–2010 CAGR Percent                                 Current value       Global staples production1 and food price (wheat)

                                                                                             Billion tons per year              Real USD/ton

                                                                                  6                                                              600
       Total staple                                      5.6 billion
                                                 1.9
       crop supply                                       tons/year1               5                                                              500

                                                                                  4                                                              400

                                                                                  3                                             -62%             300
                                                                                                                                -2% p.a.
           Global                                        6.8 billion
                                              1.7                                 2                                                              200
        population                                       people
                                                                                  1                                                              100

                                                                                  0                                                              0
                                                                                  1960         1970       1980         1990      2000         2010
         Per capita                                      2,800 calories
                               0.5
      calorie intake                                     per day
                                                                                          166% increase in staples production since 1960
                                                                                          62% decrease in real prices over same period

  1
      Includes cereals, sugar crops, oil seeds, pulses, tubers, and roots.   Source: Team analysis, FAO stat, UN states, USDA




Many governments have responded to the ongoing volatility in staple food
prices with more frequent market intervention. This has included establishing
or increasing Strategic Grain Reserves (SGR) that can enhance a government’s
ability to influence and regulate domestic cereals prices. These reserves are
relied upon in times of emergencies to feed vulnerable populations affected
by natural disasters and conflict. However, SGRs can be even more important
to governments to provide a buffer against externally generated food price
shocks, such as those that have occurred with increasing frequency since 2007.
See Table 1 for countries’ planned reserves.
Apart from maintaining emergency reserves, countries such as India have
reviewed their long-term ongoing subsidized food ration programs and have
approved new legislation. Policy responses have typically also included a
review of the government handling and storage practices in some countries. It
is estimated that a substantial proportion of the global cereal production is lost
through poor storage and handling practices that lead to spoilage and infesta-
tion at various stages in the supply chain. Key physical impediments such as



                                                                                                      Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 9
                                  inefficient storage and handling methods, and lack of sufficient storage capac-
                                  ity along the supply chain, contribute significantly to annual losses in food as a
    Figure 2:                     proportion of total production. Figure 3 shows global food losses at different
   Global food                    stages of the supply chain beginning from the losses on the field during and
     prices,
   1991–2013
                                                                                       Food Price Index               Barley
                                                                                       Rice                           Wheat

  $1100
                                                                                    In US$/metric ton, except FPI for which 2005=100
  $1000

   $900

   $800

   $700

   $600

   $500

   $400

   $300

   $200

   $100

     $0
          1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

                                                                                       Source: IMF Primary Commodity Prices Database




     Figure 3:
   Global food
loss stages along
 the production/
   supply chain


  25%
                      Developed countries
  20%                 Industrialized Asia
                      Developing countries
  15%


  10%


   5%


   0%
               On field           Handling & storage        Processing &            Distribution                  Consumption
                                                             packaging
                                                                                                                      Source: IFC




10 • The World Bank Group
immediately after harvest and going on to storage, handling, processing, pack-
aging, distribution, and consumption in developed countries, industrialized
Asia, and developing countries. It is observed that storage and handling losses
are substantial in the latter two categories. Figure 4 shows losses in cereals
alone along the supply chain with a categorization of regions at a finer level of
granularity, supplementing Figure 3. Post-harvest cereal losses are substantial
                                                                                                                                  Figure 4:
in industrialized Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, North Africa, West and Central Asia,
                                                                                                                              Losses in cereals
and in South and Southeast Asia.                                                                                              along the supply
                                                                                                                              chain, by region


    60%

    50%
                                                                                                                                   Consumption
    40%                                                                                                                            Distribution
                                                                                                                                   Processing
    30%                                                                                                                            Post-harvest
                                                                                                                                   Agriculture
    20%

    10%

     0%
                Europe       North America Industrialized        Sub-Saharan     North Africa,     South &      Latin
                              & Oceania        Asia                 Africa         West &         Southeast    America
                                                                                 Central Asia       Asia

      Source: FAO (2011). Global Food Losses and Food Waste: Extent, Causes, and Prevention




There is a long-standing economic debate on the desirability of maintaining
large strategic food reserves. The costs are typically high. They include the
budget financing of the government grain purchases, investment in and/or
leasing of storage infrastructure, and operating costs, as well as market risk.
The longer the cereals are stored the greater the likelihood of quality losses
and spoilage, water damage, or infestation. Such costs can be partly managed
through stock level adjustments, institutional design, and integration with
social safety net programs3.
Holding large grain reserves also requires strategic planning and demand
estimation in order to minimize waste. While we do not look at what the opti-
mal levels of storage could or should be for a country given the limited scope
of this paper, it is necessary to highlight that national food policy has important
ramifications affecting risk allocation in storage PPP projects. Levels of storage
and associated policies can substantially influence contract duration and design                                3
                                                                                                                  Strategic grain reserves in four
decisions. For example, Nigeria may not be able to have the same PPP design                                     African countries – Ethiopia, Kenya,
in grain storage as India, given that the latter’s grain storage underlies social                               Malawi and Mali – were studied
                                                                                                                by IFPRI in 2009. The case studies
safety net programs while the former has few such integrated long term pro-                                     suggest that the cost of holding a
grams.                                                                                                          metric ton of food varied from $20
                                                                                                                to $46 in these countries and were
Some of the largest developing country governments have been carrying out                                       linked to the factors mentioned.
substantial levels of procurement for maintenance of SGRs. Traditionally they



                                                                                                 Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 11
                                         have either built their own storage or leased space. To increase their flexibility
                                         in management of the reserves, lower costs, and reduce the probability of cor-
                                         rupt practices, many government grain agencies have been exploring better
                                         storage modalities, including PPP schemes that mobilize private financing and
     Table 1:
                                         efficiencies that come from marketplace competition.
Planned Strategic
Grain Reserves of
  Governments



                                                           Country               Reserves/Planned Reserves


                                                                                 Planned increase in peak period public stocks of wheat
                                                          Bangladesh             and rice to 2.5 to 3.0 million MT from a previous level
                                                                                 of 1.5 million MT


                                                                                 Minimum strategic reserves of 2 million MT of wheat
                                                                                 and 2 million MT of rice in addition to the buffer stock
                                                                   India         norms prescribed based on seasonality4. Total procure-
                                                                                 ment by state and federal government much higher at
                                                                                 approximately 90 million MT of wheat and rice ( 2013)


                                                                Jordan           Proposed 33 percent increase in wheat reserves


                                                                                 The National Cereal and Produce Board announced
                                                                 Kenya
                                                                                 a doubling of reserves to 720,000 MT of maize.


                                                                                 5 percent of total annual grain harvest to be held in
                                                                Nigeria
                                                                                 reserves


                                                                                 Stated increase from 6 months to 17 months of national
                                                                 Oman            consumption after construction of new storages under
                                                                                 PPP schemes.


                                                                                 Stock on hand of imported wheat to be increased to
                                                         Saudi Arabia
                                                                                 1.5 million MT


      4
        The buffer stock norms (2005                      South Korea            Rice reserves with a record of up to 1.5 million MT
 onwards) require stocks of rice and
  wheat of 20.6, 16.2, 26.9 and 16.2
  million MT in Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4
                         respectively.                                           Currently holding about 2 million MT. The reserve target
                                                                Zambia
                                                                                 for 2014 is 500,000 MT.



                                          Source: Prepared by the authors based on information from Food Corporation of India; Federal Government of Nige-
                                                          ria; Government of Zambia; Public Authority for Stores & Food Reserves, Government of Oman; IFC.




12 • The World Bank Group
Public-private
partnerships in
grain storage

STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS
There are upstream policy related questions to be addressed before a Public
Private Partnership-based project can be launched. These relate to the usual
strategic considerations for PPPs in any sector: for example, long-term demand
for the project, fit of the projects with existing and planned government poli-
cies, risk of policy change, and events beyond the control of governments that
could result in substantial change. Some of these issues are discussed briefly
below:
•	 While international trade policy is outside the scope of this paper, an im-
   portant issue with regard to project risks relates to international agreements
   that might limit the amount of grain a developing country may purchase
   and store; this would have obvious impacts on the financial viability of PPP
   grain storage projects dependent upon availability payments from govern-
   ment. A country like India in particular could be affected, since it has recent-
   ly embarked on an ambitious program to scale up long term food storage
   PPPs with assured payments to the private operators for storage of
   guaranteed minimum quantities of food grains over defined periods.
•	 Another important issue is the level and nature of government demand for
   grains, which depends on underlying government policies related to food
   and social safety nets. India, for example, has committed itself to expand-
   ing the distribution of subsidized food rations to an even greater share of
   the population under the National Food Security Act, passed in 2013. Most



                                                                      Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 13
                               states also depend on distribution from public food stocks to operate their
                               mid-day meal programs for schoolchildren, along with other supplemen-
                               tary nutrition programs. Among other countries in the region, Bangladesh
                               operates several targeted feeding and food ration schemes although it no
                               longer operates a comprehensive system of food rations. The public food
                               distribution systems in both countries provide the basis for government
                               grain purchases and can ensure that government stocks can be adequately
                               rotated without distorting markets through intervention sales.
                            •	 In contrast, there is a global trend toward the use of cash transfers to re-
                               place the distribution of food rations to vulnerable low income groups. This
                               eliminates the need for governments to engage in routine food distribution
                               operations that are better performed by market players. Government’s role,
                               in these cases, is restricted to maintaining and positioning adequate food
                               stocks for emergency response in case of natural disasters. In some states of
                               India, efforts are underway to transition poverty programs from in-kind sub-
                               sidies to cash transfers. Continuing movement towards this would reduce
                               the need for government grain procurement and storage, and thus would
                               need to be taken into consideration while assessing the economic feasibility
                               of long-term PPP projects for grain storage.
                            •	 Nigeria is an example of a country where there is no policy for distribution
                               of subsidized food. While Nigeria does have an objective to maintain 15
                               percent of its grain production as reserves for responding to emergencies,
                               particularly drought, with 5 percent maintained as core reserves, it has not
                               allocated adequate budget for the purpose, resulting in lower than required
                               levels of procurement. Essentially, due to a lack of policy backing and no
                               guarantee of demand, the Nigerian silo storage PPPs will need to be based
                               on a thorough assessment of the commercial viability of rehabilitating and
                               using existing storage through a concession type arrangement with no
                               coverage of demand risk.
                            •	 Where the silo storage program is based solely on emergency reserves,
                               there could be other issues of management and rotation of stocks. In
                               addition to price spikes, volatility—significant price fluctuations and cyclic
                               pricing effects—are also of great concern. Given that grain may typically be
                               stored for an extended period in some cases, there are problems in rotating
                               old SGR stocks, particularly with grain quality maintained over the period.
                               Governments such as India that are engaged in food distribution programs
                               will always have some use for grain from storage facilities, including for use
                               as animal feed. But if some countries are storing grain only for emergen-
                               cies and experience an extended period without major emergencies, they
                               will have stored their grain without benefit and actually at a major loss. So
                               there is need for clear reserve management policies, rotation practices, and
                               quality control for ensuring nutritional value, as well as disaster prediction
                               capacity. This will help determine how grain is cycled through storage facili-
                               ties and when and how it is released either domestically or internationally.
                            •	 The volumes of emergency stocks needed purely for disaster response is
                               normally modest in relation to stocks typically maintained for routine food
                               distribution and market interventions. The emergency reserve calculation
                               is based on the maximum number of disaster affected people that must be



14 • The World Bank Group
   fed during the period before emergency shipments can arrive from out-
   side. Even in the case of Pakistan’s historic flooding in June 2010, affecting
   millions of people, total wheat released from government stocks over one
   year’s time was just 500,000 tons versus annual intervention purchases of 4
   to 5 million tons. In the case of Oman, the government has partnered with
   private sector milling companies for rotation of reserves on regular basis,
   through the formation of two joint venture companies.


RATIONALE FOR PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN
GRAIN STORAGE
SGRs require physical storage facilities for the cereals owned by governments.
Several countries are at various stages of delivering new or improved storage
capacity using PPP models. The rationale for the use of PPP arrangements in
grain storage is discussed below in some detail. However, it is important to
understand that there could be a range of PPP models, some of these almost
fully private, for the storage and management of grain reserves (also addressed
in detail in sub-section 5 below). Where the government requires storage and
management services for grain reserves for national emergencies and food
subsidy programs, it is obvious that full privatization with no government
involvement is not possible and some form of PPP would be required given
the government’s involvement as a buyer of services. Where the storage is for
commercial purposes, the rationale for PPP is less obvious given that one would
expect the private sector to step in where the requirement exists. However, this
may not always happen, as is seen in the case of India and other developing
countries where the issue of farm-to-market logistics is a persistent problem.
India has been exploring PPPs in cold storage as well as associated transport
infrastructure to provide a seamless farm-to-market logistics chain. These areas
are still developing and PPPs could be an effective solution to market failures in
this sector, as in other sectors.
The rationale for grain storage PPPs typically includes the quick scaling up of
storage capacity, risk transfer, and mobilization of private sector efficiencies and
innovation, and as an additional source of financing when governments lack
fiscal space. Given the characteristics of grain projects, would we expect PPP
projects in grain storage to have the same benefits as PPPs in other sectors?
While there is less experience of PPP implementation in grain storage, the same
general problems and issues prevail in grain storage, as in any other infrastruc-
ture or service. Some typical value drivers for PPPs are listed below, followed by
a discussion of the rationale for PPP in grain storage.
Some of the value drivers of PPP include5:
•	 Risk transfer—Optimal risk allocation with specific risks transferred to
   the private party can reduce the cost to government.                                5
                                                                                         World Bank Institute (PPIAF).
                                                                                       (2012). Public-Private Partnerships
•	 Whole of life costing—Bundling of design, construction, operation                   Reference Guide (Version 1.0),
                                                                                       Pages 161-167, available at: http://
   and maintenance can reduce total project costs as well as provide                   wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/Data/wbi/
   predictability of costs over project life.                                          wbicms/files/drupal-acquia/wbi/WBI
                                                                                       PPIAFPPPReferenceGuidev11.0.pdf
•	 Innovation—Specifying outputs in a contract provides opportunity for



                                                                       Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 15
                                     innovation as private players compete for the best way to deliver the
                                     outputs at least cost.
                                •	 Focus on service delivery—Management in the PPP firm is focused on
                                   service delivery and is free from the objectives or constraints that are
                                   typical drivers in the public sector.
                                •	 Mobilization of financing—PPPs can provide additional sources of financing.

    Figure 5:                   •	 Accountability—PPPs can ensure higher levels of accountability given that
    Rationale                      government payments are conditional on the timely provision of the agreed
   for private                     quality and quantity of outputs.
 participation in
  grain storage



  Public Provision                           Private Provision


                                                •	 On time and at cost delivery
         Inability to scale-up storage
                                                •	 Transfer of construction and commissioning risk


                                                •	 Upfront investment
              Lack of fiscal space
                                                •	 Deferred government payments


                                                •	 Private sector managerial skills
           Inefficient management
                                                •	 Better processes, cost savings


         Poor repair and maintenance            •	 Incorporation of maintenance in the life-cycle costs


                                                •	 Opportunity for modernization
             Unscientific methods
                                                •	 Introduction of state of the art storage


          Loss in quantity and quality          •	 Transfer of performance risk




                                Figure 5 above looks at the value drivers and the rationale for PPP in the con-
                                text of grain storage, comparing public and private management. Some of the
                                issues highlighted may be more important than others given specific circum-
                                stances within countries. These are discussed below in the context of PPP in
                                grain storage.

                                     Scaling Up Storage Capacity
                                     In many countries, a major policy response to the financial and economic
                                     crisis of 2008 and the accompanying food price spikes was to increase
                                     domestically held strategic food reserves. Because of its self-sufficiency
                                     in cereals, India was less impacted by international food price volatility.



16 • The World Bank Group
Instead, key issues included the long-standing problems in government
grain storage. This was further aggravated by parliament’s decision to
expand the national program of subsidized food rations under a new Food
Security Law. The Food Corporation of India (FCI), which is responsible for
coordination at the federal level, has seen increased procurement over the
years, but has not been able to bring about proportionate increase in the
owned and hired storage space (Figures 6 and 7) due to inadequate budget
revenues for the large capital investments required as well as other factors
outlined in Figure 5. For example, under the new procurement targets, the
state of Madhya Pradesh plans to create storage space for 15 million MT
of wheat and rice by 2015 against an available capacity of 9.1 million MT in
20136. (For more information, see the details of the silo project in MP in sec-
tion III of this paper.)
Nigeria is approaching the PPP model from a different standpoint and
with a different set of objectives. The government already owns silo and
warehouse storage facilities, but these need rehabilitation and moderniza-
tion. Some government owned silo storage facilities have been severely
underutilized or never used at all, resulting in opportunity cost losses to
the government. With a longer term plan to increase rice production in the
country and the development of commodity exchanges, rehabilitating the
silos through the PPP route for commercial use is considered a good busi-
ness proposition.
In Zambia, production volumes of white maize for human consumption have
greatly increased over the last two decades. To help farmers dispose of their
surplus, the national Food Reserve Agency (FRA) has made large interven-
                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                           Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and
tion purchases over the last four years (Figure 8). Zambia cannot consume                                                 Logistics Corporation
all of its maize production and must export the surplus to other African
countries. To do this, it needs better storage facilities to receive the harvest
from farmers and make it available for commercial sales. The Government
of Zambia has estimated that up to 30 percent of maize production is lost
due to poor storage practices. Therefore, the government has embarked on                                                                    Figure 6:
a program to invest in a network of new maize storage facilities. While the                                                               Gap in Storage
                                                                                                                                          Capacity of FCI
                                                                                                                                             in India


                    Total Storage Capacity with FCI (owned and hired)
                    Stock in Central Pool (excluding quantity procured by DCP states)


                    800                                                                                                                           667.89
 (Figures in LMT)




                                                                                                                          541.38
                    600                                                                            468.72
                                                                            419.94
                    400                                298.89
                                  210.07
                    200                                                                                                   316.10                  336.04
                                                                                                   288.36
                                  252.07               238.94               252.79
                       0
                                 2006–2007           2007–2008            2008–2009             2009–2010               2010–2011              2011–2012

                                                                                Source: 2013 Performance Audit of FCI, Comptroller and Auditor General, India




                                                                                                    Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 17
                                                           arrangement was initially envisaged as a PPP using an unsolicited proposal,
                    Figure 7:                              government now appears to be proceeding with direct public investments
                  Owned and                                in new storage warehouses for bagged maize. However, the opportunities
                hired storage of                           for private sector engagement remain a viable value proposition.
                   FCI in India

                                                                                                                           Owned          Hired        Total

                          40
million tons




                          35

                          30

                          25

                          20

                          15

                          10

                           5

                           0
                                  2005        2006         2007           2008          2009          2010           2011            2012            2013
                                1st April   1st April    1st April      1st April     1st April     1st April      1st April       1st April       1st April

                                                                                                  Source: FCI, available at http://fciweb.nic.in/storages/view/6




    Figure 8:
Maize production
    and FRA
 procurement



                          3.5                                                                                                                                      90%
million tonnes of maize




                                                                                                                                                                   80%
                          3.0                     National Production
                                                                                                                                                                   70%
                                                  FRA Purchase
                          2.5
                                                  % purchased by FRA                                                                                               60%
                          2.0                                                                                                                                      50%

                          1.5                                                                                                                                      40%

                                                                                                                                                                   30%
                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                   20%
                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                   10%

                           0                                                                                                                                       0%
                                1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

                                                        Source: Food Reserve Agency, Zambia; World Food Program; University of Greenwich; World Resources Institute




  18 • The World Bank Group
Private Sector Efficiencies
Globally, private companies procure, transport, and store much more grain
and oilseeds than government entities. Private sector players have been
responsible for advances worldwide in the design, construction, operation,
and maintenance of storage and handling facilities, as well as transport in-
novations throughout their supply chains. A PPP can improve operational
efficiencies through competitive design, adoption of modern technologies,
provisions for maintenance of building and equipment through complete
life-cycle of projects, and through building output-based performance indi-
cators into the contract. These relate especially to handling time, labor and
equipment productivity, low loss level tolerance, and other factors. In terms
of grain storage, performance indicators may include measurements
such as:
•	 Average acceptance and dispatch qualities;
•	 Capacity requirements for facility processes; and
•	 Volume of grain stored or handled per hour, including during peak
   time or time required to accept or dispatch a specified volume of
   grain at the facility.

PPP contracts typically link the achievement of certain levels of output
with the payment mechanism. For example, there could be an incentive for
reduction in grain losses below a benchmark level or a penalty for losses
above a pre-agreed level. The MPWLC estimates post-harvest losses at
approximately 1 percent annually. However, in its PPP contract, under the
performance requirements, it seeks to cap any variance in the prescribed
volume to weight ratio to + or - 0.1 percent. In addition, all shortfalls are to
be paid for by the concessionaire at the prescribed rate. The FCI draft con-
tract caps dust losses at a maximum of 0.05 percent of the intake quantity if
storage is beyond one year. Apart from the savings in terms of actual grain
losses and quality deterioration, there are efficiencies in several areas of the
process of storage and handling that are likely to generate overall savings
for government. According to estimates by IFC, the first Punjab silo alone
would result in a savings of $6 million to the government over the term of
the concession7. Pakistan is another country that is now in the process
of procuring private partners for construction and operation of grain silos        7
                                                                                    IFC Success Stories, Punjab
in Punjab and Sindh provinces. See Box 1 for details on losses under the           Silo Project
current system of public procurement of grain in Pakistan.                         8
                                                                                     Rightly or wrongly, PPPs have been
                                                                                   used for the purpose of moderniza-
PPPs are sometimes used as a tool for the modernization and adoption               tion and adoption of world class
of new technology8. This seems to be an important consideration for gov-           technology in the transport, water,
                                                                                   and other sectors. The idea is not
ernments that may not be able to manage modernization either because               to advocate that these should be
of lack of fiscal space or simply the inability to keep up with the rapidly        used as such, but this is a practical
                                                                                   and easy way of bringing in new
moving technologies and skill requirement. Given the proportion of wast-           methodologies. The public sector
age in storage and handling of grain by the public sector, and the lack of         typically lacks skills to do this.
                                                                                   However, this may not always work if
updated technology, there is a need for revamping systems and practices.           radical change is sought. For further
This can be done best by the private grain industry firms, which are much          reading on using PPPs as a tool for
more adept than government at bringing in the most up to date and cost             modernization, see Chapter 3 of the
                                                                                   Asian Development Bank’s, Public-
effective technologies.                                                            Private Partnerships Handbook.




                                                                   Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 19
        Box 1


                                                PAKISTAN: LOSSES IN PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND THE DECISION TO ADOPT
                                                PPP MODE
                                                Annual wheat production in Pakistan ranges from 20 to 24 million tons, roughly estimated at
                                                3 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP)9. About two-thirds of the wheat produced is
                                                marketed, with the government purchasing 35–50 percent10. Current wheat stock estimates in
                                                Pakistan range from 3.3 million MT, as assessed by the United States Agency for International
                                                Development (USAID), to the State Bank of Pakistan’s estimate of 7 million tons11. Total wheat
                                                consumption in Pakistan is expected to rise to 23 to 24 million tons by 201712.
                                                The Government of Pakistan is actively involved in the wheat market with the twin objec-
                                                tives of price stabilization and food security. The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services
                                                Corporation Limited (PASSCO) and the provincial governments maintain the operational and
                                                strategic reserves. The federal government sets the procurement and release prices, with the
 9
   Dmitry Prikhodko and Olekksandr              provincial-level governments also playing an important role. Since the mid-1980s, the govern-
Zrilyi, “Pakistan: Review of the wheat          ment has shifted toward positive market price support for wheat farmers, including during
     sector and grain storage issues,”          the food crisis of 2008–10, in an effort to increase domestic wheat production to meet food
         FAO Investment Center, 2013.
                                                security needs.
                           10
                                 Ibid, viii.
                                                Government procurement is financed by commercial loans from approximately 20 banks,
 11
   Given that the State Bank of Paki-
  stan, along with other commercial             including the State Bank of Pakistan, and the high interest rate of the loans adds about 11
    banks, finances the government              percent to the total government cost of procuring13. After procurement, wheat transportation
  procurement of wheat, this assess-            is operated by the private sector, often with government financing. The government then
           ment is likely to be closer.         stores the wheat in government-owned or rented storage facilities, primarily godowns or
                            12
                                 Ibid, vii.     open-air ganjis14. Financial losses are estimated to be extremely high; however, these losses
                                   13
                                        Ibid.   are not officially recognized or accounted for. As a result, the losses are absorbed by the
  14
    Ibid, 24. Godowns are horizontal
                                                government or by the millers at sale. The wheat is released from the storage to millers at a
    or flat-shed storage facilities and         previously fixed price. The state’s losses from the current processes of procurement, storage,
ganjis are open-air storage facilities,         transport and financing are estimated to be up to 13 percent of the total costs15. Given the
often under tarpaulin or other cover.           chronic losses in public procurement and storage of grain, governments in the provinces of
                            15
                                 Ibid, 25.      Sindh and Punjab in Pakistan made the decision to go for PPP-based silo projects, which are
                                                currently at procurement stage.




                                                    Examples of areas with potential for improving outputs through the use of
                                                    modern and scientific methods, paired with private participation, include:
                                                    •	 Change from bag-based storage to bulk storage with mechanical
                                                       handling;
                                                    •	 Monitoring and removal of foreign matter at reception;
                                                    •	 Inventory monitoring through electronic scales and specialized computer
                                                       software;
                                                    •	 Aeration and recirculation of grain in bulk storage to equalize moisture
                                                       and prevent pest infestation;
                                                    •	 Temperature controlled storage and temperature monitoring to prevent
                                                       infestation; and
                                                    •	 Systems for segregating grain based on quality, such as protein based
                                                       grain segregation.



20 • The World Bank Group
   In addition, it would be easier to introduce the use of warehouse receipt-
   based financing as well as modern ICT tools and techniques for supply
   chain efficiency improvement in areas where the storage systems are
   already modern and scientific.

   Additional Source of Financing
   Lack of fiscal space in national or state budgets for construction of modern
   storage facilities, and need for additional sources of financing, has been
   one of the reasons governments have sought PPP arrangements. Private
   sector investment can enable governments to spread capital expenditures
   over many years. For example, the fixed component of the fee for silo
   services is often used to pay for the amortization of the silo investment
   cost for the duration of the contract. This could be as long as 20 to 30 years
   based on several considerations, a key factor being the time required by the
   private party to recoup its capital investment at reasonable tariff levels. For
   many governments, fiscal constraints mean that PPP arrangements could be
   the only way to bridge the infrastructure gap.

   Risk Transfer
   In some publicly owned and operated storage facilities, a substantial pro-
   portion of the cereals may be lost in storage and handling. A private opera-
   tor can reduce these losses through good management practices and the
   right technology.
   However, the private sector company could itself face the possibility of
   shortfalls in demand and revenue that could raise the risk profile of a
   storage project significantly. A PPP grain storage contract can effectively
   allocate financing, construction, and performance risks to the private sector
   which is better able to manage these, while retaining the demand/ revenue
   risk with the public sector. This makes for an optimal risk allocation,
   especially in cases where government is involved in substantial grain
   procurement.


TYPICAL PPP MODELS
The PPP type adopted is most commonly determined on the basis of the objec-
tives that the PPP desires to achieve, the risk profile of projects, and the ability
of parties to take on specific risks. As seen in the earlier part of this paper, most
commonly, countries maintain reserves either for the purpose of food security
during times of natural calamities, as a result of price stabilization programs,
or as a linkage to ongoing social safety net programs. The practice depends on
the type of linkage to other programs/ policies:
•	 Where the reserves are linked to disaster response, there is a requirement
   of forecasting disasters suitably in advance with early warning systems to be
   able to rotate and maintain an optimal reserve;
•	 Where the linkage is to a price stabilization program consisting of procure-
   ment by government at a minimum support price, it is difficult to assess
   storage requirements given that prices cannot always be predicted suffi-




                                                                        Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 21
                                    ciently in advance. India’s high minimum support prices have contributed to
                                    record wheat and rice crops with the state and federal government legally
                                    obligated to buy up the surplus, which has contributed to burgeoning re-
                                    serve stocks and chronic shortages of adequate storage capacity; and
                               •	 Where there is linkage to ongoing social safety net programs, there are
                                  fewer problems in terms of estimating requirements and maintaining
                                  optimal reserves.
                               Although this discussion pertains to national food security policies, it has impor-
                               tant ramifications as far as predictability of demand for storage services is con-
                               cerned. For example, it could also help determine the best option for storage:
                               public, private, or PPP mode. In addition, it could affect the type of PPP select-
                               ed, the duration of the contract, and the structuring of the risks of the project.
                               Overall, similar to projects in any other sector, PPPs in grain storage range from
                               full public ownership projects, which are the norm in most developing coun-
                               tries, to full privatization at the other end, with many variations in between (See
                               Figure 9 below).
                               Given the above background, we present below a spectrum of PPP models and
                               examples. These models are used globally for grain and agricultural storage for
                               emergency reserves as well as for other purposes. In the case of countries like
                               India, the stocks are associated with national and state food ration and targeted
                               feeding programs, resulting in longer term contracts. In these cases, the private
                               party takes on a larger role in the provision of services and provides land as well
    Figure 9:                  as financing for projects17.
  PPP models in
 projects in grain
     storage




                Public                                                                          Private



                         Nigeria,          Madhya           Punjab, FCI,     Oman             Philippines
                         Serbia            Pradesh,         India &          Joint venture    Outright Sale
                                           India, Oman      Pakistan
                         RBOT project                                        with private     of Post-Har-
                         in Nigeria        BOT project      BOO project      party (gov-      vest Process-
                         (concession-      in MP (10 year   (government      ernment and      ing and Trad-
                         ing govern-       guaranteed       payments)        commercial       ing Centers
                         ment storage,     tonnage,                          use)             (PHPTC)
                         commercial        VGF, land)
                         risk with         BOT project
                         private party)    in Oman
                                           (government
                                           payments)




22 • The World Bank Group
Public Ownership of Assets with Private Operation
Under this model, warehouses and goods are owned by the state, and a                    17
                                                                                          The categorization is adapted
private company operates the storage facility. The state and the company                from a presentation by Mirjana
                                                                                        Janjic and Alojzij Cerne , “Manage-
enter into a contract that governs the mutual rights and obligations relat-             ment of National Emergency Stocks
ing to the storage and restoration of goods and warehouse management.                   of Agricultural Products in Serbia,
Example: Serbia, Nigeria (with slight deviations).                                      Slovenia, Poland, Germany and
                                                                                        Models of PPP” made at Kenya PPP
                                                                                        Workshop, September 3–4, 2013.
In Nigeria, a similar but slightly different model is expected to be put to bid.        This presentation was based on re-
Federal and state governments are offering concessions on 33 state-owned                search by Alojzij Cerne of the Zavod
silo facilities and warehouses (Box 2). This has been called the RBOT model,            Republike Slovenije za blagovne
                                                                                        reserve.
in which the private party will modernize/ rehabilitate the silos and operate
them. The assets will revert to the public authority after completion of the
contract term. However, in the Nigerian model currently being structured, it
is envisaged that the silos will be used to provide storage services to private
parties who store and trade in grain and other agricultural commodities. It is                             Figure 10:
also expected that these will be linked to the operation of the commodities                                 Proposed
exchange.                                                                                                 initiatives to
                                                                                                         increase food
                                                                                                           storage in
                                                                                                             Nigeria
   Stakeholders             Initiatives


     FMA & WR
                             Increase in
                             Silos & Ware-
                             house Capacity
     Private investors




                                                                                     •	 Stability in food supply
     FMA & WR                                                                           and food prices
                             Guaranteed                  Increased and               •	 Improved food quality
                             Minimum Food               improved food                   post-harvest
                             Pricing                  storage in Nigeria             •	 Improved agri-dependent
     Marketing Boards                                                                   industrial (Processors)
                                                                                        productivity




     Commodity
     Exchange

     FMA & WR
                             Warehouse
                             Receipt
     Commercial Banks/
     MFIs

     Security & Exchange
     Commission
                                                                       Source: National Food Security Program Document 2008




                                                                    Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 23
        Box 2




                                         Concessioning state-owned silo complexes in Nigeria

                                         In Nigeria, agriculture accounts for 40 percent of the national Gross Domestic Product
                                         (GDP)18, employs more than two-thirds of the labor force, and provides 88 percent of non-
                                         oil earnings. Eighty percent of the agricultural GDP is contributed by crops (85 percent)19.
                                         In 2009, Nigeria adopted a policy to hold 15 percent of the total grain harvest as reserves,
                                         with the National Food Reserve Agency (NFRA) holding 5 percent as the core strategic re-
                                         serve and individual states holding another 10 percent as “state buffer stocks.20” The govern-
                                         ment is said to have provided N50 billion ($4.05 billion at 2009 conversion rates) in the 2009
                                         budget and another N96 billion ($7.8 billion at 2010 conversion rates) in 2010 to the Federal
                                         Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources for the construction of government silo stor-
                                         age facilities21. This appears to have been in line with the objectives outlined in the National
                                         Food Security program document of 2008, which emphasized increased and improved food
                                         storage in the country (Figure 10). In addition to the storage capacity of 325,000 tons, which
                                         it already held, in 2010 NFRA embarked on the procurement of equipment for the construc-
                                         tion of 18 silo complexes at inland sites in different states, in line with stated policy. Seven
                                         facilities had 100,000 tons capacity each (20 bins x 5000 tons per bin) and the remaining 11
                                         facilities were 25,000 tons each, bringing the total capacity to 1.3 million MT.
                                         However, only a few of these storage facilities are operational. The rest are not operational
                                         and in some cases are abandoned. Reasons include:
                                         •	   lack of fiscal resources to fill the silos and operationalize the SGR of 15 percent as
                                              envisaged earlier;
                                         •	   government policy to make agriculture a commercial venture with greater private
                                              participation in grain and food markets; and
18
  Oluyemisi Kuku-Shittu, Astrid
Mathiassen, Amit Wahwa, Lucy             •	   dissolution of the NFRSA as an independent agency and the transfer of its functions
Myles and Akeem Ajibola, “Com-                to a ministerial department.
prehensive Food Security and
Vulnerability Analysis, Nigeria,” July   The Federal Government of Nigeria changed its policy of intervention in agriculture in favor
2013, page 4.                            of greater private participation, and commenced the implementation of the Agriculture
19
  National Food Security Program,        Transformation Agenda (ATA) in 2011 in order to transform agriculture to a profitable busi-
2008, Federal Government of              ness. The ATA seeks to promote agribusiness, attract private sector investment in agriculture,
Nigeria                                  reduce post-harvest losses, add value to local produce, develop rural infrastructure,
20
  Institute for Agriculture and Trade    and enhance access of farmers to financial services and markets22. In 2012, Nigeria’s Fed-
Policy, “Grain Reserves and the          eral Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMA&RD), which manages the 33 silo
Food Price Crisis: Selected Writings     complexes built by government under its earlier policy of providing food security through
from 2008–2010,” June 2012, 34.
                                         government procurement and stocking, signed a Memorandum of Cooperation with the In-
21
  Theophilius Abbah, “Nigeria:           frastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (ICRC) to concession out the silo complexes.
Food Crisis – No Grains in Over
N140 Billion Silos,” 21 October          The FMA&RD, in collaboration with the ICRC and the Federal Ministry of Finance (MoF),
2012, www.allafrica.com.                 launched a call in October 2013 for retaining the services of a Transaction Adviser to pre-
22
  African Development Bank,              pare the Outline Business Case (OBC) for the 33 silo complexes. While the details are being
“Strategic Environmental and Social      worked out, the ICRC has described the preferred PPP model for the Silo project as rehabil-
Assessment,” July 2013, 3.               itate-build-operate-transfer (RBOT)23. Under this model, the already-built silo complexes will
 http://www.icrc.gov.ng/project_
23                                       be rehabilitated/ refurbished by the private entity and will be put to use for commercial stor-
book.pdf                                 age. It is envisaged at this stage that the private entity will take on the demand risk as well as
                                         pay government a part of the revenues earned in the form of concession payments.




24 • The World Bank Group
Joint Ownership of Asset with Private Operation
This model is similar to the public ownership model, except that the storage
is co-owned with the company. The state has a contract with the company
under which the state pays the costs of storage and management of the
grain. In addition to these costs, the state, in proportion to its ownership
share, also covers the current costs and maintenance of the warehouse.
The model of joint venture companies has been used by Oman to maintain
its reserves (Box 3).
                                                                                                                          Box 3




PASFR joint ventures with private flour mills in Oman                                                24
                                                                                                        Domestic production as a per-
Oman is 0.8 percent self-sufficient in grain production, with low levels of cultivation of land
                     24                                                                             centage of the amount available for
                                                                                                    consumption
due to lack of water for irrigation25. Given this situation, Oman cannot achieve self-sufficiency
in food production and will continue to be heavily dependent upon the import of grains for
                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                      Msafiri Daudi Mbaga, “Alternative
                                                                                                    mechanisms for achieving food se-
domestic consumption. In addition, with demand showing an increasing trend with popu-
                                                                                                    curity in Aman, Agriculture & Food
lation growth, new industrial zones, and greater inflows of foreign workers, it is expected         Security 2013, 2:3, 1 February 2013.
that Oman may have to rely solely on imports to meet food security needs by 205026. In the          26
                                                                                                         Ibid.
aftermath of the global financial crisis and continuing food price volatility, given the high
import dependence, the government decided to increase its wheat storage capacity from
                                                                                                    27
                                                                                                      The World Bank, “The Grain
                                                                                                    Chain: Food Security and Managing
six months to a 17-month supply27. In addition to ensuring food security for its population,        Wheat Imports in Arab Countries,”
Oman also envisages itself as a hub for grain trade in the Middle East and North Africa             2012, http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/
region.                                                                                             user_upload/tci/docs/The%20
                                                                                                    Grain%20Chain_ENG.pdf, 14.
The Public Authority for Stores & Food Reserves (PASFR) was established in 1980 with a
                                                                                                     Rice, sugar, separated lentils, tea,
                                                                                                    28
mandate to maintain strategic food reserves as well as to ensure domestic price stability of        milk powder, edible oil and wheat.
basic commodities. PASFR is also responsible for constructing and maintaining warehousing           29
                                                                                                       Atyab Investments LLC, estab-
for basic commodities28. PASFR envisages increasing private participation in order to fulfill       lished in 1977, has a subsidiary
this mandate, and it has established joint ventures for this purpose with Atyab Investments         Oman Flour Mills which together
LLC29 (with 51 percent government shareholding) and with Salalah Mills Co. (with 4 percent          with the Salalah Mills Company,
government share).                                                                                  established later in 1995, has a
                                                                                                    market share of 95 percent in
In Oman, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry is structuring a deal for the construction of        locally milled wheat flour.
steel silo storages at two port sites: 300,000 MT at Sohar port30 with Oman Flour Mills and         30
                                                                                                      This will be part of the Food
120000 MT in Salalah Port with Salalah Flour Mills. The agreement is a build-own-operate-           Cluster in Sohar Port and Freezone.
transfer (BOOT) model.




Private Ownership and Operation with Public Financing
In this model, storage is owned by a private company, but the state, based
on full or partial financing of the construction, has the right to affordable
rental. The private operator provides storage service for state-owned food
commodities. This model is similar to the fourth model, except that a long-
term contract in addition to other rights and obligations sets a deadline for
ending the right of the state to cheaper warehousing. This model is also
similar to the fifth model, except that the state has the right to cheaper
warehousing until the end of a long-term contract. After the end of that
agreement, the benefit expires. Example: Croatia, Madhya Pradesh in India.
The state of Madhya Pradesh in India has a PPP model with Viability Gap



                                                                                 Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 25
                                 Financing (VGF) support from the government to the private party with the
                                 amount of VGF required being the basis of bid. Section III examines the
                                 MP Silo Project in greater detail. The PEG scheme in India is also based on
                                 private financing of storage and renting back to government at pre-agreed
                                 rates. See Box 4 for details.
    Box 4




                            PRIVATE FINANCING OF STORAGE INFRASTRUCTURE THROUGH THE
                            PRIVATE ENTREPRENEURS GUARANTEE (PEG) SCHEME IN INDIA
                            Government procurement of wheat rose progressively from 9.23 million tons in 2006–07 to
                            an estimated 40 million tons in 2013–14. In July 2008, the FCI launched the PEG Scheme,
                            aimed at increasing the storage capacity for consuming states to four months of Targeted
                            Public Distribution System (TPDS), and for procured food grain in producing states to meet
                            the highest stock levels recorded in the previous three years. The PEG Scheme was started
                            for states that do not participate in Decentralized Procurement (DCP), with facilities delivered
                            under the program used by FCI to store Central Pool grain stocks. It was extended to
                            the remaining states in 2009.
                            As the name implies, the program provides a guarantee of usage of godowns to private
                            developers that deliver those facilities. The 2008 PEG Scheme was designed to increase the
                            number of godowns through Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), State Warehousing
                            Corporation (SWC), and private entrepreneurs, based on providing guarantees for a period
                            of five, seven, or 10 years. The minimum capacity of storage facilities to be procured under
                            PEG is 5,000 MT for plain areas and 1,670 MT for hilly areas, requiring a minimum of two
                            acres and 0.82 acres of land respectively. The construction period for the godowns is set
                            at one year for non-railway siding facilities and two years for railway siding facilities, with
                            the option for a one-year delay in construction resulting in a corresponding reduction in the
                            guarantee period. The procurement process involved two-stage bidding.
                            The program has the following features:

                            •	   The three parties involved in the PEG scheme are the FCI, the CWC/SWCs, and
                                 the private party. It involves two agreements for each project, one between the FCI
                                 and the CWC/ SWCs, and the other between the CWC/SWCs and the private party.
                            •	   The private party is selected based on a two-stage open bidding process.
                            •	   The monthly rate of rent to be paid to the private party is the sole selection criterion.
                                 Other factors considered as part of the technical bid prior to and separate from the
                                 financial bid are as follows: suitability of site based on distance from rail siding and
                                 other conditions; and the technical capacity of the bidder.
                            •	   The private party finances and constructs the storage based on technical
                                 specifications issued by FCI.
                            •	   The CWC/SWC hires the storage from the private party upon completion of
                                 construction.
                            •	   Five years upwards of guaranteed storage is provided to the private party.
                            •	   The private party can have contiguous storage for private/ commercial storage
                                 operations.
                            •	   The CWC/SWC is responsible for overall operations and bears the performance
                                 risk (i.e., the losses).




26 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                                          Box 4,
                                                                                                                        continued


•	   The CWC/SWC can handle food grain preservation, security and other activities itself
     or outsource these to a private party.
•	   All payments are borne by the FCI under the PEG scheme guidelines.
•	   The payment mechanism for FCI payments to the CWC/SWCs has the following
     components:
     a.	 Payments made by the CWC/SWCs to the private party;
     b.	 Expenses on food grain preservation and security; and.
     c.	   Supervision charges which are up to 15 percent of component A.
•	   As of July 31, 2013, more than seven million MT of new capacity had been delivered
     under the PEG Scheme (Figure 11).




                                                                                                                       Figure 11:
                                                                                                                   Storage capacity
                                                                                                                     created state
                                                                                                                   wise under PEG
                                                                                                                     scheme, July
                                                                                                                          2013
          West Bengal             26
          Uttarakhand         0
         Uttar Pradesh                             598
           Tamil Nadu             85
             Rajasthan             138
                Punjab                                                                                                   3239
                Odisha                 209
          Maharashtra                     335
      Madhya Pradesh                   223
                 Kerala       5
             Karnataka                   273
            Jharkhand          15
     Jammu & Kashmir            40
     Himachal Pradesh         3
               Haryana                                                 1522
                Gujarat       5
          Chhattisgarh                  247                                               Capacity created in ‘000 MT
                  Bihar        34
       Andhra Pradesh                  199

                          0                  500         1000   1500          2000          2500            3000

                                                                                             Source: Food Corporation of India




                                                                                Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 27
                                 Private Ownership and Operation of Storage
                                 Storage facilities are owned and operated by the company, which acts as
                                 the landlord and manager. The food commodities are owned by the state.
                                 This is the model that is used in the 28 countries of the European Union (EU)
                                 whose rules do not permit use of government owned storage facilities for
                                 food commodities purchased under the EU Common Agricultural Policy’s
                                 (CAP) system of Minimum Support Prices (MSP). In each EU country, there
                                 is a government payment agency that channels funds from the CAP budget
                                 to farmers, including for purchase of commodities at MSP. These national
                                 agencies also contract for storage services from the private sector following
                                 EU regulations, including open tenders.
                                 This PPP model is also closest to the form we see in India (Design Build
                                 Finance Own and Operate, or DBFOO) in the FCI (Box 5) and Punjab Silo
                                 projects in India (Box 6), and in the Pakistan projects, where the storage
                                 services are provided for government owned grains at a price determined
                                 through bid.
     Box 5



                            FCI SILO PROJECT IN INDIA
                            India’s government mandated FCI to establish 2 million MT of food grain silo capacity on a
                            PPP basis. The food grain silos are to be built across 36 different locations in both procur-
                            ing and consuming areas, in a total of nine states: Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Kerala, Madhya
                            Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal. Thirty-four of the planned
                            silo complexes will have a capacity of 50,000MTs, while the two silos planned for Kerala will
                            have a 25,000MT capacity. FCI finalized three different project options based on project
                            location, with variance in storage capacity (either 50,000MT or 25,000MT) and whether intake
                            and offtake will be in bulk and bag, or solely in bags.
                            The PPP projects will operate on a Design, Build, Finance, Own and Operate (DBFOO) basis.
                            FCI has chosen a two-stage online competitive bidding process for procuring the private
                            party. FCI issued a Request for Qualification (RFQ) on November 21, 2013, which did not
                            receive the expected response and has been cancelled. Fresh tenders with changes in some
                            of the conditions are expected to be issued in next few months.
                            The basic project features are as follows:
                            •	   The private party is required to provide storage, preservation and handling services in
                                 the Silo Complex, on an exclusive basis to the Authority (FCI) for a period of 22 years.
                            •	   The project is fully financed by the private party.
                            •	   The private party is paid on the basis of making available the required capacity
                            •	   The payment mechanism consists of fixed charges, variable charges, and loading and
                                 unloading charges. The Fixed Storage Charge is indexed to 70 percent of the Wholesale
                                 Price Index. The Variable Storage Charge is 3 percent of the Fixed Storage Charge. The
                                 Handling charge is indexed to the Consumer Price index (CPI). The Authority also pays a
                                 Service Tax, as applicable under service tax rules.
                            •	   The bid variable is the lowest level of fixed charges.
                            •	   The Selected Bidder for each of the proposed Silo Complexes procures the land for the
                                 Complex and the rail siding. The land required for the 50,000 MT capacity silo complex
                                 is a minimum of 11 acres, with a requirement of 9 acres for the 25,000 MT silos.




28 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                                   Box 5,
                                                                                                                 continued


•	   The proposed location of the rail siding should be feasible for connectivity with the
     Indian Railway network.
•	   The Concessionaire is permitted to use the rail siding for other commercial activities at
     a revenue share of 5 percent with FCI.
It is expected that the capital costs of the project might be higher than other silo projects,
such as the Punjab and MP projects. This is due to the requirements related to the rail siding
including the large area of land and the prior feasibility study on suitability of the land for
the purpose.




                                                                                                                   Box 6



PUNJAB SILO PROJECT IN INDIA
The Punjab silo was the pioneering PPP project in grain storage in India after the initial proj-
ect by Adani Agro Logistics Limited (AALL), which was commissioned in 2007 (Box 12). It is
a BOO project with a concession period of thirty years with a set of four silos with a capacity
12,500 MT each, for a total capacity of 50,000 MT. The Punjab project set the tone for other
projects that followed in the state of Madhya Pradesh, as well as FCI sponsored projects to
be constructed all over the country. It is also one of the relatively few BOO PPP projects in
India. The Punjab project, as is the case with other recent projects in India, is solely for the
purpose of storing wheat. It has been fully operational for three years.
The project was procured by the Punjab State Grain Procurement Corporation (PUNGRAIN)
with the help of IFC, which was engaged as the transaction advisor. A two stage bidding pro-
cess was used, whereby 12 bidders participated in the RFQ process and final proposals were
submitted by five shortlisted participants. The bid criterion used was the lowest fixed charge
payable by government per MT. LT Foods Limited, a 40-year-old company engaged in the
processing, storage, and marketing of basmati rice – and which has 15 years of experience
in silo storage—won the final bid on the basis of a price of INR 1,185 per MT. The award was
made in May 2010 and work was completed in early 2011.
The key features of the PPP are as follows:
•	   The private party is responsible for the financing, design, construction, operation
     and maintenance of the silo.
•	   The private party is responsible for procuring land within a period of three months
     from the date of contract execution.
•	   The site is required to be within eight kilometers of a rail head with loading facilities,
     siding, and a commercial facility for booking.
•	   The sites require a minimum of 3 hectares of land.
•	   The authority is responsible for making payments based on availability.




                                                                                   Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 29
     Box 6,
   continued


                               •	     The Authority (PUNGRAIN) is required to procure and deliver the wheat grain in bags
                                      to the Concessionaire for storage in the silos.
                               •	     The private party is responsible for unloading, de-bagging, weighing, testing, drying
                                      (if required), storing, and maintaining the quality of wheat grain, and bagging and
                                      dispatching the wheat grain.
                               •	     The payment mechanism consists of fixed and variable charges. The Fixed Service
                                      Charge is at INR 1,185/MT and the Variable Acceptance and Dispatch Service Charges
                                      are at 7.5 percent of the Fixed Service Charge each.
                               •	     The Fixed Service Charge is paid on a monthly basis by the Authority whether or not the
                                      storage is fully utilized.

                               •	     The project assets remain with the concessionaire after contract expiry.




                                      Concession with Private Operation and Ownership of
                                      Storage and Agricultural Stock
                                      Under this model, operational in Switzerland, storage is owned and operat-
                                      ed by the company and the agricultural commodities are also owned by the
                                      company. The state merely supervises the implementation of contractual
                                      obligations of storage. This is the only model of ensuring commodity re-
                                      serves that is financed by the companies. In all other models, goods/ grains
                                      are financed by the state. An example of a totally private model in ensuring
                                      the development of a commercial grain market but for a purpose other than
                                      maintaining core strategic food reserves is that of the PHPTCs (Box 7) in the
   Figure 12:                         Philippines. These were initially envisaged by the government as a PPP but
  Post-harvest
                                      were later converted to an outright sale of assets to the private sector.
 losses in white
   corn in the
   Philippines

                                                                                                                      Harvest
                                                                                            4.6%                      Post-harvest
                              Total
                            losses=
                             12.7%
                                                                                                                       3.1%
                                                                2.7%



                   1.3%
                                          1%




               Harvesting                Piling               Shelling                     Drying                     Storage

                                                                       Source: Estimates by Department of Agriculture, Philippines, 2011




30 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                                         Box 7



THE CASE OF THE POST-HARVEST PROCESSING AND TRADING
CENTERS (PHPTC) IN THE PHILIPPINES
The Philippines Department of Agriculture’s National Agribusiness Corporation (NABCOR)
owned and operated about 19 PHPTCs for yellow corn. These PHPTCs were owned by the
NABCOR jointly with Local Government Units (LGUs) before the official closing of NABCOR
recently. The PHPTCs bought yellow corn from the farmers and processed and marketed it.
However, these facilities have been operating inefficiently and at high loss levels. The Philip-
pines Department of Agriculture (DA), given the high levels of post-harvest losses (Figure 12),
planned to convert the jointly owned PHPTCs into PPPs as part of a plan to deliver a bulk
handling system for grain, with processing centers and transshipment stations in major
production areas and selected seaports.
Based on feasibility studies, it was found that PPP projects were feasible for 11 of the
PHPTCs.
However, with a change in policy and government’s emphasis on running the grain and ag-
ricultural business as a commercial venture, rather than as a government supported activity,       31
                                                                                                      Public-Private Partnership Pro-
the government decided to go in for outright sale of assets of the 11 centers and has called
                                                                                                   gram “The Philippine Public-Private
for requests for qualifications from interested private parties. Firms can place bids for mul-     Partnership Program,” May 2012,
tiple PHPTCs and once the successful bidders are selected the government will sign asset           http://ppp.gov.ph/wp-content/
purchase agreements with them. The PHPTCs are expected to operate as fully privatized              uploads/2012/05/PPP-Brochure_
entities with the government (under the DA and the Bureau of Agriculture and Fisheries             May2012.pdf, 23.
Products Standards [BAFPS] quality accreditations system) playing a regulatory role.




                                                                                 Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 31
32 • The World Bank Group
Project
case study

MP SILO PROJECT, INDIA32
This case examines the objectives, structuring and procurement of the silo
project in the state of Madhya Pradesh in India.
Wheat production in the state of Madhya Pradesh in India has increased signifi-
cantly during the last few years. Simultaneously, frequent upward revision of the
Minimum Support Price (MSP) and the consequent increase in the quantum of
wheat procured by the state has resulted in surplus stocks over and above the
amount required for the Public Distribution System (Figure 13). However, Mad-
hya Pradesh lacks the required level of storage and handling facilities for such
large stocks, resulting in losses estimated by the MPWLC at 10 percent
of the total stock.
The Government of Madhya Pradesh decided to add about 6 million MT of
storage over and above the 9.1 million MT of storage available in the state in
2012. The storage was to be added over two years: 2.5 million MT in 2013 and          32
                                                                                        The case study is based on
3.5 million MT in 2014. There is a mix of public and private investment as well       presentation and discussion of the
                                                                                      MP Silo project by Sheo Shekhar
as a mix of storage types, including conventional warehouses, steel silos, and        Shukla, Ex-MD, MPWLC at the
silo bags (Table 2). The choice was based on an analysis of available public          Brown Bag Lunch on “Public-Private
fiscal space, volumes of storage needed, and location of storage, as well as          Partnerships in Grain Storage”, held
                                                                                      on June 5 at the World Bank, Wash-
the potential attractiveness of a specific storage project to the private sector.     ington DC. In addition, some details
                                                                                      have been accessed from the pro-
The government issued the Warehousing & Logistics Policy in 2012 to pro-              curement and contract documents
mote the silo project and adopted a Design, Build, Finance, Operate, and              relating to these projects available
                                                                                      in the public domain.
Transfer (DBFOT) model. The firm Mott MacDonald was retained to prepare a



                                                                      Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 33
       Figure 13:
     Surplus wheat
   stocks in Madhya
     Pradesh, India




            170
00000 MT




                                                                                                                                  Procurement (85)
                             Wheat Production         Surplus Stock        PDS requirements
            160
            150
            140                    24 LMT PDS
                                   Requirement                                                  Procurement (49)
            130
                                                                                                                                      161
            120
            110
            100                                                       Procurement (36)
                                   Procurement (19)
                90                                                                                   127
                80
                70
                                                                          92
                60
                                        88                                                                                             61
                50
                40
                                                                                                      25
                30                                                        11
                20                      -5

                10
                 0
                                   2009–2010                          2010–2011                   2011–2012                        2012–2013

                                                                                          Source: Madhya Pradesh Warehousing and Logistics Corporation Limited




                                                  techno-commercial feasibility study of the proposal. The contract document
                                                  was drafted in close coordination with the Planning Commission as well as the
                                                  Department of Economic Affairs in the Government of India. Table 3 describes
                                                  the salient features of the project.
                                                  The individual silo projects are very small PPP projects with small capital and
                                                  operational costs. It may be noted that land costs are not included in the total
                                                  costs. The capital cost of each project has been estimated at approximately
                                                  INR 31 crore (approximately $5 million33). It was estimated based on a financial
                                                  analysis that VGF may be required to make the project financially feasible. Box
           33
                at current rate of exchange of
                                    $1 = INR 60   8 describes basic costs, sources of revenue, and key projected financial ratios
                                                  for the project.




34 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                              Table 2:
                                                                                                             Projected
                                                                                                           investment in
                                                                                                           storage in MP,
                                                                                                                India

 Private Investment

    Investment incentives                                         1.50 million MT

    Business Guarantee                                            1.30 million MT

    Rural Godowns                                                 0.35 million MT

    Steel Silos with VGF                                          0.50 million MT

    Steel Silos with Business Guarantee                           0.35 million MT

 Total                                                               4.00 million MT

 Public Investment                                                   2.00 million MT

 Grand Total                                                         6.00 million MT

Source: Government of Madhya Pradesh, India




                                                                                                               Table 3:
                                                                                                          Salient features
                                                                                                           of the MP silo
                                                                                                           project, India




 PPP                  Locations               Capacity           Government            Bid Criterion      Tariff
 model                                                           Support

 DBFOT                Dewas, Harda,           50000 MT in each   20% VGF each          Lowest Viability   The same tariff as
                      Hoshangabad,            location           by MP state/          Gap Financing      for conventional
                      Raisen, Satna,          and a total of     Government of         required.          godowns.
                      Sehore, Ujjain,         0.5 million MT.    India in upfront                         The tariff is set
                      Vidisha, Bhopal,                           and operational                          from time to time
                      and Indore.                                payments.                                by the Govern-
                                                                 8 acres of land                          ment of Madhya
                                                                 for each project                         Pradesh for all
                                                                 by state.                                MPWLC-owned
                                                                                                          storage.
                                                                 10 year business
                                                                 guarantee for the
                                                                 entire capacity
                                                                 built.
                                                                 20 years conces-
                                                                 sion term.




                                                                               Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 35
     Box 8



                            PROJECTED FINANCIALS of MP Silo Project, India
                            Tables 4, 5, 6a, and 6b detail the cost structure, revenues, and the sensitivity analysis of
                            key ratios projected for each silo project by the MPWLC. The government appears to have
                            used a lower than actual level of WACC, but the financial analysis shows that the projects
                            are feasible with good debt service coverage (30:70 equity: debt ratio and with some level
                            of VGF).




     Table 4:
 Silo complex—
       costs



                             Description                                                     INR million

                             Land & Site Development                                         0.070

                             Building and Civil Works                                        144.563

                             Plant & Machineries                                             96.695

                             Electrical, Automation, & other Utilities                       28.750

                             Preliminary & Pre-Operative Expenses                            21.877

                             Contingency                                                     13.504

                             Total Block Cost                                                305.458

                             Margin Money                                                    0.8943

                             Total Capital Cost                                              306.352




36 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                          Table 5:
                                                                                                     Silo complex—
                                                                                                         revenues




Revenues                        INR/MT/YEAR                      Description

Receipt & Dispatch Charges      91.20                            Reimbursement at actual values handled

                                                                 On value of actual quantity handled under central
Commission Charges              1%
                                                                 pool system



Storage charges                 INR/MT/YEAR

Variable Charge                 67.30                            As on April 1, 2012

Fixed Charge                    723.46                           As on April 1, 2012




                                                                                                       Table 6a:
                                                                                                    Sensitivity of key
                                                                                                     ratios to VGF




VGF %                          0%         10%           20%           25%              30%       35%           40%

Project Cost                 3063.52     2757.17       2450.81      2297.64       2144.46       1991.29      1838.11

VGF Amount                    0.00       306.35        612.70        765.88        919.06       1072.23      1225.41

Project IRR                  12.14%      13.23%        14.55%        15.34%        16.21%       17.19%        18.32%

Equity IRR                   14.05%      15.85%        18.23%        19.75%        21.57%       23.83%        26.68%

DSCR                          1.00        1.11          1.24          1.31             1.40      1.50          1.61


                                                   WACC=9.97




                                                                       Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 37
   Table 6b:
 Sensitivity of
 equity IRR to
VGF & utilization
  year 11–30



 Utilization & VGF                                                 Availability of VGF

 Equity IRR                          14.05%        10%          20%          25%          30%           35%        40%

   utilization after 10 years         100%        15.85%       18.23%       19.75%       21.57%       23.83%       26.68%

                                      90%         14.87%       17.27%       18.80%       20.64%       22.93%       25.82%

                                      80%         13.77%       16.16%       17.69%       19.55%       21.87%       24.83%

                                      70%         13.12%       15.52%       17.07%       18.95%       21.29%       24.29%

                                      60%         10.75%       13.19%       14.77%       16.70%       19.13%       22.28%

                                                                                 WACC=9.97 | Equity IRR > 12% desirable




                            The MPWLC adopted a two-stage open bidding process with a Request for
                            Qualifications in March 2013 for pre-qualifying eligible bidders. See Box 9
                            for details of the evaluation process adopted.

     Box 9



                            EVALUATION PROCESS of MP Silo Project, India
                            The evaluation process consisted of a scoring and weighting system based on project experi-
                            ence of firms/ consortia. For the purpose of technical pre-qualification of firms, the issue the
                            MPWLC had to deal with was to reach a balance between the PPP and sector/ domain exper-
                            tise requirements. While it was decided to not require mandatory silo experience for the firm,
                            since there is less of that kind of expertise inside the country and larger international firms
                            may not be interested in bidding for smaller projects even if bid out in packages, it was felt
                            that firms should at least get a premium in terms of scores to the extent of their silo / storage
                            sector experience. The MPWLC therefore categorized the firm’s project experience in terms
                            of four categories of projects and assigned weights/factors for evaluating the experience in
                            each specific category (Table 7).
                            Firms pre-qualified based on the above criteria were invited to submit financial bids. At this
                            stage the sole criterion used was the amount of VGF required/ amount of premium offered.




38 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                                   Table 7:
                                                                                                               Categorization
                                                                                                                of projects &
                                                                                                               assignment of
                                                                                                                   weights




                             Category I                Category II                Category III           Category IV

                             PPP projects in                                      EPC projects in
                                                       PPP projects in                                   EPC projects in
     Sector                  warehousing/                                         warehousing/
                                                       core sector                                       core sector
                             storage sector                                       storage sector

     Factor assigned         1.5                       0.8                        0.9                    0.4




There was a high level of interest in the project and 168 bids were submitted
by 31 firms/ consortia for the ten silo complexes. Forty-four financial bids were
submitted by nine firms/ consortia for the 10 silo complexes. The sole bid crite-
rion following pre-qualification on technical and financial criteria was the lowest
level of VGF required (or the premium offered). (See Box 10 for details of the
VGF based bids received.)
                                                                                                                    Box 10



   VIABILITY GAP FINANCING FOR SILOS IN MP, INDIA
   The Scheme for Support to Public-Private Partnerships in Infrastructure was initiated in 2005.
   The scheme provides for 20 percent grant support from the Government of India to projects
   at national and sub-national levels, where a project is found to be economically
   feasible but not financially so, and fulfills other general eligibility criteria.
   The Government of India accorded in-principle approval for up to 20 percent VGF to be pro-
   vided to the 10 silo complexes. Final VGF paid is determined on the basis of the bid, with the
   amount of VGF required being the sole bid criterion in the second stage of bidding involving
   pre-qualified firms.
   The private sector perspective on the projects appears to be mixed, with a range of amounts
   quoted as VGF for each project by different bidders. Overall, the perspective is more opti-
   mistic than the government view, as very low VGF or some amount of premium has been bid
   by the winning firms/ consortia (Table 8). One reason could be that firms were allowed to bid
   for multiple projects, and getting more than one project leads to synergies that reduce costs.
   Another reason could be early wins that companies might be trying to get in order to prepare
   for the larger FCI storage program and other state programs likely in the short to medium
   term. However, it does raise questions—as in any other PPP project—about the information
   on costs. It also brings up issues of aggressive bidding in order to capture the market for a
   specific type of project/ service, as well as questions on possible future problems in closing
   or even future operational performance issues.




                                                                                   Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 39
       Table 8:
    VGF bids by
  firms in the MP
    silo projects




 Location*                        (i)        (ii)    (iii)        (iv)       (v)       (vi)        (vii)       (viii)      (ix)           (x)

 Firm                                                        Financial Quote (VGF required) in INR millions

 Pristine
                               1.025        0.911   0.971        1.000     1.075      0.874       0.999       1.051         -              -
 Logistics

 Adani
                               0.211        0.291   0.241       0.231      0.311      0.221       0.241       0.221       0.351          0.311
 Enterprise

 LT Foods                                                                                                                0.005
                               0.626        1.220   1.130        1.146     0.626      0.577       0.611       1.170                      0.005
 Limited                                                                                                                Premium

 Techno Electric
                                  -           -     0.842          -          -       0.582       0.985          -          -              -
 & Engineering

 Veerprabhu
                               1.070        1.138   1.070        0.941        -       0.795         -         0.941         -              -
 Marketing

 Sri Avantika
                                  -           -       -          0.900        -          -          -         0.900         -              -
 Contractors (T)

 Total Shipping                                                                      0.001
                                  -           -       -          0.525        -                     -            -          -              -
 & Logistics                                                                        Premium

 Oakridge
                                  -         0.899     -            -          -          -          -            -          -              -
 Energy

 Vishandas
                                  -           -       -            -          -          -          -            -        0.165          0.145
 Asnani

 Lowest Bidders                Adani        Adani   Adani       Adani      Adani      TSL**      Adani        Adani     LT Foods LT Foods


* Locations: (i) Dewas; (ii) Harda; (iii) Hoshangabad; (iv) Raisen; (v) Satna; (vi) Sehore; (vii) Ujjain; (viii) Vidisha; (ix) Bhopal;
	 (x) Indore.
**Total Shipping & Logistics Limited




  34
       Rabi crops are sown in October-
       November and are harvested in        The deals are expected to achieve financial closure very soon and it is expected
              spring, i.e., around April.
                                            that the new silos would be ready for use before the 2015 Rabi34 harvest.




40 • The World Bank Group
Conclusion

Key Lessons
Lessons are now emerging in countries that are at various stages of implement-
ing PPP silo projects. India, where we studied the evolution of the various PPP
types in greater detail for the purposes of this paper, has a number of early les-
sons to offer. Many of these early stage concerns relate to procurement stages
from bid requirements and clauses in draft contracts. Other issues focus on the
understanding and acceptability of project structures by investors. Key positive
lessons from India underline the importance of following a transparent procure-
ment process—where bidders are not only kept aware of the progress of the
process but key elements of information are shared with bidders, and bidder
feedback is taken at each stage of the process.
Some areas where governments need to be cautious and some issues that have
emerged from ongoing experience are also highlighted below. These do not
exhaust all possibilities and it is likely that we will see more lessons emerging
as we gain more implementation experience from a larger set of countries.

   Structuring of projects
   As discussed earlier in the paper, silo projects have risk profiles which are
   related to government policy as well as to the way the sponsor structures
   the project that is brought to bid.
   Similar to PPP projects in other sectors, it is important that the project is
   structured in a way that the risk allocation is fair and efficient, with the risks



                                                                         Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 41
                            allocated to parties that are best able to handle them. For example, risks
                            that are in the government’s control (for example, changes in law) should be
                            allocated to the public sector, while other risks that are in the private party’s
                            control (such as construction and operation) should be allocated to the
                            operator.
                            However, it is important to remember that PPP projects in grain storage are
                            typically first of their kinds in countries and therefore carry higher risks than
                            projects in other sectors (such as power, where private sector activity is more
                            common). Specifically, in a grain storage project, the private sector opera-
                            tor’s primary concern revolves around the government’s ability to pay during
                            the concession term. This payment risk has to be addressed in some way
                            during project structuring in order to encourage the private sector to be
                            willing to take this risk for the long term. For example, in case of the ongo-
                            ing Sindh grain storage PPP project, the provincial government has set up
                            a VGF, which will be tapped into to provide a letter of credit to the private
                            sector investor to cover part of the payment risk. This not only addresses
                            some of the payment risk for the project, but also shows government com-
                            mitment to the project and encourages the private sector to invest in the
                            project.
                            Another important risk that is typical in grain storage projects is the large
                            number of stakeholders in this sector. These can include farmers, middle-
                            men, provincial and federal governments, millers, and consumers. With
                            introduction of private sector activity in this sector, there is a possibility that
                            some or all of these stakeholders are not excited about this change. The
                            public sector has to undertake consultation sessions with each of these
                            stakeholders in order to ensure that there are no grievances at a later stage.
                            If this is a risk that is not handled properly at the onset of the project, it has
                            potential to create significant social issues. Since this risk is not in the
                            private sector’s hands, it needs to be handled entirely by the government.
                            Apart from risk allocation related issues, we have seen in the case of the
                            Madhya Pradesh project that there could be challenges in the costing of
                            projects. While silo projects do seem to be rather simple in terms of capi-
                            tal investments, it is not clear what level of tariff should be considered the
                            right level. For example, there is substantial difference between the tariff
                            in the case of the Punjab project and the MP project. While the costs could
                            be explained by the initial investments in land, upfront grants by the MP
                            government, and the differences in commercial structure such as provision
                            of actual handling charges in MP, it is not entirely clear with the low level
                            of VGF requirements being presented by the bidders in MP if these differ-
                            ences alone can explain the large difference in tariff, one set by the govern-
                            ment and one determined through market competition. In general, there
                            is a risk when the government sets an artificially low or high tariff instead of
                            relying on market forces.

                            Pre-qualification of firms
                            Incorrect or vaguely written pre-qualification criteria could have the follow-
                            ing repercussions:
                            •	 Companies with little experience enter the bid process;



42 • The World Bank Group
•	 Eligibility criteria create an entry barrier for companies, resulting in
   low level of competition; and
•	 Quality of bids suffers with bid prices and storage solutions that are
   not feasible.
Many developing countries have little experience within the public or pri-
vate sector of establishing, or operating and maintaining, larger scale silo
storage. Given this, it has been difficult for governments to set the eligibility
criteria for bidding for these projects appropriately. Stringent requirements
relating to running of silo projects have the potential to become a major
entry barrier. At the same time, more flexibility with emphasis on allowing
companies to source technical experts from outside to provide the required
experience and expertise could result in participant companies with no
experience getting pre-qualified as well. There is also the likelihood of low
but less well analyzed or infeasible bids; even infeasible bids may have to
be accepted by the public authority given procurement rules relating to
lowest bid.
It is not unlikely under such a scenario that public authorities will sign
agreements with companies or consortia with no prior experience in the
area. The performance risk increases substantially in each case. Table 9
shows the technical pre-qualification criteria used in three different silo PPP
projects in India. In the Indian projects, the lack of prior experience in food
silo or storage projects was not used as a basis for rejection. However, the
evaluation scores were weighted such that experience in food silo or stor-
age projects would count for more. However, since the scoring was done as
a factor of the total value/cost of payments received by the firm, firms with a
high value of total payments in core infrastructure projects could potentially
score higher than firms with a fair or medium level of focused silo or food
storage infrastructure experience.
In the case of the bids for the 10 silo projects, of the nine firms appearing
in the final proposals, at least five had substantial experience in food silo or
storage projects. However, while this is the case in technical selection, the
financial bid is the sole determining factor for selection from within techni-
cally qualified firms. Because there is no weight allocated in the final reckon-
ing for the technical scores, there is an increased probability that a firm with
no food silo or storage experience will be selected.
In the case of Punjab as well as the Madhya Pradesh projects in India,
however, firms with some prior experience in storage emerged as preferred
bidders. In Madhya Pradesh, in seven out of 10 projects, Adani Enterprise—
which has run storage and transportation projects for government through
its affiliated companies—was selected.
It is also worthwhile considering other procurement methodologies that
might give different weights to technical and cost factors or evaluate these
differently—for example, use both financial and technical factors to arrive
at the final score.




                                                                    Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 43
     Table 9:
    Technical
 Prequalification
  criteria in silo
  PPP projects,
       India

                            Project   Technical Prequalification Criteria

                            FCI       Option A: Shareholder with min. of 51 percent equity stake in develop-
                                      ment, operation & maintenance of at least 1 infrastructure project with
                                      min. capital cost per project not less than INR 32 crores for 50,000 MT
                                      capacity silo complex and INR 21 crores for 25,000 MT.
                                      Option B: Shareholder with min. of 51 percent equity stake in develop-
                                      ment, operation & maintenance of projects related to (i) bulk storage
                                      and material handling systems of; and (ii) projects related to handling
                                      and storage of food grains or similar commodities, including project
                                      management, operation and maintenance of handling systems and
                                      equipment; min. experience with 1 project with capital cost of not less
                                      than INR 32 crores for 50,000 MT projects/INR 21 crores for 25,000MT
                                      OR min. experience of 2 projects with cost not less than Rs 16 crores for
                                      50,000 MT project/Rs 11 crores each for 25,000 MT project.
                                      Option C: Execution of at least 1 project with at least 51 percent equity
                                      stake of turnkey Engineering Procurement and Construction (EPC)
                                      contracts in infrastructure of bulk storage and material handling
                                      systems or projects relating to handling and storage of food grains
                                      or similar commodities; minimum capital cost shall be Rs 32 crores
                                      for 50,000 MT projects, Rs 21 crores for 25,000 MT projects.


                            Madhya    Project experience including: paid for, or received payments for con-
                            Pradesh   struction of, and/or paid for development of, and/or collected and
                                      appropriated revenues such that the sum total is INR 45 crore for the
                                      following eligible projects in the warehousing/storage sector and core
                                      sector:
                                      A PPP project undertaken on a BOT, BOLT, BOO, BOOT or similar basis
                                      for providing output or services to a public sector entity or providing
                                      non-discriminatory access to users in pursuance of its charter, concession
                                      or contract; the entity claiming experience must have held a min. of 26
                                      percent equity; the capital cost must have been more than INR 6 crore;
                                      the entity claiming experience shall, during the last 5 financial years
                                      preceding the application due date have (i) paid for development of the
                                      project, and/or (ii) collected and appropriated the revenues from users
                                      availing of non-discriminatory access to or use of fixed project assets, but
                                      shall not include revenues from sale/provision of goods or services; OR
                                      Construction experience in warehousing/storage sector or core sector in
                                      which the applicant has paid for the execution of it construction works or
                                      received payments for its clients, fully or partially, during the 5 financial
                                      years immediately preceding the application due date, and only the
                                      payments actually made or received during such 5 financial years shall
                                      qualify in computing the Experience Score; payments less than INR 6
                                      crore shall not be reckoned as payments/receipts for eligible projects.




44 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                              Table 9,
                                                                                                            continued :



Punjab         Project experience including: paid for development of, and/or experi-
               ence in the operations and maintenance of, and collected and appropri-
               ated revenues from, and/or paid for, or received payments for, construc-
               tion of the following eligible projects:
               A PPP project undertaken on a BOT, BOLT, BOO, BOOT or similar basis
               for providing output or services to a public sector entity or providing
               non-discriminatory access to users in pursuance of concession or
               contract, and construction experience in agricultural sector (including
               agri. projects undertaken on a private basis and/or captive basis)and/
               or a PPP project and construction in the core sector; the entity claiming
               experience must have held a min. of 26 percent of issued and paid-up
               equity throughout project; capital cost of project must have been more
               than INR 50 million; and during the last 5 years or 2 years have (i) paid for
               development of the project; and/or (ii) collected and appropriated the
               revenues from users of fixed project assets; OR
               Paid for the execution of its construction works or received payments
               from its client(s) for construction executed, fully or partially, during the
               5 or 2 financial years immediately preceding the bid due date, and only
               the payments actually made or received shall qualify; payments/receipts
               less than INR 5 crores shall not be reckoned as payments/receipts for
               eligible projects; and construction works shall not include the supply of
               goods/equipment except when they form part of a turnkey construc-
               tion contract/EPC contract for the project; the cost of land shall not be
               included; AND
               Such that the sum total of the above is more than INR 600 million with
               the bidder demonstrating experience over 5 financial years preceding
               the bid due date or more than INR 250 million while demonstrating
               technical capacity and experience over 2 financial years preceding the
               bid due date.




Bid requirements relating to site
In projects where the private sector provides the land, a few key problems
may also arise:
•	 Availability of land at the desired location may be an issue;
•	 Cost of land at desired location might be substantial, leading to a
   higher bid price; and
•	 Land ownership/ access related provisions as a condition for eligibility to
   bid could reduce private sector interest.



                                                                              Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 45
                            The government needs to preserve a balance between its legitimate
                            concern of ensuring that the bids do not fail due to lack of bidder access
                            to land, and the problem of rigidity in bid conditions, which might deter
                            bidders from participating in the bid.
                            In order to ensure the availability of land at an early stage in the bid, the FCI
                            Silo project in India has the following requirement relating to land at RFQ
                            stage: “The Applicant shall have adequate and contiguous parcel of land,
                            free from encumbrances, as per the specifications laid down herein for the
                            construction of the Project along with rail siding connected to the rail net-
                            work for each of the locations being applied for. The Applicant shall provide
                            details of the land parcel(s) as part of the Application. If the Applicant and
                            in case of consortium, any member or their Associate owns the requisite
                            extent of the land, such owner shall give an undertaking for transfer of the
                            land either by sale or on a long lease, of not less than 25 (twenty five) years,
                            to the Concessionaire SPV duly supported by the certified copy of owner-
                            ship documents.”
                            In cases where such ownership cannot be demonstrated at the time of RFQ,
                            the applicant has to submit an additional bank guarantee of INR 7.5 million
                            with the application. This amount is not unduly high, but companies have
                            pointed this out as adding to bid costs which are already substantial as
                            compared to the value of individual silo projects which are typically small in
                            size. In addition, the applicant is also required to submit a feasibility study
                            from an authorized consultant for connecting the site of the rail siding to
                            the network of the Indian Railways. This adds to the cost substantially, as
                            feasibility studies do not come cheap. If there are various applicants for
                            the same location, it is likely that a number of companies might be looking
                            at the same parcel of land, especially where there may be limited options
                            leading to substantial premium being added to the price leading up to its
                            purchase by the winning bidder.
                            These costs, which may be substantial, are required to be borne by the
                            applicant. Given that an applicant has no guarantee of winning the bid,
                            these requirements at RFQ stage could be premature and may have the
                            potential to reduce private sector interest in the project.
                            In contrast, in the Punjab silo project, land was provided by the private
                            party. However, the private party was allowed three months after the execu-
                            tion of the contract to produce land ownership or lease documents with no
                            requirements relating to this at RFQ stage. While this increases the risk of
                            non-serious bidding or site risk for the public authority, it reduces the costs
                            of bidding for the private party.
                            It is not fully clear to what extent the requirements relating to land could
                            affect participation in bidding. This would need to be tracked as the pro-
                            curement process in the FCI project progresses. However, it is clear that
                            this could be one of the issues where authorities may have to look for a
                            balanced approach.




46 • The World Bank Group
Requirements relating to connecting infrastructure/
logistics
Silo projects cannot be designed in isolation, and like several other infra-
structure projects (such as power generation, ports, and airports) there are
issues of evacuation and loading. This brings up the need for a good road
or rail connection, preferably the latter. The quantities and movements
could be substantial, especially where producing and consuming areas are
different, and, cost issues are likely. Handling equipment in the silos requires
electricity, but it is possible to install back-up diesel-generation sets for
the purpose.
All projects come with location requirements based on adequate availability
of land, connectivity to rail and road, and proximity to producing and con-
suming locations. In the case of the state of Madhya Pradesh, government
land has been used, so sites are specific. In the case of the other projects
where the private party is expected to secure land, given that the services
are to be bought by the government for a guaranteed period of time, loca-
tion requirements are stated in the contract.
Of the project examples reviewed, the FCI project has a mandatory require-
ment of rail siding, while there is no such requirement in the case of other
projects. Discussed below are some of the ramifications of this requirement:
•	 Less flexibility in location: The location choice becomes less flexible
   where the rail siding has to be a part of the infrastructure provided by
   the private provider, especially since the connection needs to be to an
   existing rail network in order to minimize the costs involved. This could
   lead to major delays in site identification and could also lead to lower
   levels of investor interest.
•	 High capital costs: The cost of construction of a rail siding is expected to
   add considerably to the cost of each project. As compared to the costs
   of the projects in Madhya Pradesh or Punjab, it is expected that the FCI
   project will be much costlier.
•	 Movement volumes to justify cost: It is doubtful if there would be move-
   ment volumes sufficient to justify the initial capital costs for a rail siding
   at each silo project. While the annual transportation volumes by FCI are
   quite high (Figure 14) and increasing, movement from each site would
   normally be on the lower side as silos are being used by the Govern-
   ment of India for longer term storage rather than for frequent receipt
   and dispatch.
•	 Separate contracts for storage and transportation: It is expected that
   there will be separate contracts for storage and transportation (network
   and rail siding infrastructure is expected to be part of the silo project,
   but the actual ownership and operation of rolling stock is expected to
   be by a separate provider) in the case of the FCI projects. This has its
   advantages, especially given the recent discussion in India of creat-
   ing three separate entities for procurement, storage, and transporta-
   tion, given the expected volume of operations. However, it requires a
   high level of coordination among the procurement processes for these
   separate projects, and also some level of coordination between the



                                                                    Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 47
                                                         concessionaires of the two projects if these turn out to be separate.
                                                         While in the case of firms like Adani, which have a wide range of busi-
                                                         nesses which includes storage as well as logistics, it is likely that they bid
                                                         for both and also manage to secure both, it may not always be the case.
                                                         Before embarking on storage and logistics projects which are combined
                                                         partially or fully, governments should look carefully at different options
                                                         and their implications. See Box 12 for the salient features of a joint stor-
                                                         age and transportation BOO contract that was implemented in India in
                                                         2007.
                                                    •	 Use for other purposes: The FCI draft contract does provide for use of
                                                       rail siding for other purposes—for example,for transport of other com-
                                                       modities by the private provider (transport operator). This essentially
                                                       means that for the private provider to make use of this clause, he needs
                                                       to be able to create volumes which in turn will depend upon the loca-
                                                       tion Creating other business may not be possible in some of the loca-
                                                       tions.
                                                    •	 Use after completion of contract term: Since some of these will be BOO
                                                       projects, the private provider (the transport operator) needs to be able
    Figure 14:                                         to create options for replacing the rail siding business of the FCI after
 Transportation                                        completion of contract term.
of food grains by
    FCI, India,
    1996–2013



                  450
   million tons




                  400

                  350

                  300

                  250

                  200

                  150

                  100

                   50

                    0
                          7


                                  8


                                         9


                                                0


                                                       1


                                                              2


                                                                     3


                                                                            4

                                                                                   5


                                                                                          6


                                                                                                 7


                                                                                                         8


                                                                                                                9


                                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                                                         2


                                                                                                                                                3
                        99


                                99


                                       99


                                              00


                                                     00


                                                            00


                                                                   00


                                                                          00

                                                                                 00


                                                                                        00


                                                                                               00


                                                                                                       00


                                                                                                              00


                                                                                                                      01


                                                                                                                               01


                                                                                                                                       01


                                                                                                                                              01
                        –1


                               –1


                                      –1


                                             –2


                                                    –2


                                                           –2


                                                                  –2


                                                                         –2

                                                                                –2


                                                                                       –2


                                                                                              –2


                                                                                                     –2


                                                                                                             –2


                                                                                                                     –2


                                                                                                                             –2


                                                                                                                                     –2


                                                                                                                                             –2
                    96


                               97


                                      98


                                             99


                                                    00


                                                           01


                                                                  02


                                                                         03

                                                                                04


                                                                                       05


                                                                                              06


                                                                                                     07


                                                                                                            08


                                                                                                                    09


                                                                                                                            10


                                                                                                                                    11


                                                                                                                                           12
                  19


                             19


                                    19


                                           19


                                                  20


                                                         20


                                                                20


                                                                       20

                                                                              20


                                                                                     20


                                                                                            20


                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                    Source: FCI, http://fciweb.nic.in/movements/view/5




48 • The World Bank Group
                                                                                                                  Box 12



PPP IN HANDLING, STORAGE AND TRANSPORTATION OF FOOD,
INDIA
The National Policy on Handling, Storage and Transportation of Food Grains 2000 aimed to
introduce bulk handling of food grain through private participation, with the FCI as the proj-
ect sponsoring authority. Key objectives are:
•	   Introduction of scientific methods of storage of food grain over longer periods of time;
•	   Introduction of bulk handling of food grain as opposed to use of bags;
•	   Reduction in volume and quality losses through better storage;
•	   Transfer of financing and performance risk to the private party;
•	   Introduction of a longer term perspective on storage; and
•	   Provide seamless handling, storage and transportation of food grain from procurement
     to distribution centers.
A project was structured under a Build-Own-Operate (BOO) delivery mechanism involving
the creation of a complete and seamless supply chain from grain procurement to distribution.
A service agreement was signed on June 28, 2005 with Adani Agri-Logistics Limited (AALL),
which was selected through an open competitive tender. The project was commissioned in
May 2007.
The salient features of the project are as follows:
•	   The project is financed, designed, constructed, operated and maintained by the private
     party.
•	   The service is provided as agreed to FCI over a period of 20 years from commissioning.
•	   The private party is responsible for the storage of food grain received at the two
     designated base depots (Moga in Punjab and Kaithal in Haryana) from FCI and for
     transportation and delivery to the five designated field depots (at Navi Mumbai,
     Hoogly, Chennai, Coimbatore, and Bangalore).
•	   Storage is in galvanized silos with facilities for aeration, fumigation and tumbling.
•	   The base depots require parking space for 150 vehicles at any one time, with unloading
     capacity of 75 vehicles per hour, a service time of one hour from sampling to exit and a
     testing lab capacity of 75 samples per hour.
•	   Quality of grain is defined in the contract. All risk of quality and volume losses are borne
     by the private party.
•	   Transportation is in bulk using high speed high capacity top loading bottom discharge
     wagons owned by the private party using Indian Railways track, with 50 wagons in a rake
     with a rake capacity of 3200 MT. This was the first project to feature specialized top-
     loading and bottom-unloading grain transport railway cars, and these are the only such
     railway cars in operation in India to the present day.
•	   The payment mechanism is based on payment by FCI of fixed storage and handling
     charges indexed to WPI for an annual guaranteed tonnage of 800,000 MT.
The project has been functioning reasonably well with reported losses of approximately 0.2
percent as against the average losses in conventional storage of over 10 percent.




                                                                                  Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 49
                            Migrating contracts to future liberalization
                            A problem that all governments might face, especially where there is scope
                            for fluctuations in policy, is the migration of contracts to a different policy re-
                            gime. We have discussed the issues relating to demand and policy affecting
                            contracts specific to PPPs in grain storage in an earlier section. Currently,
                            most contracts have clauses relating to change in law; whether these ade-
                            quately cover unforeseen changes in terms of sector liberalization is unclear,
                            and these could be specifically addressed. While this is a risk that is ge-
                            neric to most PPPs, and has been covered very well in a wide variety of PPP
                            literature on risks, it merits brief mention here as grain silo PPP contracts are
                            especially vulnerable to changes in government policy.




50 • The World Bank Group
Documents &
References

Asian Development Bank (2008), Public-Private Partnerships Handbook.

Dmitry Prikhodko and Olekksandr Zrilyi (2013), Pakistan: Review of the Wheat
sector and Grain Storage Issues,” FAO Investment Center.

FCI (2013), Draft Request for Qualification for Selection of developer for
construction of Food Grain Silos at Various Locations through Public Private
Partnership (PPP) on Design, Build, Finance, Own and Operate (DBFOO) Basis.

FCI (2013), Draft Request for Proposal for Selection of Developer for Construc-
tion of Food Grain Silos at Various Locations through Public Private Partnership
(PPP) on Design, Build, Finance, Own and Operate (DBFOO) Basis.

FCI (2013), Draft Concession Agreement for Construction, Operation &
Maintenance of Silo Complex under Design, Build, Finance, Own & Operate
(DBFOO) Model.

FCI (2012), Private Warehousing Scheme – 2010 – A Scheme for Hiring of Private
Godowns by FCI with Preservation, Maintenance and Security.

Food and Agriculture Organization (2011), Global Food Losses and Food
Waste: Extent, Causes and Prevention.

Government of India, Planning Commission, RFP for Technical Consultant:
Manual of Standards and Specifications for Silos.



                                                                    Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 51
                            Government of India (2008), Scheme for Construction of Godowns for FCI –
                            Storage requirements through Private Entrepreneurs.

                            Government of India (2013), Empowered Institution for the Scheme for Financial
                            Support to Public Private Partnerships in Infrastructure, 48th Meeting, Record
                            Note of Discussions.

                            ICRA (2012), Rating of Adani Agri Logistics Limited Long-Term Fund Based and
                            Non-Fund Based Facilities.

                            IFC Success Stories, Punjab Silo Project.

                            Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy (2012), Grain Reserves and the Food
                            Price Crisis: Selected Writings from 2008–2010.

                            MPWLC (2013), RFQ, Silo Project for PPP at Ten Locations in Madhya Pradesh.

                            MPWLC (2013), Storage Agreement for Silo Project at Pathari Haweli, Vidisha.
                            Msafiri Daudi Mbaga (2013), Alternative mechanisms for achieving food security
                            in Aman, Agriculture & Food Security.

                            Oluyemisi Kuku-Shittu, Astrid Mathiassen, Amit Wahwa, Lucy Myles and Akeem
                            Ajibola (2013), Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis, Nige-
                            ria.

                            PUNGRAIN (2010), Concession Agreement for Wheat Silo Project in Punjab.

                            PUNGRAIN (2010), Request for Proposal, Wheat Silo Project in Punjab.

                            The World Bank (2012),The Grain Chain: Food Security and Managing Wheat
                            Imports in Arab Countries.

                            The World Bank, Natural Resources Institute and Food and Agricultural
                            Organization (2011), Missing Food: The Case of Post-Harvest Grain Losses
                            in Sub-Saharan Africa.

                            World Bank Institute (PPIAF) (2012), Public-Private Partnerships Reference
                            Guide.




52 • The World Bank Group
Appendix

SIMPLIFIED GUIDE TO MODERN SILOS
Bulk storage of grains with mechanized handling can be done either in flat
warehouses or in vertical silos of concrete or steel. Since the technology was
first introduced in North America about 60 years ago, steel silos have become
the most common choice for new grain and oilseed storage projects in all
climates globally. Concrete silos and grain elevators, though more costly on a
per ton of storage basis, are still used for port facilities and food and feed pro-
cessing plants where taller structures are desirable because of limited space—
particularly if high grain throughput justifies the larger investment costs. Silos
may have either hopper (cone) bottoms or flat bottoms. Hopper bottoms are
limited to about a 12 meter diameter and have higher construction costs on a
per ton basis. Individual flat bottom steel silos now may be as much as 30
meters in diameter and hold up to 30,000 MT of grain.
The key advantages of vertical silo storage systems include:
•	 Automated, mechanical handling to reduce operating costs;
•	 Computerized controls for monitoring of intake, discharge, aeration,
   and other operations;
•	 Temperature monitoring, ventilation and fumigation systems;
•	 Storage volume per unit of land area is multiple times that of flat
   warehouse storages; and



                                                                       Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 53
                            •	 Reduction in bag inventory and dunnage (pallets) costs.

                            Construction
                            Bolted steel silos offer the advantage of relatively easy and rapid erection by
                            the general contractor using a kit supplied by the manufacturer. After silo
                            foundation (often concrete based) is complete based on the drawing provided
                            by the silo manufacturer, the silo walls are constructed from the components
                            at ground level, starting with the uppermost ring, followed by assembly of the
                            steel roof on top of it. Hydraulic jacks, as many as two dozen for a 20 meter di-
                            ameter silo, are then used to lift the wall structure off the ground to accommo-
                            date the next ring of wall panels. The silo is raised in this manner until all rings
                            have been bolted together and the silo can be anchored to the foundation.
                            Working in this manner, a team of 10 semi-skilled workers can erect a steel grain
                            bin with 5,000 MT capacity in just two months.

                            Equipment
                            The equipment components of a grain silo facility can vary greatly depending
                            on the needs of the end user. The basic sections consist of the receiving, stor-
                            age, and discharging systems. Nearly all silo components are made of galva-
                            nized steel. This includes wall panels, bolts, and washers, conveying equipment,
                            bucket elevators, catwalks, and towers. The zinc coating enables the facility to
                            stand for decades without major rust problems, even in tropical ports.
                            For short distances, conveyers are of the “drag chain” type that push the grain
                            along by use of enclosed flighting. Belt conveyers are used for longer distances.
                            Optional but commonly used equipment includes cleaning, bulk weighing, dust
                            aspiration, temperature monitoring, fumigation, aeration, and bagging systems.
                            Drying systems and grain chilling are also both commonly used.

                            Operations
                            Modern grain silo facilities allow for highly efficient, mechanized receiving and
                            discharging of grain and for operational procedures to ensure minimal loss of
                            quality during storage.
                            Receiving: On arrival at the site, the truck or railcar stops at a weighbridge that
                            electronically records the weight. Samples are taken for analysis of moisture
                            content, foreign material, and other quality parameters at a laboratory on the
                            site. The bulk grain is dumped through a grill into a concrete or steel receiving
                            pit as much as 3 or 4 meters deep. If arriving in bags, they are slit open manu-
                            ally and emptied into the pit.
                            From there the grain is lifted by a bucket elevator, which is made up of plastic
                            or metal containers attached to a belt conveyer. These continuously scoop the
                            grain at the bottom (boot) and lift it up. At its top, or “bonnet,” the bucket el-
                            evator feeds a horizontal conveyer normally positioned on a catwalk that spans
                            an entire row of silos along the centerline. This chain conveyer has slide gates
                            (outlets) at the peak of each roof that allow for center filling of each bin, critical
                            for maintaining even loads on the silo walls.
                            Discharge: Gravity flow makes possible the discharge of 85 percent of the grain
                            from flat bottom silos of average dimensions. An outlet in the center of the silo



54 • The World Bank Group
is opened via a slide gate for initial emptying onto a bottom conveyer that runs
along the centerline of a whole row of silos. Subsequently, additional outlets
on each side of the center are opened to feed the conveyer until gravity flow
has ended and the grain inside has reached its angle of repose. A sweep augur
mounted on a pivot removes the residual grain in two revolutions. The augur is
a screw conveyer that pulls the grain from the outside inward to the center dis-
charge outlet while moving through the mass in a circle. The bottom conveyers
move the grain back to a bucket elevator that lifts the grain so that it can
be sent to bagging stations or to trucks/rail cars for transport to mills/users.

Maintaining quality
During storage, several operations may take place to maintain grain quality.
Aeration serves to cool the grain and ensure uniform moisture levels. Large fans
mounted outside the silo walls blow air into channels with perforated covers in
the concrete floor of the silo and then upwards through the grain mass, exiting
through vents in the roof. Cables suspended in the grain mass from the roof
enable operators in the control room to monitor temperature changes. Sensors
every meter or so can detect the location where grain heats up due to pockets
of moisture or due to insect infestation.
Recirculation of the grain from one bin to another using the conveying systems
for filling and discharge is another way to reduce insect activity and maintain
even moisture content throughout.
Fumigation can be achieved during silo filling with automatic dispensing of
fumigant tablets into the conveying system.

Staffing
A grain silo facility requires a mix of professional staff, semi-skilled personnel,
and unskilled labor. Because of mechanization and automated handling, total
personnel is only a fraction of a flat warehouse facility holding similar quantities
of grain in bagged form. Management of grain silo operations has been simpli-
fied by touch screen panels for control of filling, discharging, and recirculation.
This allows constant monitoring of grain levels, moisture, and temperature.
Typical grain storage projects with 50,000 tons of storage capacity may have the
following job positions with responsibilities and skills as indicated:
•	 Facility manager: overall responsibility for operations; knowledgeable with
   the software used for inventory management; sufficient electro-mechanical
   training to troubleshoot problems in grain receiving and discharge; ability
   to manage all staff.
•	 Operations managers: day to day operations on shifts when the facility man-
   ager is not present; knowledge of electrical and mechanical engineering
   and grain science.
•	 Weighbridge operator: operation of the electronic truck scales and issuing
   receipts to drivers on arrival and departure.
•	 Laboratory technicians: collection of grain samples at reception and
   dispatch and analysis on quality parameters.
•	 Bookkeeper / accountant: managing the financial accounts.



                                                                       Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 55
                            •	 Electrician / mechanic: equipment repair and troubleshooting.
                            •	 Security guards: security of premises and operations.
                            •	 Labor: loading bagged grain into trucks, silo clean out operations.
                            GEAPS (Grain Elevator and Processors Society) is a professional organization
                            that in partnership with Kansas State University (USA) offers over 20 online
                            courses covering all aspects of grain storage operations. Credentialing is also
                            part of the joint program. Course titles range from the general to the specific:
                            Introduction to Grain Handling Operations; Grain Quality Management; Grain
                            Elevator Equipment Maintenance; and Grain Entrapment: Causes, Prevention
                            and Rescue, among others.

                            Investment costs
                            The main investment costs in a steel silo grain storage facility are broken down
                            into three parts: land, civil works, and equipment. New large silo storage facili-
                            ties are most often built outside urban areas in grain production zones. This is
                            done to minimize land costs and optimize logistics, provided transport access
                            infrastructure is suitable and access to power is adequate.
                            Civil works: Concrete silo foundations are the most important component in
                            civil works associated with a silo project. An internationally accepted rule of
                            thumb in steel silo projects is that foundations make up one-third of the project
                            cost, assuming stable soil with only minimal need for pilings. If extensive pilings
                            are needed, the cost can exceed the total cost of the bins and the electro-me-
                            chanical handling equipment.
                            Equipment costs: Manufactured components of a steel grain silo facility
                            vconsist of the stationary steel bins and the electro-mechanical machinery made
                            up primarily of conveyers and bucket elevators. Per ton of storage construction
                            costs depend on several factors, including type, number, average size, height,
                            and diameter of bins; filling and discharge capacity; aeration equipment; and
                            bagging and weighing systems.
                            Hopper bottom bins are desirable for easy clean out but cost roughly twice that
                            of flat bottom bins because of the structural supports at the base. Use of larger
                            bins reduces cost. A 100,000 ton capacity facility consisting of 10 bins of 10,000
                            tons could cost about one- third less than a one with 20 bins of 5000 tons.
                            Bin height and diameter are also important. A taller, narrower silo requires more
                            steel than a wider, shorter one. The thickness of the steel in the rings is less
                            for the top rings and greater for the bottom rings. A taller silo requires higher
                            gauge steel for the bottom rings or double wall panels. However, if the silo is
                            too wide then the conveying systems must be longer and cost more.
                            Handling systems can be designed to fill and discharge the facility at any rate,
                            from as little as 50 tons per hour to 1000 tons per hour or more. Higher capaci-
                            ties require bigger, more expensive motors and larger conveyers and elevators.
                            Higher capacity is required at port grain terminals, where ships must be loaded
                            or discharged quickly to avoid demurrage, and also other places where large
                            volumes of grain need be received in a short period of time.
                            High capacity grain cleaning, bulk weighing and bagging systems can signifi-




56 • The World Bank Group
cantly add to the per ton cost. Grain dryers and grain chillers, sometimes
essential for ensuring grain quality in storage, can increase cost by 10 percent
to 20 percent.
In a typical steel silo facility, the high tensile strength galvanized steel makes up
roughly 60 percent of manufacturer’s cost. Silo design is based on minimizing
the amount of steel to obtain maximum storage capacity. Therefore, the sticker
price will vary according to steel prices.

Equipment supply
Equipment supply for grain silo facilities is highly competitive. Since the steel
grain bins are the biggest cost component in a silo facility, most grain bin
manufacturers sell complete facilities, using manufacturers of the handling
equipment as sub-suppliers if they do not manufacture it themselves.
There are about 25 manufacturers of grain bins that do business internationally.
Three-quarters of these are located in North America, Europe, or Turkey. A
handful of manufacturers are located in Brazil and China as well. Many of the
larger manufacturers have their silos installed in over 50 countries.
The competitiveness of supply has to do with the low transport costs in relation
to ex-works costs. The one-meter by two-meter corrugated steel panels stack
neatly, making shipment in ocean containers economical. This rarely amounts
to more than 10 percent of the CIF price, even to the most distant countries.
Grain bin manufacturers are rarely willing to undertake turnkey projects. They
leave this to the local construction companies that have the ability to do the
civil works and hire labor for erection of the bins. The manufacturers do pro-
vide erection supervisors at an extra cost, but without liability for errors by the
contractor. Because silo erection is relatively simple, consisting mostly of bolted
assembly at ground level, many silo operators act as their own general contrac-
tor—purchasing the equipment directly and engaging a construction company
only to do the civil works and provide labor for erection.




                                                                         Global Trends in PPPs in Grain Storage • 3
        ifc.org/handshake |   @WorldBankPPP |   scribd.com/WBG_PPP |   handshake@ifc.org




September 2014
