THE
ECONOMICS
OF TOBACCO
TAXATION AND
EMPLOYMENT
IN INDONESIA
Health, Population, and Nutrition
Global Practice
Cover photos (clockwise from left): Aerial view of forest and fields, Indonesia. Photo by Curt Carnemark/
World Bank. A child from Jakarta. Project: JEDI. Photo by Farhana Asnap/World Bank. Home and boats on
the water. Photo by Curt Carnemark/World Bank. Jakarta city landmark. Photo
by Jerry Kurniawan/World Bank.
THE
ECONOMICS
OF TOBACCO
TAXATION AND
EMPLOYMENT
IN INDONESIA
Health, Population, and Nutrition
Global Practice




Revised Draft
25 September 2017
SMOKING HAS
BEEN A MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR O
DISEASE BURDEN
INDONESIA. SMO
PREVALENCE
AMONG WORKIN
AGE INDIVIDUAL
HAS EXCEEDED 3
PERCENT SINCE 2
LIST OF ACRONYMS
BPJS 	   Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Sosial
FGD 	    Focus Group Discussion
FT	Full-time
FTE	     Full-time Equivalent
GDP	     Gross Domestic Product
KIS	     Kartu Indonesia Sehat
KKS	     Kartu Keluarga Sejahtera
KPS	     Kartu Perlindungan Sosial
NCD 	    Noncommunicable Diseases
PBI	     Penerima Bantuan Iuran
PPP	     Purchasing Power Parity
Rp	      Indonesian Rupiah
SKM	Machine-made kretek
SKT	Hand-made kretek
SPM	     White cigarettes
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Indonesia has one of the most complex cigarette excise tax structures in the world.
The current cigarette excise tax is divided into 12 tiers, which are based on manufacturers’
type of cigarettes, the number of cigarette productions, and per-unit retail price. The tiers
in the cigarette excise tax structure aim to accommodate small-scale cigarette firms, espe-
cially hand-rolled kreteks (SKT) firms. The rationale for such a structure is that smaller SKT
firms account for more than half of the total factories in the tobacco industry. Moreover,
these firms are responsible for employing a significant share of the workers in tobacco
manufacturing. Such a system favors downward substitution to lower priced products and
has a limited impact on smoking reduction.

This report aims to contribute to the policy debate over the tobacco excise tax
reform, and specifically, any effects it might have on employment in Indonesia.
It uses data from the Central Bureau of Statistics to observe the trends in employment and
output in the tobacco sector and estimate the potential impact on tobacco employment
(gross effect) from raising cigarette taxes in Indonesia.

The report shows that tobacco manufacturing represents only a small share of the
economy-wide employment (0.60 percent). Additionally, the contribution of tobacco
manufacturing to employment in the manufacturing sector is quite small (5.3 percent)
in comparison to the contribution of the food (27.43 percent), garment (11.43 percent),
and textile (7.90 percent) sectors. Although small, tobacco manufacturing jobs are heavily
concentrated, with about 94 percent of tobacco manufacturing workers in Central Java,
East Java, and West Nusa Tenggara. In these provinces, several districts are quite depen-
dent on tobacco sector employment, for example, Kudus (30 percent), Temanggung (27.6
percent), and Kediri (26 percent).

We found that most tobacco manufacturing workers are females and unskilled.
The share of female workers in tobacco manufacturing is 66 percent, which is the highest
in the manufacturing industry. Other sectors in which most workers are female are the
garment sector (63 percent) and textiles sector (56 percent). About 69 percent of total
workers in the tobacco sector completed at most, junior high school. Among tobacco
households, the share of tobacco households with female tobacco workers is 78 percent.
Average years of schooling completed by tobacco manufacturing workers is among the
lowest at 8.22 years, which is comparable to the average years of schooling completed by
workers in the food processing sector (8.50 years), manufacturing of wood products sec-
tor (7.31), nonmetallic metal products sector (7.42), furniture sector (8.77), and recycling
sector (5.20).

Tobacco households are partially dependent on income from tobacco employment,
which represents 60 percent of household income, on average. Additionally, among
these households, only 9 percent have a female as the primary income earner. These find-



4 // Executive Summary
ings from secondary data (the Sakernas data) are consistent with the ones from the World
Bank/ACS kretek workers survey in Indonesia—the proportion of wage income from kretek
is 54 percent and the share of female tobacco workers as primary earner is about 10 per-
cent (World Bank, 2017a).

Productivity of tobacco sector workers, measured by the output per worker, is
relatively low in comparison to productivity of workers in the comparable sector.
A typical worker in the medium and large tobacco firms can produce IDR 104 million
(US$7,761) worth of products annually. For comparisons, a typical worker in the food and
drink, and textile industries can produce IDR 265 million (US$19,776) and IDR 300 million
(US$22,388) worth of products respectively.

The estimated output elasticity of labor demand for the cigarette manufacturing
sector is 0.160. This means that a 1 percent decrease in output results in a 0.16 percent
decrease in employment in the cigarette manufacturing sector. On the other hand, the
estimate for the tobacco processing sector implies that a 1 percent decrease in output
corresponds to a 0.092 percent decrease in employment in the tobacco processing sector.

Our estimates predict that raising cigarette taxes by an average of 47% and sim-
plifying the cigarette tax structure to 6 tiers will reduce cigarette demand by 10.4
percent, increase government revenue by 8.4 percent, and reduce gross employ-
ment in the tobacco manufacturing sector by 9.13 percent. Our estimates suggest
that the consumption of cigarette is predicted to decrease by 36 billion sticks. Higher cig-
arette taxes are expected to increase government revenue by IDR 12,875 trillion. In terms
of employment, we estimate a reduction of 32,132 tobacco manufacturing jobs, most of
them in the SKT industry (24,710 fewer jobs). This implies a 4.79% reduction in tobacco
manufacturing jobs and an 8.60% reduction in SKT industry jobs.

The evidence presented in this report clearly shows that the gross employment
impact of reforming tobacco excise taxes and structure in Indonesia is not as big as
previously thought. Analyses presented here are complemented by other evidence pre-
sented in the World Bank/ACS Indonesia Tobacco Studies, which highlighted the economic
and social costs of tobacco workers’ and farmers’ livelihoods. Given the additional reve-
nues the government will obtain with the reform (IDR 12,875 trillion), there is an oppor-
tunity to implement measures to reduce the impact on the tobacco workers’ livelihoods
(such as cash transfers or expanded access to social safety nets) or to find alternative occu-
pations for the workers affected (retraining programs, educational grants, etc.).

It is important to note that these estimates represent the gross employment effect
of lower cigarette consumption. When prices of cigarettes increase, consumers may
shift their consumption to other goods and services which will create jobs in these sec-
tors. Evidence has shown that the job losses in the tobacco sector (gross effect) are usu-
ally compensated with job creation in the other sectors (net effect). For Indonesia, Ahsan
and Wiyono (2007) estimated positive effects varying from 84,340 to 281, 135 jobs with tax
increases of 25 percent and 100 percent, respectively (Ahsan and Wiyono, 2007).


                                                                                             5
•	   For kretek hand-rollers

     o	 First, the most vulnerable groups in the affected population who would need
     immediate income support in the event of job loss include the workers who are less
     educated, older, heads of their households, and who contribute a significant pro-
     portion of total household income from kretek rolling. The government can provide
     income support to these workers with less than 2% of the revenue gained from a tax
     increase; and

     o	 Second, the additional revenue or part thereof can be allocated for re-skilling and
     redeployment of laid-off kretek workers to smooth their transition to an alternative
     source of employment in the short to medium term.

•	   For (tobacco and clove) farmers:

     o	 The government should help to improve supply chains and value chains for
     other goods in tobacco-growing areas. Many former tobacco farmers are making
     a better living growing other common, locally grown crops (e.g., corn, sweet potato,
     and green vegetables), an outcome that could be further enhanced with even small
     investments by governments in improved supply chains for these products. Results
     from the World Bank/ACS survey suggest that current tobacco farmers are already
     growing many of these crops, so it is an issue of shifting their factors of production to
     maximize economic opportunity.

      o	 The government should help to facilitate access to credit for tobacco
     farmers. Greater access to capital through improved credit schemes could help to
     improve the possibilities for tobacco farmers to cultivate other crops and/or develop
     other nonagricultural economic enterprises. That could be in the form of grants or
     low-interest loans to farmers willing to move away from tobacco cultivation; and

     o	 Specifically, on clove farmers, it is important to emphasize that clove
     farming is not particularly profitable for most clove-producing households in
     at least a couple of major clove-producing districts. The government needs to
     research which alternatives could be viable and target the least profitable areas for
     switching and help these farmers make successful transitions to growing other crops
     and/or economic activities.




6 // Executive Summary
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The preparation of this report was carried out under the World
Bank Global Tobacco Control Program coordinated by Patricio
V. Marquez, with the support of the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation and the Bloomberg Foundation.

The report is part of the Indonesia Tobacco Employment Studies
and was prepared by a team comprised of:

  Gumilang Aryo Sahadewo (Research Faculty Universitas Gadjah Mada
  and Consultant World Bank);
  Roberto Iglesias (Director, Center of Studies on Integration and
  Development, CINDES, Brasil);
  Edson C. Araujo (Senior Economist and Task Team Leader, World Bank);
  Nigar Nargis (Director, American Cancer Society);
  Pandu Harimurti (Senior Health Specialist and Task Team Leader,
  World Bank);
  Jeffrey Drope (Vice-President, American Cancer Society);
  Qing Li (Senior Data Analyst, American Cancer Society);
  Josefine Durazo (Survey Specialist, World Bank);
  Firman Witoelar (Director of Research, SurveyMeter); and
  Bondan Sikoki (Chairperson, SurveyMeter).




  The report greatly benefited from comments, inputs, and advice
  provided by Violeta Vulovic (Economist, World Bank), Frank Chaloupka
  (Professor, Institute for Health Research and Policy, University of Illinois,
  Chicago), Jeremias N. Paul (Coordinator of Tobacco Control, WHO) and
  Michael Weber (Senior Economist, World Bank).




                                                                                  7
TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Acronyms	                                                             3
Executive Summary	                                                            4
Acknowledgments	7
List of Tables	                                                               9
List of Figures	                                                              9


1. Introduction	                                                             11

2. The Economics of Tobacco Taxation	                                        15
      2.1 — Tobacco Consumption, Health Outcomes and Economic Costs	         15
      2.2 — Tobacco Taxes and Tobacco Consumption	                           17
      2.3 — Tobacco Taxation and Tax Revenues	                               18
      2.4 — Employment Impacts of Tobacco Taxation	                          19

3. Cigarette Tax Policies in Indonesia	                                      25
      3.1 — Effects of Cigarette Consumption, Revenues, and Employment	      26

4. Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector	                              33
      4.1 — Data Sources	                                                    33
      4.2 — 23 Employment in the Indonesia Tobacco Farming Sector 	          34
      4.3 — Employment in the Tobacco Manufacturing Sector	                  36

5. Simulations on the Effects of Raising Cigarette Taxes on Employment 	     49

6. Conclusion	                                                               55
References	57
Annex I. Estimation of the Wage Equation	                                    61
Annex II. Sample Selection Procedure for the Manufacturing Industry Data	 62
Annex III. Estimation of Output Elasticity of Labor Demand	                  64
Annex IV. Estimation of Price Elasticity of Demand	                          66
Annex V. Simulation of the Effects of Raising Cigarette Prices on Employment	 68




8 // Table of Contents
List of Figures
     Figure 1. Trends of the cigarette excise tax in Indonesia in real terms, 2010–2017	             27
     Figure 2. Revenue from the tobacco excise, 2005–2015	                                           29
     Figure 3. Trends of cigarette production in Indonesia, 2010–2016	                               30
     Figure 4. Number of tobacco farmers and share of tobacco farmers to total workers, 1990–2011	   35
     Figure 5: Number of medium and large tobacco manufacturers, 2000–2014	                          39
     Figure 6. Share of tobacco employment to total manufacturing employment, 2000–2014	             40
     Figure 7. The concentration of tobacco manufacturing workers, 2014	                             41
     Figure 8. Number of workers per firm by industry	                                               42
     Figure 9. Productivity of workers, 2000–2014	                                                   46
     Figure 10. Relationship between output and labor in medium and large industry, 2000–2014	       46


List of Tables
     Table 1. Selected studies on net employment impact of tobacco control policies 	                21
     Table 2. Type of external tobacco trade and likely net employment impacts	                      23
     Table 3. Cigarette excise tax in Indonesia, 2017	                                               26
     Table 4. Distribution of tobacco farmers across regions, 2014	                                  36
     Table 5. Distribution of clove farmers across regions, 2014	                                    37
     Table 6. Employment structure of the Indonesian tobacco industry, 2014	                         38
     Table 7. Concentration of workers in selected districts, 2014	                                  41
     Table 8. Characteristics of tobacco sector workers, 2011, 2013, & 2015	                         43
     Table 9. Estimation results of the wage equation, 2001–2015	                                    45
     Table 10. Estimation of own-wage and output elasticity of labor demand, 2000–2014	              47
     Table 11. Estimated number of workers in each tax tier	                                         50
     Table 12. Proposed cigarette tax increase and new cigarette excise tariffs	                     51
     Table 13. The effects of raising cigarette prices on employment in the manufacturing sector	    51
     Table 14. Simulation on the effects of raising cigarette taxes on employment	                   53
     Table 15. Summary statistics, National Labor Force Survey Sample	                               61
     Table 16. Selected sample, Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry	                             62
     Table 17. Summary statistics, Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry	                          65
     Table 18. Estimation of price elasticity of cigarette demand, 2015	                             67




                                                                                                      9
SMOKING HAS
 The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




BEEN A MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR O
DISEASE BURDEN
INDONESIA. SMO
PREVALENCE
AMONG WORKIN
AGE INDIVIDUAL
HAS EXCEEDED 3
PERCENT SINCE 2
 10 // Table of Contents
1
    INTRODUCTION
    Smoking has been a major contributor to the disease burden in Indonesia. Smoking
    prevalence among working-age individuals has exceeded 30 percent since 2001. In 2013,
    smoking prevalence among males was 66%, while among females was 6.7%. Smoking
    prevalence among children ages 10–14 in 2013 was 3.7%, twelve times higher than in
    1995 (IAKMI, 2014; Ahsan, 2015). Diseases attributable to smoking include hypertension,
    acute respiratory infection, coronary heart disease, cardiovascular diseases, selected can-
    cers, and perinatal disorders (IAKMI, 2014; Kosen et al., 2012; Kristina et al., 2015). In 2013,
    healthy years lost at the population level due to smoking-induced diseases was estimated
    to be 6.2 million disability-adjusted life years (DALY) (IAKMI, 2014).

    The government of Indonesia continues its efforts to reform the cigarette excise
    tax system. The main objectives of the excise tax reform are to reduce smoking preva-
    lence and to increase tax revenues. Studies suggest that a 10 percent increase in ciga-
    rette excise tax would lead to a reduction in cigarette consumption by 0.9 to 3 percent
    and an increase in government revenue by 6.7 to 9 percent (Hidayat and Thabrany, 2010;
    Setyonaluri et al., 2008). Currently Indonesia has one of the most complex cigarette tax
    structures in the world, which favors downward substitution to lower priced cigarettes
    (World Bank, 2015). Cigarette prices across all tiers increased at a modest rate between
    2010 and 2017 as the government continued to increase cigarette taxes; nevertheless
    cigarette prices were more affordable in recent years than they were in 2000 owing to
    a faster income growth (NCI-WHO, 2017). The main argument against adopting such a
    complex cigarette tax structure was to protect employment by differentiating firms with
    different production scales with those that employ more workers, such as hand-rolled
    kreteks (SKT) workers.

    Despite the concerns, tobacco manufacturing represents only a small share of
    the economy-wide employment (0.60 percent). Additionally, the contribution of the
    tobacco manufacturing to employment in the manufacturing sector is quite small (5.3
    percent) in comparison to the contribution of the food (27.43 percent), garment (11.43
    percent), and textile (7.90 percent) sectors. Although small, tobacco manufacturing jobs
    are heavily concentrated in Central Java, East Java, and West Nusa Tenggara, where about
    94% of tobacco manufacturing workers are employed. In these provinces, several districts
    are quite dependent on sector employment, as for example Kudus (30 percent), Temang-
    gung (27.6 percent), and Kediri (26 percent). A tax change shock that affected the tobacco
    sector would affect these districts most.




                                                                                                       11
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




The objective of this report is to analyze the recent employment trends in the
Indonesian tobacco industry and estimate the potential effects of raising cigarette
taxes on employment in the tobacco manufacturing sector. The report provides new
evidence to contribute to the ongoing debate about the effects of raising cigarette taxes
on tobacco sector employment. It complements the current analytical work conducted
by the World Bank, in partnership with the American Cancer Society, to explore the
employment conditions and livelihoods of tobacco and clove farmers and kretek rollers in
Indonesia. The report is part of the World Bank technical assistance to the government of
Indonesia in the areas of revenue policy reform and health systems reform.

This report is structured as follows: Section two provides a review of the global evi-
dence on the impacts of raising cigarette taxes on population health outcomes and on
the economy. It briefly reviews the economic issues around tobacco taxation, including
a summary of the global evidence on the effects of taxation on smoking reduction, fiscal
revenues, tobacco production and employment in the sector. Section three presents
an overview of the cigarette tax reforms in Indonesia in recent years and discusses the
government of Indonesia’s plans for reforming the cigarette tax structure. Section four
discusses the employment trends in the tobacco industry in Indonesia, analyzes workers’
characteristics and compares workers to similar sectors and socio-demographic profiles.
The section also discusses the potential impacts of raising cigarette taxes on employment
by presenting results of simulations. The final section, section five, discusses the results
in light of the current debate over cigarette tax reform in Indonesia and provides policy
recommendations on the employment aspects of the reform.




12 // Introduction
13
SMOKING HAS
BEEN A MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR O
DISEASE BURDEN
INDONESIA. SMO
PREVALENCE
AMONG WORKIN
AGE INDIVIDUAL
HAS EXCEEDED 3
PERCENT SINCE
2
    THE ECONOMICS OF
    TOBACCO TAXATION
    Raising cigarette prices through taxes is a cost-effective way to reduce cigarette
    consumption as recommended by the World Health Organization Framework
    Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC, 2003). The objective of raising cigarette
    taxes is to decrease consumption of cigarettes through higher prices.1 Additionally, rais-
    ing cigarette taxes can increase government’s tax revenues, which can be allocated to
    finance complementary tobacco control policies and social investments such as health
    and education. Experiences in both high and low-and middle-income countries (LIMCs)
    show how tobacco tax revenues can be used to expand health care coverage. In France,
    for example, tobacco tax revenues are used to supplement the funding for public health
    services. In Philippines, higher tobacco and alcohol tax revenues have been used to
    expand health coverage for the poor. On the other hand, the tobacco industry argues
    that lower consumption of tobacco products due to higher tobacco tax can have neg-
    ative effects on production and, consequently, on employment. This section presents a
    summary of the global evidence on the impacts of tobacco consumption on population’s
    health and the impacts of tobacco taxation on fiscal revenues and employment.


    2.1 Tobacco Consumption, Health Outcomes, and Economic Costs
    Smoking is a major cause of morbidity and premature mortality. Tobacco consump-
    tion has been directly linked to diseases of the circulatory system (e.g., ischemic heart
    and cerebrovascular diseases); cancers of the trachea, bronchus and lung, esophagus,
    oropharynx, larynx, stomach, liver, pancreas, kidney and ureter, cervix, bladder, colon/
    rectum, as well as acute myeloid leukemia; chronic respiratory diseases (e.g., asthma,
    chronic obstructive pulmonary disease); and metabolic diseases such as diabetes mel-
    litus (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2014). Besides the harm of direct
    consumption, it has been proven that secondhand smoking (sometimes referred to as
    passive smoking, environmental tobacco smoke, or tobacco smoke pollution) also has
    damaging health consequences. Secondhand smoking is quite dangerous because there
    are at least 50 carcinogenic chemicals inhaled by those who are around smokers, and the
    scientific evidence shows that there is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoking


    1 We use the term cigarette taxes and tobacco taxes interchangeably because cigarettes are a major form of tobacco product in
    Indonesia.



                                                                                                                                    15
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




(US NCI-WHO, 2016). The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that approximately
7.2 million deaths per year worldwide are attributable to smoking, more than 6 million of
those deaths are the result of direct tobacco use, while around 900 000 are the result of
non-smokers being exposed to second-hand smoke (WHO, 2017a). Half of these deaths
occurred in LMICs. By 2030, the annual death toll could reach 10 million if no tobacco
control measures are taken (WHO, 2008).

Smoking is one of the major risk factors for noncommunicable diseases (NCD)
deaths. NCDs kill 40 million people each year, which is equivalent to 70% of all deaths
globally. Each year, 15 million people die from a NCD between the ages of 30 and 69
years; over 80% of these premature deaths occur in LMICs (WHO, 2017b). Worldwide,
approximately 14% of adult deaths from NCDs are attributed to tobacco use, includ-
ing 10% of all adult deaths from cardiovascular diseases (14% among men, 6% among
women), and 22% of all adult deaths from cancer (32% among men, 11% among
women). The clear majority (71%) of adult lung cancer deaths (78% among men, 53%
among women) were attributable to tobacco. In addition, 36% of all adult deaths from
diseases of the respiratory system were attributable to tobacco (42% among men, 29%
among women) (WHO, 2012). Tobacco smoking is also an important risk factor for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In 2004, about 49% of the COPD deaths among
adult men and 34% of COPD deaths among adult women were attributable to tobacco
(WHO, 2012).

NCDs have become a major public health concern in Indonesia. The WHO estimates
that the proportional mortality due to NCDs has increased from 50.7% in 2004 to 71% in
2014 (WHO, 2014). Tobacco smoke is the fourth risk factor that contributes to most death
and disability combined from NCDs, after dietary risks, high blood pressure, and high fast-
ing plasma glucose (IHME, 2017). In 2012, NCDs accounted for more disability-adjusted
life years (DALYs) than communicable diseases—approximately 476 million and 240 mil-
lion DALYs, respectively (WHO, 2014).

Smoking is also responsible for deaths from communicable diseases. Approximately
5% of global deaths from communicable diseases are attributed to tobacco, including
7% of all deaths due to tuberculosis (TB) and 12% of deaths due to lower respiratory
infections (WHO, 2012). A systematic review of the literature found a significant positive
relationship between exposure (passive or active) to tobacco smoke and TB infection and
disease, independent of various potential health issues including alcohol use and socio-
economic status (Salma et al., 2007). Recurrent TB and mortality resulting from TB were
also associated with active smoking. This relationship is particularly important in Indo-
nesia, given that the country has one of the highest TB infection rates in the world and
where tuberculosis is one of the top causes of death (USAID, 2009).




16 // The Economics of Tobacco Taxation
The risk of death due to smoking declines with the length of time from an individ-
ual quits smoking. In other words, the sooner one quits smoking, the longer she/he will
live. Studies have been conducted for the United States (Burns et al., 1997), India (Jha et
al., 2008), and Germany (Neubauer et al., 2006) that have provided a quantitative relation-
ship between the length of smoking, smoking cessation, and benefits of quitting smok-
ing concerning mortality, showing that the reductions in relative risk of heart disease and
stroke are more immediate than the effects on respiratory disease and cancer. Due to the
lengthy time lags for the development of cancers and chronic respiratory diseases asso-
ciated with tobacco smoking, deaths from these illnesses in LMICs may continue to rise,
even if smoking prevalence remains the same or decreases (US NCI and WHO, 2016).

Smoking imposes a substantial economic burden on countries due to increased
health care costs and worker’s productivity losses. Goodchild and colleagues (2016)
measured the economic costs of smoking in 152 countries, representing 97% of the
worldwide smoking population. They considered direct costs related to health care
treatment and indirect costs from productivity losses due to tobacco-related premature
mortality and morbidity. The estimated total economic cost of smoking was equivalent
in magnitude to 1.8% of the world’s annual gross domestic product (GDP) in 2012 and
40% in LMICs. Of those, 76% are indirect costs related to productivity losses due to mor-
bidity (35%) and premature mortality (65%). The direct health care costs were estimated
at purchasing power parity (PPP) $467 billion (PPP international dollars), which is equiv-
alent to 5.7% of global total health expenditures. The findings from this study highlight
the urgent need to implement comprehensive tobacco control measures to reduce the
economic costs of smoking.


2.2 Tobacco Taxes and Tobacco Consumption
Increasing tobacco and cigarette taxes reduces consumption and, consequently,
can reduce smoking-attributable mortality and morbidity. The impact of tobacco
taxation on the reduction of mortality depends on (i) the magnitude of the price increase
resulting from a tobacco tax increase, (ii) the reaction of consumers to price changes,
that is the price elasticity of demand,2 which is related to smoking behavior (initiating,
reducing intensity, or quitting), and (iii) the relationship between mortality and quit-
ting smoking. The price of tobacco products in relation to income, i.e. affordability, also
matters on initiation decisions, intensity, or quitting.3 Empirical studies in high- and
low- and middle-income countries have found a negative relationship between cigarette
prices and smoking. Once prices increase, smokers adjust their decision of consuming


2 Technically, the price elasticity of demand is the percentage change in the consumption of a product in response to a 1% change in
the price of the product, with all else remaining constant.
3 To be effective in reducing tobacco demand, tax and price increases need to be significant to counteract the effect of income
growth on tobacco demand and reduce affordability.



                                                                                                                                  17
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




through quitting or smoking reduction. Additionally, higher prices, due to a higher tax, act
as a deterrent for new smokers, particularly among the youth or the poor. In high-income
countries (HICs), price elasticity estimates are clustered around –0.4 percent (IARC, 2011). In
LMICs also show a negative price-elasticities of tobacco demand, ranging from –0.1 to –1.0,
with estimates clustered around –0.5 percent (John et al., 2010; Jha and Chaloupka, 2012;
Szabo et al., 2016). In other words, in HICs, a 10 percent increase in the price of tobacco is
expected to decrease tobacco consumption by 4 percent. In LMICs, a 10 percent increase
in price would be expected to decrease tobacco consumption by 5 percent (IARC, 2011).
A recent global simulation study shows that an 80 percent increase in excise per pack may
lead to 42% increase in price, reduce global annual cigarette consumption by 18 percent
and global smoking prevalence by 9 percent (Goodchild, Perucic, and Nargis, 2016).

Studies also show that smoking reduction after a tax increase has positive impacts
on individual and public health. Several studies show the health benefits of quitting
smoking due to tax increases (John et al., 2010; Blakely et al., 2015; Goodchild, Perucic and
Nargis, 2016; Szabo et al., 2016). A recent systemic review of studies, published in English
between 2000 and 2012, also concludes that tobacco taxation is a highly cost-effective
policy, because the costs of intervention are minimal and significantly save health care
costs after the tax increase implementation, although many health benefits of quitting
take time to materialize (Contreary et al., 2015).


2.3 Tobacco Taxation and Tax Revenues
Tobacco and cigarette excise taxation can also be efficient sources of fiscal revenue.
Given that tobacco demand is relatively inelastic, due to consumer addiction and the lack
of close substitutes, tobacco taxes can generate considerable amounts of tax revenues,
particularly if sales are large. Tobacco taxes may also create fewer distortions in the mar-
kets than would result from taxes on goods and services with more elastic demand. Also,
given the small number of producers, tobacco taxes are relatively easy to collect at low
administration and enforcement cost, as compared to general consumption and income
taxes. Experiences in numerous countries indicate that an increase in tobacco taxes will
increase nominal (as well as real) tax revenues in the short to medium terms.

The magnitude of tobacco and cigarette tax revenue that a government can gen-
erate largely depends on the tax system and the demand characteristics. Given a
certain income level, per capita or total, a country’s tobacco excise revenue depends on:
(i) the level of taxation per unit of tobacco product (either as percent of the price or abso-
lute amount of tax per pack); (ii) the number of different tax tiers; (iii) the price elasticity of
tobacco demand; and (iv) the volume of tobacco sales. Normally, low levels of tobacco
excise revenues are associated with low levels of taxation per unit of product (Chaloupka
et al., 2012). Different tax tiers, such as in Indonesia, allow producers to reduce their tax



18 // The Economics of Tobacco Taxation
burden, expanding production through less taxed products. Also, smokers could avoid
higher rates by switching to lower taxed cigarettes. The result may be lower revenues
than potentially anticipated. The more inelastic the demand, the more government rev-
enues can be generated with a certain tax rate increase. With an inelastic demand, the
proportional reduction in cigarettes purchased by the consumer after the tax increase is
smaller than the proportional increase in tax revenue. As the price elasticity of demand
increases in absolute value, the possibility to raise revenues for a given tax rate change
decreases. Finally, the volume of tobacco sales will determine the possibility of revenue
expansion, given certain demand elasticity and percent changes on the taxation level.

Tobacco taxes are likely to remain high after a significant tax increase, even with
a considerable decline in tobacco use. Chaloupka et al. (2012) argue that over time,
inflation will erode the value of tobacco tax revenues, unless those taxes are increased
often enough to keep pace with inflation. Similarly, as tobacco use declines in response
to other tobacco control efforts, revenues from tobacco taxes will also decline, unless
taxes are increased periodically. Nevertheless, it is possible that tax revenues may remain
higher many years after a significant tax increase than they were before, even in the wake
of a considerable decline in tobacco use. For example, in the case of California, tax rates
increased by 770% between 1989 and 1999, while cigarette sales declined by more than
60% between 1989 and 2010, and tobacco excise revenues increased from US$250 mil-
lion before 1989 up to US$845 million in 2010 (Chaloupka et al. 2012). In Brazil, the excise
tax amount per cigarette pack was increased in real terms by 81.4% between 2011 and
2015, while total cigarettes sales decreased by 35% in the same period. However, real
excise revenues in 2015 were still 17% higher than in 2011 (Iglesias, 2016).


2.4 Employment Impact of Tobacco Taxation
Despite its effectiveness in reducing tobacco consumption and increasing tax rev-
enues, there is often a debate over the effects of tobacco tax employment in the
tobacco industry. The tobacco industry generates jobs in diverse parts of the economy,
including farming, manufacturing, and wholesale sectors. However, it is important to
differentiate the employment that is from core-tobacco sectors (directly dependent on
tobacco production, such as farming and manufacturing) compared to tobacco-related
employment (jobs that are just partially dependent on tobacco, such as retail). Historic
analyses of the tobacco industry show that the industry has significantly reduced employ-
ment because, over time, the industry has become more capital intensive and farming
has become more efficient, so that job losses have occurred even in the absence of
tobacco control measures (NCI-WHO, 2017). The tobacco industry has sponsored studies
to document the employment contribution of the sector. Usually these studies argue
that tobacco control measures, such as higher taxation, would result in job losses in the
tobacco industry and, consequently, increase unemployment (Zhang, 2002).


                                                                                              19
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




In contrast, most academic studies have shown that tobacco control policies, such
as taxation, have an overall neutral or positive impact on employment. Zhang
(2002) argues that the (industry-sponsored) studies use unrealistic assumptions about
impacts of sales drop, overestimate the number of jobs associated with the tobacco
industry and, consequently, overestimate the possible negative impact of tobacco con-
trol measures on overall employment. However, the main problem is that those studies
do not consider: (i) the expansionary employment effect of consumption substitution of
smokers who redirect their expenditure toward other products after the tax increase—
tobacco expenditures do not disappear from the economy; rather, they are redistributed
to the consumption and production of other goods and services; and (ii) the expansionary
employment effect of higher public expenditure after the tax increase.4

Studies simulating the impacts of tobacco control policies on employment depend
on key assumptions. For example, studies applying input–output models first estimate
the change in final consumer demand for goods and services resulting from a tobacco
control policy (US NCI and WHO, 2016). The change in demand is composed of two com-
ponents: (i) the reduction of tobacco consumption, and (ii) the expansion of expenditures
in other products, according to consumers (smokers) preferences. These studies then
calculate the induced changes in outputs based on input–output tables that describe the
flow of goods and services within the economy. Finally, changes in outputs are converted
into changes in employment to obtain the employment impacts. The critical assump-
tions these studies rely on are: the impact of tobacco control measures—estimated price
and income elasticities in the case of tax increases; and, more importantly, the type of
consumption substitution that smokers display after the tax increase or tobacco control
measure. The normal assumption is that ex-smokers would follow the average expendi-
ture pattern or the most recent quitter expenditure pattern. If other selected goods and
services have a larger direct and indirect employment input than tobacco product
production, the net employment effect is positive.

The challenge to measure the employment impacts of higher tobacco taxes is
that employment losses could be relatively concentrated, whereas employment
gains tend to spread throughout the economy. Table 1 presents a selection of recent
independent studies in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). Under the assump-
tions discussed above, four out of the six studies resulted in net employment gains after
tobacco control policies. Generally, the net effects were not significant, except in the case
of Bangladesh and Egypt. Reductions occurred in core tobacco sectors, including tobacco
farming and manufacturing; in tobacco-related sectors, such as wholesaling and retailing;
and in ancillary sectors, such as the paper and pesticide industries. The net gains
in employment depended on several factors, such as: the assumed structure of

4 This expansionary effect depends on fiscal policy decisions; greater public revenues do not mean automatically higher public
expenditures.



20 // The Economics of Tobacco Taxation
                     Table 1: Selected studies on net employment impact of tobacco control policies
 STUDIES                MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS                                                   CONCLUSIONS

 South Africa           Static input–output model
                                                                                                Domestic tobacco control
 Van der Merwe          Domestic consumption expenditures were eliminated, and the rate of      policies may have negative net
 and Abedian,           consumption decline in 1995 doubled.                                    employment effects. Smoking
 1999                   Expenditures were allocated by recent quitter and average               prevalence and size of control
                        expenditure pattern.                                                    policy could be important
                                                                                                for absolute impact on net
                        Government spending was reduced or kept at the same level by            employment.
                        increasing other taxes.

 Zimbabwe               Static input–output model

 Van der Merwe,         Domestic consumption expenditures and tobacco production in 1980
                        were eliminated.                                                        Net loss of 87,798 jobs in
 1998
                                                                                                1980, and 47,463 jobs when
                        Average input–output pattern changed, and all tobacco production        all output went to alternative
                        was shifted to alternative agriculture products.                        agriculture products

                        Because of increases in other taxes, no change in government
                        spending occurred.

 Bangladesh             Static input–output model

 Van der Merwe,         Domestic consumption expenditures and all tobacco production for
 1998                   tobacco products and bidis in 1994 were eliminated.
                                                                                                Net gain of 10,989,192 jobs
                        Average input–output pattern changed, and all tobacco production        in 1994
                        was shifted to alternative agriculture products.

                        Because of increases in other taxes, no change in government
                        spending occurred.

 Bulgaria               Static input–output model

 Petkova and            Domestic consumption expenditures and tobacco production in 1999
 colleagues,            were eliminated.

 2003                                                                                           Net loss of 5,567 jobs in 1999
                        Average input–output pattern changed, and all tobacco production
                        was shifted to alternative agriculture products.

                        Because of increases in other taxes, no change in government
                        spending occurred.

 Egypt                  Static input–output model

 Nassar and             Domestic consumption expenditures and tobacco production in 1999
 Metwally, 2003         were eliminated.
                                                                                                Net loss of 5,567 jobs in 1999
                        Average input–output pattern changed, and all tobacco production
                        was shifted to alternative agriculture products.

                        Because of increases in other taxes, no change in government
                        spending occurred.

 Indonesia              Static input–output model                                               Net gain of 84,340 jobs with
                                                                                                a 25% tax increase; net gain
 Ahsan and              Percentage increases of 25%, 50%, and 100% occurred in the              of 140,567 jobs with a 50%
 Wiyono, 2007           cigarette tax.                                                          tax increase; and net gain of
                                                                                                281,135 jobs with a 100% tax
                        Expenditures were allocated by the average expenditure pattern.
                                                                                                increase

Source: National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization (2017), Table 15.3, page 560.
                                                                                                                                 21
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




population (smoker) consumption; the production structure of the economy, i.e., the
extent to which final products, inputs, and services were produced domestically or
imported in the tobacco industry and in the industries where ex-smokers would spend
their money; and the labor intensity of tobacco growing/manufacturing versus the rest
of the industries composed of the average consumer expenditures. For example, Ahsan
and Wiyono (2007) found that, in Indonesia, the top five sectors that would experience
increased employment include rice, tea, coffee, sugarcane, and root crops, which have
higher labor intensity than tobacco growing (Ahsan and Wiyono, 2007)

The possible employment impacts varied depending on whether the country was a
net exporter or net importer of tobacco leaf. When tobacco control policies reduced
the demand for cigarettes, a country was likely to have lower employment losses if that
country imported a significant percentage of the cigarettes smoked and/or leaf used
to make them, and domestically produced a large portion of the rest of the products
included in the average consumption expenditure. Conversely, the more the tobacco
leaf and other inputs and cigarettes were nationally grown and/or produced relative to
the local content of the things people buy instead, the greater is the likelihood that there
was some employment losses locally. The higher the production diversification of the
economy, the higher was the domestic employment created by the demand switch from
tobacco toward other products. In contrast, the higher the expenditure on tobacco and
the lower the sectoral diversification of domestic production, the smaller (or even neg-
ative) was the net employment impact. The United States National Cancer Institute (US
NCI) and the WHO published a report that presented a classification of countries and the
likely employment impacts, based on a country’s situation in terms of tobacco trade: net
exporter, net importer, balanced economy and mixed situation (US NCI and WHO, 2016).
As shown in Table 2, domestic tobacco control policies likely had a larger impact in coun-
tries with a balanced tobacco economy—self-sufficient in tobacco, because the employ-
ment destruction reduction of tobacco demand could not be offset.

Decline in tobacco consumption as a result of taxation or tobacco control policies
may occur gradually. Although most of the studies presented in Table 1 assume a sharp
and total reduction in cigarette consumption, smoking prevalence reduction occurred
gradually even when a significant tax increase was implemented in the short term.5
Tobacco control policies normally gradually reduce smoking, distributing adjustment
costs through time and diluting them in decades (US NCI and WHO, 2016). The adjust-
ment costs of labor-intensive segments of the industry, such as tobacco farming, depend
on the existence of viable alternatives. In many LMICs, such as Brazil and the Philippines,
tobacco farmers are diversified, producing other crops, which may facilitate the transition
to other crops. The result from the World Bank/ACS survey on the economics of tobacco

5 The Philippines, for example, increased the excise taxes for the cheapest cigarettes by 341% in a one-year period that resulted in a
decline of tobacco use prevalence by approximately 20% Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GATS).



22 // The Economics of Tobacco Taxation
Table 2: Type of tobacco external trade and likely net employment impacts
 TYPE OF EXTERNAL               MEANING                                LIKELY EMPLOYMENT IMPACTS
 TOBACCO TRADE THAT
 A COUNTRY HAS

 Net exporter of tobacco        Production of tobacco leaf and         Domestic tobacco demand is not the only determi-
 products                       cigarettes is higher than domestic     nant of production/employment in the core sectors.
                                consumption.                           Drop of domestic tobacco demand could be com-
                                                                       pensated with production directed to external mar-
                                Tobacco employment distribution        kets and employment effects could be minimized.
                                in domestic sales or exports would     The relative effects of global and domestic policies
                                depend on the share of exports to      will depend on the share of production that is
                                total sales                            exported

 Balanced tobacco econ-         Domestic production of tobacco         Domestic tobacco control policies may have nega-
 omy                            leaf or cigarettes is used primarily   tive net employment effects. Smoking prevalence
                                for local consumption. Self-suffi-     and size of control policy could be important for
                                cient in tobacco                       absolute impact on net employment.

 Net importers of tobacco       Produce less tobacco leaf or ciga-     Tobacco control policies in countries with small
 products                       rettes than they consume.              tobacco/cigarette production may increase overall
                                                                       employment. Not affected by global tobacco
                                                                       demand.

 Mixed tobacco economy          Significant grower and producer        US is an example: tobacco leaf producer, importer
                                and also imports and/or exports a      and exporter of large amounts of tobacco leaf.
                                substantial share of tobacco leaf      Changes in both domestic and global tobacco con-
                                and tobacco products                   trol policies would affect employment.

Source: Own elaboration based on US NCI and WHO (2016).




                   farming unequivocally demonstrated that former tobacco farmers were growing many
                   of the same crops as current tobacco farmers, and were simply increasing production of
                   these crops. Moreover, these former tobacco farmers were typically generating higher
                   revenues and incurring lower costs than their neighbors and peers who continued to
                   grow tobacco.

                   The employment issue has lost preeminence in the debate of tobacco control
                   policies in many countries. Since the first half of the last decade, there have been few
                   studies about the employment effect of tobacco control policies from either side of
                   the debate; instead the debate has concentrated on other issues, such as illicit trade in
                   tobacco products. For example, in the recent Brazilian experience of large increases of
                   tobacco taxes (2011–2016), effects on employment were not an issue, because the export
                   share of leaf production in the country increased. In the Philippines (2012 onward) poten-
                   tial employment impact was a big issue during Congressional deliberations, but since
                   80% of tobacco leaf was exported, the Ministry of Finance recognized that the employ-
                   ment impact risk on tobacco farmers was low. Furthermore, a budget was also allocated
                   to help those that may be adversely affected—15% of the incremental tobacco tax reve-
                   nues was allocated to tobacco farmers to encourage them to shift to alternative crops.


                                                                                                                              23
SMOKING HAS
BEEN A MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR O
DISEASE BURDEN
INDONESIA. SMO
   V LENCE
PREVA

AGE INDIVIDUAL
HAS EXCEEDED 3
PERCENT SINCE 2
     3
         CIGARETTE TAX POLICIES IN

O        INDONESIA
         Indonesia has one of the most complex cigarette excise tax structures in the world.




N
         The current cigarette excise tax system has 12 tiers, which are based on manufacturers’
         types of cigarettes, the scale of cigarette productions, and per unit retail price.6 There are
         three types of cigarettes: machine-made kreteks (SKM), machine-made white cigarettes
         (SPM), and hand-rolled kreteks (SKT).7 Manufacturers of either SKM or SPM are considered
         as a Class I if they produce more than 3 billion cigarettes annually and as a Class II if they




O
         produce less than the 3 billion cigarettes. On the other hand, manufacturers of SKT are
         considered a Class I if they produce more than 2 billion cigarettes annually, a Class II if
         they produce between 500 million to 2 billion cigarettes annually, and a Class III if they
         produce less than 500 million cigarettes annually.

         Excise taxes for cigarettes produced by larger manufacturers increased at a modest
         rate between 2010 and 2017 (Figure 1). As shown in column 4 of Table 3, the excise
         taxes for machine-made kreteks (SKM, Class I) and white cigarettes (SPM, Class I) increased
         by 27 and 46 percent, respectively in real terms between 2010 and 2017. Note that
         changes in the tariffs for the small-scale manufacturers were relatively smaller compared
         to changes for the Class I SKM and SPM manufacturers. For example, excise taxes for Class
         II SKM manufacturers increased 24 percent while excise taxes for Class II SPM manufactur-
         ers increased 35 percent. It is important to note that tax increases that occurred have not
         been enough to reduce cigarette affordability. The US NCI and WHO show that cigarettes
         in Indonesia were much more affordable in 2013 than they were in 2000 (US NCI and
         WHO, 2016).




L
3        6 Ministry of Finance Decree Number 43/PMK.04/2005.
         7 In addition to SKM, SPM, and SKT, there are hand-rolled white cigarettes with filters. The structure of the excise tax for these products
         are identical to the structure for SKM..




 2
                                                                                                                                                25
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Table 3: Cigarette excise tax in Indonesia, 2017

  TYPE OF                                            CATEGORY                     PER-UNIT               % NOMINAL           NUMBER
  CIGARETTE                                          (PRODUCTION)                 TARIFFS                CHANGE              OF
                                                                                  (TIERS), IN            (REAL),             FACTORIES
                                                                                  RUPIAH                 2010-2017           (2015)

  Machine-made kreteks (SKM), hand-                  Class I, > 3 billion                530                   78 (27)          14
  rolled kreteks with filter (SKTF),                 sticks

  hand-rolled white cigarettes with
  filter (SPTF)
  Hand-rolled white cigarettes with                  Class II, ≤ 3 billion             335-365                 75 (24)          232
  filter (SPTF)                                      sticks

  Machine-made white cigarettes                      Class I, > 3 billion                555                  106 (46)           1
  (SPM)                                              sticks
                                                     Class II, ≤ 3 billion            290-330                  90 (35)          25
                                                     sticks

  Hand-rolled kreteks (SKT)                          Class I, > 2 billion             265-345                  66 (18)           16
                                                     sticks
                                                     Class II, 500 million–2           155-165                 64 (15)           21
                                                     billion sticks
                                                     Class III, ≤ 500 million          80-100                  38 (-2)          404
                                                     sticks

Source: Peraturan Menteri Keuangan (Ministry of Finance Decree) abbreviated as PMK: PMK Number 181 2009,
PMK Number 190 2010, PMK Number 167 2011, PMK Number 205 2014, PMK Number 198 2015, PMK Number
147 2016.
Note: For parsimony, per-unit tariffs for Class II and Class III categories are simplified from per-unit tariffs for Class
IIA, Class IIB, Class IIIA, and Class IIIB. Real change in per-unit tariffs accounts for changes in prices of goods and
services in the economy.


The tiers in the cigarette excise tax structure aimed to accommodate small-scale
cigarette firms, especially SKT firms. The rationale for such a structure was to protect
smaller SKT firms that accounted for more than half of total factories in the tobacco indus-
try (column 5 of Table 3). Moreover, these firms were responsible for employing a signifi-
cant share of the workers in tobacco manufacturing. For example, the per-unit tariffs for a
SKM produced by Class I manufacturers and sold for a minimum of IDR 1,120 per unit was
IDR 530 (47.3 percent of retail sale price), while the per-unit tariffs for a SKT produced by
Class I manufacturers and sold for a minimum of IDR 1,215 per unit was only IDR 345 (28.4
percent of retail sale price). These numbers imply that per-unit tariffs for SKT was half of
the per-unit tariffs for SKM of a similar tier. The ratio between the highest and the lowest
per-unit tariffs in the 2017 tax structure was quite high at 6.7. Changes in real excise tax
for SKT between 2010 and 2017 was also quite low at 18% or lower. Additionally, SKT pro-
duced by Class III producers were cheaper, in real terms, in 2017 than they were in 2010.




26 // Cigarette Tax Policies in Indonesia
         Figure 1. Trends of the Cigarette Excise Tax in Indonesia in Real Terms, 2010–2017


                                         400                                                  400
EXCISE TARIFF PER STICK, IN REAL TERMS




                                         300                                                  300




                                         200                                                  200




                                         100                                                  100

                                               2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017              2010 2011 2012       2013 2014   2015 2016 2017

                                                SKT Class I, layer 1   SKT Class I, layer 2           SKT Class II, layer 1   SKT Class II, layer 2
                                                SKM Class I            SPM Class I                    SKM Class II, layer 1   SKM Class II, layer 2
                                                                                                      SPM Class II, layer 1   SPM Class II, layer 2

            Source: Peraturan Menteri Keuangan (Ministry of Finance Decree) abbreviated as PMK: PMK Number 181 2009,
            PMK Number 190 2010, PMK Number 167 2011, PMK Number 205 2014, PMK Number 198 2015, PMK Number
            147 2016.
            Note: The pre-2009 tariffs were calculated based on the current 12 layers.


            Despite the low tax rates, there was a downward trend in the sale of SKT in the
            market. In 2001, the share of SKT in the market was about 40% (Ministry of Industry,
            2009). The share decreased to 35.5% in 2005, to 30% in 2011, and to just 26% in 2013.
            We argue that the shift away from SKT was not likely the result of higher cigarette taxes.
            First, as shown in Table 3, taxes imposed on SKT were among the lowest in the cigarette
            industry, and the changes of the taxes in real terms were quite small. Second, despite the
            decreasing share, productions of SKT were still increasing over time at least up to year
            2010 (Tobacco Control Support Center, 2014). The shift away from SKT have been driven
            by changing preferences among smokers for machine-made products due to income
            growth. It may also have reflected substitution of more capital-intensive technology away
            from labor-intensive hand-rolling in cigarette production.


            3.1 Effects on Cigarette Consumption, Revenues, and Employment
            Previous evidence suggests that raising cigarette prices through taxes may have
            potential to reduce consumption in Indonesia. A review by Setyonaluri and col-
            leagues (2008) reported price elasticities of demand ranging from –0.26 to –0.76. These
            estimates suggest that raising prices through taxes can reduce consumption. Ahsan
            (2011) suggested that a 16 percent increase in cigarette tax would reduce consumption
            by 4.7 percent, implying a price elasticity of –0.29. The impacts of raising cigarette tax on
            health were also potentially significant. A study suggested that raising cigarette taxes to


                                                                                                                                                      27
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




50 percent of retail prices can reduce expected mortality rate by 2 to 5 percent, depend-
ing on the price elasticity of demand (Setyonaluri et al., 2008).

This report updates earlier elasticity estimates. To do so, we used the 2015 National
Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas) to estimate the price elasticity of cigarette demand.
The NSS contains data on whether an individual smoked kreteks or white cigarettes,
the number of cigarettes smoked in the past week, and total expenditure for cigarettes.
The limitation of our estimation was that we could not differentiate between hand-made
and machine-made kretek. However, obtaining separate estimates for kreteks and white
cigarettes offered a significant improvement over the existing literature. This information
allowed estimating price elasticity of demand for SKT and SKM separately. Results showed
variation in price elasticities of demand between kreteks and white cigarettes. The esti-
mated price elasticity of demand for kreteks was about –0.42 while for white cigarettes
was about –0.51 (within the range of –0.26 and –0.76 reported in previous studies). We
acknowledge our price elasticities may be underestimated because they do not account
for substitutions to cheaper products. For example, individuals can easily switch to
cheaper cigarettes if cigarette prices increase because of higher excise taxes.

An important aspect is to observe the impact of tobacco excise tax across income
groups. The global evidence suggests that cigarette tax was regressive and showed that
the young and the poor were more responsive to price changes. For example, Nasrudin
and colleagues (2013) estimated price elasticities of –0.15 to –0.16 among individuals in
the first two income deciles and price elasticities of –0.20 to –0.28 among individuals in
the third to ninth deciles. The authors estimated that the tax burden as a percentage of
income of individuals in the first two deciles was between 3 to 10.63 percent and the tax
burden of individuals from the other income groups was below 2 percent (Nasrudin et al.,
2013). These results may be explained by the policy of keeping kreteks cheap. However,
the study did not consider the benefits of raising cigarette taxes. A more recent study
showed that once indirect benefits (such as lower health care expenditures and higher
productivity) of raising cigarette taxes were accounted for, a tobacco tax increase was
actually progressive (Fuchs and Meneses, 2017).

In Indonesia, annual excise tax revenues from tobacco products had been increas-
ing monotonically since 2005 (Figure 2). In 2007, the realized excise tax revenue was
IDR 43.54 trillion (US$4.87 billion). The figure grew to IDR 55.38 trillion (US$5.33 billion) in
2009, IDR 103.6 trillion (US$9.90 billion) in 2013, and IDR 139.5 trillion (US$11.76 billion) in
2014 (IAKMI, 2014; Dwi Kurnaini, 2016).10 Historically, tobacco excise accounts for more
than 95 percent of total excise revenue. Simulation studies suggest that a 10 percent
increase in cigarette tax would increase excise revenues by 6.7 to 9.0 percent (Setyonaluri


10 The exchange rates were IDR 8,938/US$ in 2004, IDR 10,389/US$ in 2009, IDR 10,461/US$ in 2013, and IDR 11,865/US$ in 2014
(OECD, 2017).



28 // Cigarette Tax Policies in Indonesia
      Figure 2. Revenue from the tobacco excise, 2005–2015
                                                                                                                                                                      1.21
TOBACCOV EXCISE REVENUE, IN TRILLION IDR   140                                                                                                                               140
                                                 1.18




                                                                                                                                                                                          SHARE OF EXCISE REVENUE TO GDP
                                           120                                                                                                                                     1.20
                                                                                                                                                         113
                                                                                                                                                 1.14
                                                                                                                                                                             107
                                           100                                                                                                   104                               1.15
                                                             1.11             1.10                                                   1.10
                                                                                                                                            91             92
                                                                                                                                                  89
                                           80                                                                                           82
                                                                                                                                                                                   1.10
                                                                                                                         73
                                                                                   1.18                                                                        1.07
                                                                                                            63
                                           60                                                     58                     70                                                        1.05
                                                                                          55                 63
                                                                              52
                                                        47          48                     50      55
                                           40                                             1.01       0.99                                                                          1.00
                                                                              44                                  0.98        0.99
                                                                    37
                                                        33

                                                    2005            2006       2007        2008    2009           2010        2011     2012       2013    2014          2015

                                                   realization           in real term     share to GDP

          Source: Data collected from Tobacco Control Support Center—IAKMI (2014) and Dwi Kurnaini (2016) for post
          2010 data.



          et al., 2008). Another simulation suggests that a 16 percent increase in cigarette tax would
          boost excise revenue by 30.5 percent (Ahsan, 2011). These studies suggest that the tax
          elasticity of revenue is between 0.67 to 1.90.

          Raising cigarette taxes did not seem to affect cigarette production as production
          exhibited an increasing trend over the years. As shown in Figure 3, the tobacco indus-
          try produced 235.5 billion cigarettes in 2005 and increased that number for the next 10
          years. Cigarette production hit the 300 billion mark in 2011, peaked at 348 billion in 2015,
          and decreased to 342 billion sticks in 2016 (Ahsan, 2015; Dwi Kurnaini, 2016). A positive
          trend in cigarette production over the years could have been driven by growing cigarette
          affordability and the ineffectiveness of low excise taxes in reducing affordability. Never-
          theless, it is important to note that growth of cigarette production exhibited a decreasing
          trend post 2010.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           29
  The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




 Figure 3. Trends of cigarette production in Indonesia, 2010–2016

                                                       CIGARETTE PRODUCTION

                                                                          8.12
             400                                                                                                                        8.00
PRODUCTION




                                                                                                                                                GROWTH
                                                                                       7.30
                                                            6.62
                                                                                                      346     344.52   348.12     342
                                                                                              326.8
                                                                                    310.2
                                                                                                      5.88
                                                                          289.1                                                         6.00
             300                                              267.4
                                                                                              5.35
                            245.4      241.5
                   235.5                              250.8
                           4.20              3.85                                                                                       4.00
             200
                                                                          52.50
                                                              58.25
                            57.82     56.77         57.87                                                                               2.00
                   57.52
                                                                                                                       1.04
                                       36.34                  34.94       35.1
             100 35.5        35.95                  35.32
                                                                                                                                        0.00

                                             -1.59 6.81                    6.84                              -0.43
                   6.95      6.23                              6.81
              0                          6.9                                                                                  -1.76     -2.00

                   2005      2006      2007          2008          2009      2010      2011    2012   2013     2014    2015      2016
                   overall, billion sticks     SKM (%)             SKT (%)        SPM (%)       growth (%)

  Source: Ministry of Finance as cited in Ahsan (2015) and Dwi Kurnaini (2016) for post 2013 data.
  Note: production data by types of cigarette are not available for public after 2010.




  Despite a positive production trend, the number of cigarette firms decreased quite
  significantly in the past decade. Dwi Kurnaini (2016) reported that the number of cig-
  arette factories decreased from 4,699 in 2007 to just 713 in 2015. There were 246 factories
  in the SKM industry (34.5 percent), 441 factories in the SKT industry (61.9 percent), and
  26 factories in the SPM industry (3.6 percent) in 2015 (Dwi Kurnaini, 2016). Moreover, the
  Class III SKT industry operated 404 factories in 2015 which accounted for 56.6 percent of
  total factories in the cigarette industry (Dwi Kurnaini, 2016). The reduction in the num-
  ber of factories was partly due to closing a tax loophole. Larger companies formed small
  cigarette firms to take advantage of a lower tax rate for small-scale firms. The government
  closed this loophole by the requirement that there should be no ownership link between
  the small and the large cigarette firms.

  Previous evidence showed that raising cigarette taxes had a net positive impact
  on employment in Indonesia. A study by Ahsan and Wiyono (2007) investigated three
  policy scenarios using an input–output (IO) model: a 30%, 50%, and 100% increase in
  cigarette tax. These increases corresponded to higher cigarette prices by 8%, 13%, and
  26%, respectively. The authors found overall employment gains in all scenarios, although
  employment in cigarette manufacturing, and tobacco and clove farming decreased
  (which meant net employment effect was positive). The analysis suggested that work-
  ers would have shifted to other agricultural sector such as other food crops, paddy, tea,
  coffee, sugarcane, and root crops. The net effect on employment of a 100% increase in



  30 // Cigarette Tax Policies in Indonesia
cigarette taxes was an additional 281,135 workers. This was equivalent to a 0.3% increase
in total employment (Ahsan and Wiyono, 2007). Another study by Marks (as cited in
Ahsan and Wiyono, 2007; Setyonaluri et al., 2008) showed that an increase in real price
of cigarettes by 80% resulted in a gross reduction of jobs in the SKT sector by 86,000. A
more recent study by Nasrudin and colleagues (2013) showed that raising cigarette taxes
resulted in gross employment reduction in the cigarette manufacturing sectors. Specifi-
cally, the study estimated a decrease in employment by 3.27 to 3.46 percent among small
SKT producers, by 6.66 to 6.78 percent among medium and large SKT producers, and by
5.85 to 6.04 percent among the machine-made cigarette sector (Nasrudin et al., 2013).




                                                                                            31
SMOKING HAS
BEEN A MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR O
DISEASE BURDEN
INDONESIA. SMO
   V LENCE
PREVA

AGE INDIVIDUAL
HAS EXCEEDED 3
PERCENT SINCE 2
     4
         EMPLOYMENT IN THE

O        INDONESIAN TOBACCO
         SECTOR


N
         This section presents an overview of the employment trends in the Indonesian
         tobacco industry and estimates the effects of raising cigarette taxes on gross
         employment in the tobacco sector. It reviews the recent trends in employment in
         the tobacco sector, such as the number of workers, the share of tobacco manufacturing




O
         employment to total manufacturing employment, and labor productivity. The section
         also discusses the concentration of tobacco workers across provinces in Indonesia and
         compares employment trends to other similar sectors.

         The core Indonesian tobacco sector includes workers in the tobacco manufactur-
         ing sector, tobacco farmers, and clove farmers. The tobacco manufacturing sector
         is divided into three main industries: kretek, white cigarette, tobacco processing and
         tobacco/clove farming. In 2014, there were 307,793 workers in the kretek industry, 10,598
         workers in the white cigarette industry, 352,086 workers in tobacco processing, and
         16,529 workers in the non-cigarette industry.11 There were also approximately 761,310
         tobacco farmers in 2011 and 1.04 million clove farmers in 2013.12 However, evidence
         suggests these farmers also dedicated some percentage of their time to other crops and,
         therefore, the full-time equivalent of the number of workers should be significantly lower
         (World Bank, 2017a; 2017b; 2017c). Clove farmers were considered as the core employ-
         ment because 90 percent of annual clove production was purchased by cigarette compa-
         nies to produce kreteks even though a clear majority of clove farmers made just a fraction
         of their income from clove (World Bank, 2017c).




L        4.1 Data Sources
         To provide a picture of the size, composition, and trends of the tobacco sector
         workforce, this report utilized firm- and household-level micro data. We used the
         annual survey of micro and small industry (SIMK), aggregated statistics of micro and small




3
         industry, the annual survey of manufacturing industry (SI), and the National Labor Force


         11 Non-cigarette products included cigars, kelembak menyan, and tobacco flavoring.
         12 The numbers were calculated or obtained from the 2014 Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry (SI), the 2014 Annual Survey
         of Micro and Small Manufacturing Industry (SIMK), Table 4.8 of Tobacco Control Support Center—IAKMI (2014), and the 2014 Clove
         Farming Statistics.




 2
                                                                                                                                          33
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Survey (Sakernas), all published by the Central Bureau of Statistics.13 The firm-level data
included, among others, variables such as the number of workers, wages, materials, costs
of inputs, outputs, and value added. We used these data to generate the employment
trend in the tobacco industry and to estimate output elasticity of employment of output.
The Sakernas included employment variables such as years of schooling, hours of work,
type of jobs, employment status, and occupation category. We used these data to describe
the labor market characteristics of workers in the tobacco manufacturing sector.14

For the tobacco manufacturing sector, we focused our analysis on the kretek, white
cigarette, and tobacco processing industry. We acknowledged that we could not iden-
tify in SIMK or SI whether kretek firms produced SKT or SKM. This information would have
been very useful for estimations of output elasticity of labor since SKT firms tend to be
more labor intensive than SKM firms. Moreover, we could not identify tobacco and clove
farmers in the Sakernas dataset. Therefore, we use aggregated data of tobacco and clove
farmers from Tobacco and Clove Farming Statistics.

The analysis complemented the household level data collected under the Indone-
sian Tobacco Employment Studies, which focused on small-holders’ tobacco and
clove farmers and kretek rollers. Results from these surveys are reported in the accom-
panying reports (World Bank, 2017a, b and c).


4.2 Employment in the Indonesia Tobacco Farming Sector
The share of tobacco farmers to total farmers in the agricultural sector fluctuated
around 1.6 percent in recent decades. Additionally, the share to total workers in the
economy fluctuated around 0.7 percent (see Figure 4). Furthermore, tobacco was just a
part of what the farmers did economically. As reported by the World Bank/ACS report on
tobacco farming in Indonesia, tobacco farmers only dedicated a portion of their land to
cultivate tobacco and only a minority of tobacco-farming households relied on tobacco
farming as their major income-earning activity (World Bank, 2017c). We can observe in
Table 4 that tobacco farmers were concentrated in Java, particularly in East Java and Cen-
tral Java. The combined number from these two provinces made up about 84% of total
tobacco farmers in the nation. There was also a non-negligible number of tobacco farm-
ers in Nusa Tenggara Barat, which accounted for about 7% of total Indonesian tobacco
farmers. These statistics underlined the phenomena that the tobacco industry, particularly
tobacco manufacturing and tobacco farming, was concentrated in few provinces.




13 The annual survey of micro and small industry was available from 2010.
14 When using the National Labor Force Survey (NLFS), we acknowledge that estimation of statistics using 3-digit International Stan-
dard Industrial Classification (ISIC) yields high relative standard error owing to the sampling design.



34 // Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector
   Figure 4: Number of tobacco farmers and share of tobacco farmers to total workers,
   1990–2011
                                                                                  913
                                  900           894


                                                                                          809



                                  800                                                                                                                   761
TOBACCO FARMERS, IN THOUSANDS




                                                                                                   715
                                                                                                      694
                                  700                                                                            684                        680

                                         669                               665
                                                            636                                                                      628

                                                                                                                            598
                                  600
                                                                                                                                    582




                                  500                                                                                 512




                                  400                           400
                                         1996
                                                1997
                                                       1998
                                                                  1999
                                                                         2000
                                                                                2001
                                                                                        2002
                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                        2004
                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                                                    2008
                                                                                                                                           2009
                                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                                                                                                          2011




                                                                                                                                                                 share to total agriculture workers
                                                                                                                                                                 share to total workers in the economy
                                                     2.6


                                   2.5
                                                                                  2.3




                                   2                                                           2

                                                                                                                                                          1.8
                                          1.8                      1.7                             1.7     1.7
                                                                                                                  1.6
                    SHARE, IN %




                                                                                                                                                         1.6
                                                                           1.6
                                   1.5
                                                                                                                              1.4            1.5
                                                                                                                                      1.4


                                                                                                                       1.2
                                                                                   1
                                                 1
                                   1                        1                             .9
                                                                                                   .8
                                          .8                       .7                                     .7 .7                                            .7
                                                                            .7                                                .6            .6
                                                                                                                                     .6            .6
                                   .5
                                                            .5                                                         .5
                                         1996
                                                1997
                                                           1998
                                                                  1999
                                                                         2000
                                                                                 2001
                                                                                        2002
                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                        2004
                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                                                    2008
                                                                                                                                           2009
                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                          2011




   Source: Data collected from Tobacco Control Support Center—IAKMI (2014).




                                                                                                                                                                                                         35
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Table 4. Distribution of tobacco farmers across regions, 2014

 PROVINCE                            FARMER, 2014           SHARE, 2014 (%)   PRODUCTIVITY
                                                                              (TON/FARMER)

 East Java                                 351,217                 61.87           0.308

 Central Java                              125,154                22.05            0.26

 NTB                                       38,336                  6.75            0.967

 West Java                                 26,319                  4.64            0.31

 Sumatera (all provinces)                   11,188                 1.97            0.671

 DIY                                        8,888                  1.57            0.123

 Sulawesi                                   2,874                  0.51            0.546

 NTT                                        2,563                  0.45            0.509

 Bali                                       1,098                  0.19            0.853

 Indonesia                                 567,637                 100             0.349

Source: Indonesian Plantation Statistics: Tobacco (2014).


Similar to tobacco farmers, clove farmers were concentrated in East, Central,
and West Java (Table 5). Data from the Indonesian Plantation Statistics (2015) suggest
that there were around one million clove farmers in Indonesia. This suggests that about
2.69 percent of all agricultural workers grew cloves, or 0.95 percent of total workers in the
economy. However, the World Bank/ACS survey showed that clove farming was just but
one of the crops that these farmers grew. As reported in the World Bank/ACS report,
farmers did not need to tend the plants for much of the year (World Bank, 2017c).
Clove farming also contributed a small part to household income. Using the aggregated
statistics, we found that the productivity of clove farmers in Java was quite low, which is
similar to tobacco farmers in Java. Nevertheless, the calculation of productivity was crude
because it didn’t consider many aspects of clove farming reported in the World Bank/ACS
report (World Bank, 2017c).


4.3 Employment in the Tobacco Manufacturing Sector
The tobacco manufacturing sector employed approximately 692,000 workers in
2014. As shown in Table 6, employment in the kreteks and tobacco processing industry
accounted for 96 percent of tobacco employment. The kretek industry employed 307,793
workers in 2014, while the tobacco processing industry employed 352,086. Tobacco pro-
cessing usually involved farming households that dried, cured, and sometimes cut the
tobacco leaves for further processing, such as for cigarette manufacturing. Most kreteks
workers worked in large firms (97 percent) while most tobacco processing workers



36 // Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector
Table 5. Distribution of clove farmers across regions, 2014

 PROVINCE                                FARMERS, 2013              SHARE, 2013 (%)             PRODUCTIVITY (TON/
                                                                                                FARMER)

 East Java                                      238,100                     22.62                           0.045

 Central Java                                   189,527                      18.00                          0.033

 West Java                                      143,249                      13.61                          0.046

 Sumatera (all provinces)                        76,109                       7.00                           0.115

 North Sulawesi                                  72,284                      6.87                            0.130

 Maluku                                          65,352                       6.21                           0.212

 South Sulawesi                                   61,114                      5.81                          0.286

 Bali                                            53,233                      5.06                           0.058

 Central Sulawesi                                44,629                      4.24                           0.309

 East Nusa Tenggara                              24,725                      2.35                           0.078

 North Maluku                                    19,749                      1.88                            0.227

 Southeast Sulawesi                              17,826                       1.69                          0.368

 Banten                                          17,618                       1.67                           0.267

 DI Yogyakarta                                   12,591                      1.20                           0.029

 Gorontalo                                       6,360                       0.60                            0.119

 West Nusa Tenggara                              3,344                      0.3=2                           0.038

 West Sulawesi                                   2,705                       0.26                            0.146

 Kalimantan (all provinces)                      2,490                       0.24                            0.145

 Papua (all provinces)                            1,639                      0.16                           0.037

 Total                                         1,052,644                      100                            0.104

Source: Indonesian Plantation Statistics: Clove (2015).


worked in micro or small firms (92 percent).15 As pointed out above, the available data
do not allow to distinguish between firms that produced SKM and SKT. Therefore, we
assumed that most of the large firms were firms producing SKT as they required a larger
number of workers in the production process.




15 We used the government’s definition to define the production scale of a firm. Firms that employed less than 5 workers were con-
sidered micro firms, between 5–19 workers were considered small firms, between 20–99 workers were considered medium firms, and
more than 99 workers were considered large firms.



                                                                                                                               37
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Table 6. Employment Structure of the Indonesian Tobacco Industry, 2014

  PRODUCTION               KRETEKS                  WHITE                   PROCESSING                 OTHERS
  SCALES
                            Worker        Firms     Worker       Firms       Worker        Firms       Worker        Firms

  Micro                       828          368                               119,400      36,500        5,288       4,334

  Small                      1,748         92                               203,067        21,363        558          54

  Medium                     6,132         148        448           6        13,094         399         1,606         44

  Large                    299,085         209       10,150        11        16,525          32         9,077          13

  Total                    307,793         817       10,598        17       352,086       58,294        16,529      4,445

Source: Calculated using data from ASMSI & ASMI (2014).

Employment in large and medium tobacco manufacturing firms exhibited positive
trend in the years 2000–2014. As shown in Panel B of Figure 5, the number of tobacco
manufacturing workers in large and medium firms was about 245,000 in 2000 and
increased by 68 percent to 356,000 in 2014. In Panel A of Figure 5, we can observe that
the total number of workers in the tobacco manufacturing sector was approximately
692,000 in 2014. The tobacco sector employed a high share of female production workers,
which was similar to the food, textile, and garment sectors.16

The contribution of the tobacco sector to employment in the manufacturing sector
was quite small relative to similar manufacturing sectors. Tobacco manufacturing
employment represented 5.13 percent of total manufacturing employment in Indonesia,
while industries such as food employed 27.43 percent, garment employed 11.43 percent,
and textile employed 7.90 percent. Furthermore, the contribution of tobacco manufac-
turing employment to economy-wide employment was also quite low at 0.60 percent in
2014. In Panel B of Figure 6, we can observe the long-run trend of employment contribu-
tion by each sector in the medium and large manufacturing industry. The employment
share of medium and large tobacco firms increased steadily from 6.36 percent in 2001 to
about 8 percent in 2008. However, the share exhibited a decreasing trend post 2008 and
reached 6.93 percent in 2014.




16 We acknowledged that there was a drop in the tobacco manufacturing employment in 2011. However, we were not able to find
explanations about the drop during the period of the study.



38 // Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector
Figure 5. Number of Medium and Large Tobacco Manufacturers, 2000–20142014

            PANEL A: ALL SCALES
                                                                                        4,198,921

                                                                                                               3,702,756
4,000,000                                                       3,390,846
                                           3,446,568
                 2,828,211
3,000,000

                                                                    2,237,451

2,000,000                                                                                   1,841,062
                                          1,722,296
                                                                                                                   1,542,540

               1,185,421
                                                                                        1,101,802
                                                                                                                   1,066,129
                                            928,264                  895,975
1,000,000            910,796


                 691,625                                                                                           692,795

                                                                                            556,878



                                              381,001               382,411



                     2010                    2011                     2012                   2013                  2014



               PANEL B: MEDIUM & LARGE FIRMS ONLY
   1,000,000
                                                                                                              881,769 899,945
                                                                                                                                    875,739

   800,000
                                                        726,178
                                                                                        739,832
                                                              690,746
                                                                      659,821
                                                                                  675,230
                                 581,089               622,442                                          636,026
                                             583,523                     650,270          598,672
   600,000        564,974      560,594    571,008               572,861
                                     551,675
                 525,011                       536,933 528,977 528,772   524,698 527,461        570,726 546,765
                         494,432
                                           495,382
                484,154                                           483,808 481,914 519,224
                                     507,056
                               486,813
                                      474,151472,806 475,303                             482,100 476,684
                                                                                   477,037
                          442,888                               428,924
                                                                          424,259
   400,000
                                                                                                                       362,933
                                                                                                                                        356,117
                                                                                 346,042       329,877
                                                                      334,194
                                                                                        331,590
                                                                                                                     324,614
                  299,746                                                                                  304,243
                                       263,943                         316,991
                                  265,378
                 242,930                                     272,343
                                                   254,728


   200,000

                                  189,652
                   2000

                           2001

                                    2002

                                            2003

                                                     2004

                                                             2005

                                                                      2006

                                                                              2007

                                                                                     2008

                                                                                             2009

                                                                                                    2010

                                                                                                            2011

                                                                                                                   2012

                                                                                                                          2013

                                                                                                                                 2014




                tobacco            food            textile          garmet




Source: Calculated using data from ASMSI (2000-2014) and aggregated statistics of micro and small industry (2014).




                                                                                                                                                  39
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Figure 6. Share of tobacco employment to total manufacturing employment,
2000–2014

        PANEL A: ALL SCALES                                                                            PANEL B: MEDIUM & LARGE FIRMS ONLY

30.00                                                   28.57          27.43                   20.00
                      26.91                                                                                                                                                            18.09          18.14
          25.93
                                  24.21
                                                                                                               16.57
                                                                                                                                     15.72                  16.32                                           17.05
                                                                                                                                                 15.26
                                                                                                             14.84         14.84
20.00                                                                                          15.00 14.55                       14.23     15.39      15.45  15.14
                                  15.98                                                                            14.30
                                                                                                              13.60                      13.48
                                                                                                   13.75               13.15 12.87
                      13.45                                                                                                         13.10
                                                        12.53                                          12.46                                   12.76 12.47                                                    12.38
                                                                                                                 13.12                                                                        12.28
                                                                       11.43
         10.87                                                                                                                  12.29             11.45 12.23 11.82                   11.45
                                                                               IN PERCENTAGE

                                                                                                                                            11.59       11.16                                         11.50
                                                                                                                       11.40                                  10.80
10.00                                                                                                                                                                                    10.52
          8.35                                                                                                                                                                                                 10.64
                                                       7.50            7.90                    10.00                                                        10.21
                      7.25                                                                                     10.04                                                    10.09           9.89
                                      6.40                                                                                                                                                           9.61
          6.34
                                                                                                                                                           8.00            7.88
                                                                        5.13                                                                                                      7.39               7.31
                                                                                                                                                             7.45
                                                                                                                              6.84
                                                                                                                                            6.64     6.86                                                   6.93
                                                                                                                                                                                6.71
                                                       3.79                                            6.25 6.36                     6.62                                                     6.66
                                                                                                                      6.21
                        2.97
                                      2.73
                                                                                                5.00
                                                                                                        2000
                                                                                                               2001

                                                                                                                       2002



                                                                                                                                     2004
                                                                                                                                            2005
                                                                                                                                                   2006



                                                                                                                                                                 2008

                                                                                                                                                                        2009


                                                                                                                                                                                      2011

                                                                                                                                                                                              2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                     2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2014
                                                                                                                              2003




                                                                                                                                                          2007




                                                                                                                                                                               2010
          2010       2011         2012                 2013            2014


                  tobacco      food          textile          garmet                                                    tobacco               food               textile          garmet



Source: Calculated using data from ASMSI (2000–2014) and aggregated statistics of micro and small industry (2014).




Tobacco manufacturing jobs were heavily concentrated in a few regions of
Indonesia. Most of the tobacco manufacturing workers were concentrated in Central
and East Java (Figure 7). Our estimates from the 2014 annual industry survey showed
that the combined share of tobacco manufacturing workers in Central and East Java was
about 76 percent of total tobacco manufacturing workers in Indonesia. Another 18 per-
cent of manufacturing workers were in West Nusa Tenggara. This was a higher concentra-
tion when compared to other sectors, for example, 40 percent of the workers in the food
and drink sector were concentrated in Central Java (21 percent), East Java (19 percent)
and 18 percent in West Java. In the garment sector 42 percent of workers were in West
Java and 29 percent in Central Java.

This concentration of tobacco workers meant that some districts were dependent
on tobacco sector employment. In Kudus, Temanggung, and Kediri, employment in the
tobacco sector accounted for more than 60 percent of local manufacturing employment
and more than 25 percent of overall local employment (Table 7). The type of tobacco
industry varied across districts. For example, Kudus and Kediri relied quite heavily on the
kreteks industry. In Kediri, the share of kreteks workers to total employment in the manu-
facturing industry was about 67.6 percent. On the other hand, Temanggung relied heavily
on the tobacco processing industry. Any intervention to alleviate possible employment
impacts of tobacco consumption shocks should be focused on these districts.


40 // Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector
    Figure 7. The Concentration of Tobacco Manufacturing Workers, 2014

                      50    48.50
SHARE, IN PRECENAGE




                      40



                      30
                                            27.18



                      20                                 18.37




                      10
                                                                    3.75
                                                                                 0.70              0.63             0.35                  0.21      0.14    0.07             0.04            0.02 0.01         0.01                    0.00
                      0
                             CENTRAL JAVA


                                            EAST JAVA


                                                          WEST NT


                                                                    WEST JAVA


                                                                                  NORTH SUMATERA


                                                                                                   DI YOGYAKARTA


                                                                                                                         SOUTH SULAWESI


                                                                                                                                            BALI


                                                                                                                                                      NAD


                                                                                                                                                             WEST SUMATERA


                                                                                                                                                                              RIAU ISLANDS


                                                                                                                                                                                              LAMPUNG


                                                                                                                                                                                                        RIAU


                                                                                                                                                                                                                CENTRAL SULAWESI


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BANTEN
   Source: Calculated using data from ASMSI (2000–2014) and aggregated statistics of micro and small industry (2014).



    Table 7: Concentration of Workers in Selected Districts, 2014

               SHARE TO TOTAL                    CENTRAL                    KUDUS                         TEMANG-                             EAST          KEDIRI                           SRA-BAYA          MALANG                            WEST NT
               LOCAL                             JAVA                                                     GUNG                                JAVA
               EMPLOYMENT IN
               MANUFACTURING
               INDUSTRY


               Kreteks                                  5.47                    57.98                                -                           5.99           67.6                          12.29              34.55                               -

               White ciga-                              0.02                    0.13                                 -                           0.23                   -                           -                 0.61                           -
               rettes

               Tobacco                                   6.6                     2.6                           66.48                             0.66                   -                      0.19                                -               39.18
               processing

               Total tobacco                            12.18                   60.72                          66.48                             7.32          67.6                           12.49                  35.2                          39.18

               Food                                     31.08                   8.99                               9.83                          28.91       17.54                            16.71                17.24                           13.9

               Wood products                             12                     0.58                               18.26                         15.83        0.36                             2.15                0.04                            17.55

               Garment                                  11.64                    6                                 1.29                          3.64             0.2                         6.42                  6.06                           3.53

               Textiles                                 9.39                    2.18                                0                              5.2             0.1                        2.56                       2.5                       5.54

               Furniture                                6.23                    4.06                               0.4                           4.93         0.36                             1.97                 4.49                           1.88

               Others                                   17.48                   17.47                              3.71                          34.17       13.84                             57.7              34.47                             18.42

               Share of tobac-                          2.01                    30.13                              27.65                         0.97        26.29                             2.12                  5.07                          6.03
               co employment
               to local
               employment
               (%)
   Source: Calculated from ASMI & ASMSI (2014) and NFLS (2014).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           41
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




The Indonesian tobacco manufacturing sector exhibited a high worker per firm ratio
relative to other sectors, and that was mostly due to kretek manufacturing. Available
data only focused on the medium and large industries in which we observed variations
across firms (Figure 8). In the food and textile industries, typical firms employed on average
157 and 214 workers in 2014, respectively. In contrast, a typical tobacco manufacturer
employed, on average, 414 workers in 2014. Note that we could not distinguish whether
firms produced SKT or SKM. Nevertheless, a recent report by the Tobacco Control Support
Center—IAKMI showed that the SKT industry was the most labor-intensive industry in the
tobacco manufacturing sector, with a typical SKT firm employing 662 workers and a typical
machine-made kreteks firm employing just 84 workers (IAKMI, 2014).


Figure 8. Number of workers per firm by industry
     PANEL A: ALL SCALES                                            PANEL B: MEDIUM & LARGE FIRMS ONLY

     13                                                                                                                                                    419
                                                                                                                                                                        413
12
                               11                      11
                                                              400 351
                                                                           339                                                            336
10                                                                     326     320                                                                        344
                                              9                                    317                                         315
                                                                    326    330                                        306                                             299
                                                              300 302    317
                                                                               305                                                               308
8                 7                                                                                                                                269
                                                                                                                       277                                      277
                                                                            259
                                                                    234                  229       232 246                           237          255
6                 6                                                                                        219
                                              5                               229               231    211                                                215         214
                                                                                                                                          207
                               5                                     216                                                                          212
                                                              200                                                200                202                        209
     4                         4                       4
4    4           4                            4                                                               177 176 180
                                                       3                                                                                            156 156
                  3            4              4                                          144 142
                                                                              137                                                           136                       147
                                                                                                         133
     3                                                 3                                                                             129
                                                                     121
                                                                                                                117117 116
                                                                                                                                   118
2
                                                              100          104
     2010        2011           2012          2013     2014
                                                                    2000
                                                                           2001



                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                              2006


                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                   2009


                                                                                                                                                 2011
                                                                                                                                                        2012
                                                                                                                                                               2013
                                                                                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                  2002
                                                                                         2003




                                                                                                                     2007



                                                                                                                                          2010




            tobacco     food        textile   garmet                               tobacco                food              textile              garmet


Source: Calculated using data from ASMSI (2000–2014) and aggregated statistics of micro and small industry (2014).


Most tobacco sector workers were females and unskilled. The share of female work-
ers in the tobacco industry was 66 percent, which was the highest in the manufacturing
industry (Table 8). Other sectors in which most workers were female were the garment
sectors (63 percent) and textiles sectors (56 percent). About 69 percent of total workers in
the tobacco sector completed at most junior high school. Among tobacco households,
the share of tobacco households with female tobacco workers was 78 percent. Average
years of schooling completed by tobacco sector workers was among the lowest at 8.22
years, which was comparable to average years of schooling completed by workers in the
food processing sector (8.50 years), manufacturing of wood products (7.31), non-metallic
metal products (7.42), furniture sectors (8.77), and recycling sectors (5.20).


42 // Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector
Table 8. Characteristics of Tobacco Sector Workers, 2011, 2013, and 2015

  VARIABLE                                                           2011                   2013                 2015

  1 if rural                                                              52.50%                  55%                   60%

  Age                                                                       36.2                  35.9                   37.1

  1 if female                                                               72%                   75%                   66%

  1 if production workers                                                   93%                   91%                   92%

  Hours worked                                                              46.7                  34.6                  44.1

  Years of Schooling                                                        7.79                  8.12                  8.21

  1 if less than elementary school                                          16%                   15%                    15%

  1 if completed elementary school                                          32%                   31%                   30%

  1 if completed junior high school                                         27%                   25%                   24%

  1 if completed high school                                                25%                   26%                   26%

  1 if working part-time i.e. <30 hours pw                                 7.96%                33.04%                 13.73%

  1 if wage is below regional minimum wage                                40.51%                44.86%                50.10%

  1 if wage is below regional poverty line                                 5.01%                 5.51%                 3.62%

  Number of workers17                                                    518,328               504,726               465,236

Source: Statistics Indonesia, the August National Labor Force Survey, 2011, 2013, 2015.
Note: The statistics are based on population-weighted estimates. The sample includes only working-age individ-
uals who were currently employed or those who were temporarily out of their jobs during the survey. Tobacco
sector workers were those whose firms were classified as ISIC 160.

On average, the share of tobacco income to overall household income was 60
percent. One interesting aspect to note was that the share of female tobacco workers
as primary earners was only 9 percent.18 The findings from the Sakernas data were quite
consistent with the ones from the World Bank/ACS kretek workers survey in Indonesia
(World Bank, 2017b). In this survey, we found that the proportion of wage income from
kretek was 54 percent. We also found that the share of female tobacco workers as primary
earners was about 10 percent.

Unconditional wages in the tobacco industry were relatively low, reflecting the
fact that the industry employed a high share of low-skilled workers.19 In 2015, the
average and median real monthly wage of tobacco production workers was IDR 758,859


17 The firm- and household-level estimates of total tobacco workers were quite different. This discrepancy can be attributed to a high
relative sampling error when we estimate industry-level statistics using the household-level data.
18 A female worker was considered a primary earner in the household if the only source of income in the household came from the
female worker.
19 Unconditional wages refers to average wages for every worker in a sample. Wages, however, were determined by many factors
such as gender, age, years of working experience, years of schooling completed, employment status, and other characteristics. It is
important to note that there were determining factors when we discuss unconditional wages.



                                                                                                                                   43
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




(US$56.6) and IDR 556,994.6 (US$33.4) respectively. For comparisons, the average and
median real monthly wage of workers in the economy was IDR 1,080,530 (US$80.6) and
IDR 756,107 (US$56.4), respectively. The ratio of average and median wage to minimum
wage was 1.06 and 0.78.20 Nevertheless, about half of tobacco manufacturing workers
earned less than the minimum wage. Between 2011 and 2015, the average annual
growth of real monthly wage of these workers was 4.23 percent. During the same period,
the average annual growth of minimum wage was 7.4 percent while the average annual
wage growth in the economy was 3.23 percent.

Regression analysis showed that female production workers earned 25% lower
wages than male production workers.21 One possible explanation for the male-female
wage gap in the tobacco industry was the education gap between male and female
tobacco workers. Female production workers in this sector completed 7.7 years of
schooling while their male counterparts completed 8.4 years of schooling.22 We conjec-
ture that male production workers worked in high-productivity tobacco manufacturing
firms (machine operators), while female production workers worked in low-productivity
tobacco manufacturing firms (hand rollers). However, our data did not have the relevant
variables to estimate this conjecture. Note that the male-female education gap in the
tobacco sector was wider than the male-female education gap in the economy. On aver-
age, male workers completed 8.7 years of schooling while female workers completed
8.4 years of schooling. To investigate relative wages of tobacco workers, we included a
dummy variable for the tobacco sector in the regression specification and we presented
it in column 1 to 3 (Table 9). We found that tobacco workers earned higher wages than
workers in other manufacturing workers, even those in comparable sectors such as the
food and drink, garments, and textile industries. We found that, on average, tobacco work-
ers earned about 15 percent higher wages than other manufacturing workers.




20 For the ratio, we used the average regional minimum wage of Central Java, East Java, DIY, and West Nusa Tenggara.
21 Annex I provides a detailed description of the econometrics model for this estimation.
22 These statistics suggest a gender segmentation in the tobacco manufacturing sector. In developing countries, female workers were
more likely to be employed as informal workers while male workers were more likely to be employed as formal workers, thus gender
segmentation (Chen, 2005, 2012)



44 // Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector
Table 9. Estimation results of the wage equation, 2001–2015

  DEP. VARIABLE: LOG                        1:                   3:                          4:                         5:
  OF WAGE                                   MANUF.               WITH                        PRODUCTION                 TOBACCO
                                            INDUSTRY             COMPARABLE                  WORKERS
                                                                 SECTORS                     ONLY

  1 if female                               -0.276***            -0.248***                   -0.304***                  -0.088
                                            (0.024)              (0.026)                     (0.026)                    (0.069)

  Years of schooling                        0.060***             0.055***                    0.054***                   0.044***
                                            (0.002)              (0.002)                     (0.002)                    (0.004)

  1 if production worker                    -0.315***            -0.366***                                              -0.191
                                            (0.017)              (0.028)                                                (0.105)

  1 if tobacco                                                   0.155***                    0.162**
                                                                 (0.025)                     (0.061)

  Female x production                                                                                                   -0.247**
                                                                                                                        (0.082)

  Observations                              152,377,119          69,493,078                  131,981,606                6,437,039

  R-squared                                 0.54                 0.51                        0.51                       0.55

  Year                                      2001-15              2001-15                     2001-15                    2001-15

  Clustering of S.E.                        District             District                    District                   District

  Controls                                  Y                    Y                           Y                          Y

Source: Calculated from the August National Labor Force Survey, 2001–2015.


Productivity of tobacco sector workers, measured by the output per worker, was
relatively low in comparison to productivity of workers in the comparable sector.23
In 2014, a typical worker in the medium and large tobacco industry produced IDR 104
million (US$7,761) worth of products annually (Panel B of Figure 9). For comparisons,
a typical worker in the food and drink and textile industries produced IDR 265 million
(US$19,776) and IDR 300 million (US$22,388) worth of products, respectively. However,
there were variations within the tobacco sector. The productivity of workers in the kreteks
industry was IDR 152 million (US$11,343), while the productivity of workers in the white
cigarette industry was IDR 421 million (US$31,417).24 We could not distinguish the pro-
ductivity of the SKT and SKM industries. However, we expected that the productivity of
the SKT industry was far below the productivity of the SKM industry. Figure 10 shows that
output and labor were positively correlated. However, this correlation masked important
variations across manufacturing firms within the sector.


23 The Central Bureau of Statistics, Indonesia does not publish the quantity of goods produced in the Annual Survey of Manufacturing
Industry. The Bureau published the value of output produced, which may include the value of goods, the value of electricity sold, the
value of services sold, and the value of the difference in the inventory of intermediate goods. We used output in the text for simplicity..
24 Note that we could not differentiate productivity of workers in the hand-rolled kreteks industry and that in the machine-made
kreteks industry.



                                                                                                                                       45
      The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




      Figure 9. Productivity of workers, 2000–2014

                               PANEL A: ALL SCALES                                                                                      PANEL B: MEDIUM & LARGE ﬁRMS ONLY
                                                                                               150
      150
                                                                                                                                 300                                                                                                                         300
                                                                                                134
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        238 238                             268
                                                                 119             119
                                                                                                                                 200                                                                              195
                                                                                                                                                                                                            155                                       178
                                               98                                                                                                                                                                    142
    100                                                                                                                                                                                            136
                                                                                 89                                                                                                         122                                        144
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           104
                                   78                                                                                            100                                                   96              108 105
                                                                 72                                                                                                               76              92
                                               71                                                                                        72                 73 70                                                   74 72
                                                                                                                                                      66 69           83                                                                                   67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       65
                                                                                                                                                                67 72

                                                                                                             in million rupiah
                                                                                                                                                                         54
                                                                                                                                                57                                                            49 51 51
                                                                                                                                                       54             51                               43
                                   52                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                52                                               43                                                                  46
          50                                                                                                                                                                           31
                                                                                                                                          34                                                    28       32
                                                                                                                                                                           23 22
                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                 37              36
                                                                                                                                                       17 18
                                                                                               33                                        14 14
                                                                                 32                                                                                  16           16

                                                                                                                                                 12          13
                                               25                26
                               25
                              23                23                                                                                         7

                                   2010      2011             2012               2013          2014
                                                                                                                                        2000
                                                                                                                                               2001
                                                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                                                           2005
                                                                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                                                                                         2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2014
                                            tobacco       food         textile    garmet                                                                     tobacco              food            textile          garmet


     Source: Calculated using data from ASMSI (2000–2014) and aggregated statistics of micro and small industry (2014).




      Figure 10. Relationship between output and labor in medium and large industry,
      2000–2014

                               60,000                                                                                                                                                                       400

                               50,000
REAL OUTPUT, IN BILLION IDR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL LABOR, IN THOUSANDS




                               40,000                                                                                                                                                                       350


                               30,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                            300
                               20,000



                                                                                                                                                                                                            250


                                   10,000


                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                                              2000

                                                       2001

                                                              2002

                                                                         2003

                                                                                 2004

                                                                                        2005

                                                                                               2006

                                                                                                      2007

                                                                                                             2008

                                                                                                                                 2009

                                                                                                                                         2010

                                                                                                                                                      2011

                                                                                                                                                                  2012

                                                                                                                                                                            2013

                                                                                                                                                                                         2014




                                                      real output         total labor

     Source: Calculated using data from ASMSI (2000–2014).




      46 // Employment in the Indonesian Tobacco Sector
We estimated the output elasticity of labor demand for the cigarette manufac-
turing sector at 0.160. This estimate implied that a one percentage decrease in output
corresponded to a 0.160 percent decrease in employment in the cigarette manufacturing
sector (Table 10). On the other hand, the estimate for the tobacco processing sector
implied that a one percentage decrease in output corresponded to a 0.092 percent
decrease in employment in the tobacco processing sector.25


Table 10. Estimation of own-wage and output elasticity of labor demand, 2000–2014

  DEPENDENT                        FE, ALL             FE,                FE,                FE, PRO-            OLS, PRO-
  VARIABLE: LOG OF                                     CIGARETTE          KRETEKS            CESSING             CESSING
  EMPLOYMENT

  Log of wage                       -0.045***            -0.107***          -0.107***          -0.058***             -0.157***
                                     (0.001)              (0.013)            (0.013)            (0.007)               (0.019)

  Log of output                       0.157***           0.160***           0.162***           0.092***              0.177***
                                      (0.003)             (0.017)           (0.017)            (0.022)               (0.043)

  N                                   275,189              4,135              4,031              6,471                 1,557

  Clusters                            27,580                458                453                762                     -

  Year                               2000-14             2000-14            2000-14            2000-14             2010, 2011,
                                                                                                                     2014

  Clustering of S.E.                Firm-Level          Firm-Level         Firm-Level         Firm-Level            Robust SE

  Scale                                M&L                 M&L                M&L                M&L                  Mi & S

Source: Estimated from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry, 2000–2012, and the Annual Survey of
Micro and Small Industry, 2010, 2011, and 2014.
Note: ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels. The regression sample included an unbal-
anced panel of manufacturing firms in Indonesia as explained in Annex II. Wage, output, and other nominal
variables were adjusted by wholesale price index. The control variables included price-adjusted capital, price-ad-
justed material expenditures, and price-adjusted energy expenditures, the share of production workers, scale of
production, investment status, dummies for districts, dummies for industries, year dummies, and the interaction
between industry and year dummies. The standard errors were clustered at the firm level.




25 We noted several advantages and drawbacks of using a fixed-effect model to estimate output elasticity of labor demand. First, a
fixed-effect model accounted for firm-specific unobserved heterogeneity which may bias the estimate of the elasticity. On the other
hand, a fixed-effect model may not account for a possible simultaneity bias between output and labor demand.



                                                                                                                                  47
SMOKING HAS
BEEN A MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR O
DISEASE BURDEN
INDONESIA. SMO
   V LENCE
PREVA

AGE INDIVIDUAL
HAS EXCEEDED 3
PERCENT SINCE 2
     5
         SIMULATIONS ON THE EFFECTS

O        OF RAISING CIGARETTE TAXES
         ON EMPLOYMENT


N
         To estimate the impact of raising taxes on employment, we needed to estimate the
         number of workers in each production tier. Given that available data did not allow to
         directly identify the number of workers in each tier, we used secondary data and applied
         a few assumptions to estimate the number of workers in each tier. First, we obtained




O
         the number of factories by cigarette type and tier using 2015 data from Dwi Kurnaini
         (2016); secondly, we used the average workers per firm in 2011 reported in Tobacco
         Control Support Center and IAKMI (2014). These are shown in Column B and C of Table
         11, respectively; thirdly, we calculated the estimated total workers per tier by multiplying
         the number of factories and the average workers per firm; and finally, we summed these
         numbers by subindustries to obtain total workers in the kretek and white cigarette indus-
         tries, which are shown in Column D of Table 11. Note that estimated total workers in kretek
         and white cigarette industries were consistent with the actual total workers.26 Next, we
         calculated the estimated share of workers in each tier to total employment in the kreteks
         and white cigarette industries, and we show these shares in Column E. Using these shares,
         we calculated the implied number of workers by multiplying the shares with the actual
         number of workers in the kretek and white cigarette industries calculated using SIMK and
         SI. We show the implied number of workers that we used for simulations in Column F of
         Table 11.




L
3        25 However, we acknowledge that the estimated total workers in the white cigarette industry was underestimated.




 2
                                                                                                                           49
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Table 11: Estimated number of workers in each tax tier

 TYPE           A:       B:                C:            D:                E:              F:
                TIER     NUMBER OF         WORKERS       ESTIMATED         ESTIMATED       IMPLIED
                         FACTORIES         PER FIRM      NUMBER OF         SHARE (%)       NUMBER OF
                         (2015)            (2011)        WORKERS                           WORKERS
                                                                                           (2014 ESTI-
                                                                                           MATE)

 SKM            I        14                85            1,190             0.38            1,167
                IIA      84                85            7,140             2.28            7,005
                IIB      148               85            12,580            4.01            12,342

 SKT            IA       1                 664           664               0.21            651
                IB       15                664           9,960             3.17            9,771
                IIA      6                 664           3,984             1.27            3,909
                IIB      15                664           9,960             3.17            9,771
                IIIA     88                664           58,432            18.62           57,326
                IIIB     316               664           209,824           66.88           205,851

 SPM            I        1                 31            31                3.85             408
                IIA      7                 31            217               26.92            2,853
                IIB      18                31            558               69.23            7,337

 Tobacco        n/a      58,294	                                                           352,086
 processing

 Estimated total workers, kretek                         313,734
 Estimated total workers, white                          806

 Actual total workers, SKM & SKT (2014)                                                    307,793
 Actual total workers, SPM (2014)                                                          10,598
 Actual total workers, processing (2014)                                                   352,086

Source: We obtained the numbers of factories in 2015 from Dwi Kurnaeni (2016), the average workers per firm
from Tobacco Control Support Center—IAKMI (2014), and the actual total workers in each tobacco subindustry
from the 2014 SIMK and SI.


We observed that most kretek workers worked in the small kretek firms. Specifically,
small SKT firms employed about 268,000 workers or 86 percent of total kretek workers in
Indonesia. On the other hand, workers in SKM firms employed only 6.7% of total kretek
workers in Indonesia.

The World Bank has been providing inputs for the tobacco tax excise reform since
2015, in which the reform proposal was to streamline the excise tax structure and
increase disproportionately the average excise tax rate across tiers. Specifically, tiers
with lower cigarette taxes would experience higher tax increase. Under the proposed pol-
icy, the number of tiers was reduced by half to just 6 tiers. For example, there are currently
five tiers for SKT and the policy proposes to reduce the tiers to just two.

The proposed reform would reduce cigarette demand by 10.4 percent, but increase
government revenue by 8.4%. We show our prediction on the effects of raising ciga-
rette taxes on government revenue in Table 13. Results show that the consumption of tier
1 SKM is predicted to decrease by 10 billion sticks but the revenue is predicted to increase
by IDR 7,262 billion. Overall, higher cigarette taxes are expected to increase government
revenue by IDR 12,875 billion.


50 // Simulations on the Effects of Raising Cigarette Taxes on Employment
        Table 12. Proposed cigarette tax increase and new cigarette excise tariffs

          TYPE     A:             B:                 C:            D:          F:           H:
                   TIER           CONSUMPTION        EXCISE        BASE        PROPOSED     NEW
                                  (BILLION OF        TARIFF 2017   REVENUE     TAX          TARIFFS
                                  STICKS)            (RUPIAH)      (BILLION    INCREASE     (RUPIAH)
                                                                   RUPIAH)     (%)

          SKM          I              212                  530       112,360       12          594
                     IIA               17                  365        6,205        40          511
                     IIB              21                   335        7,035        53          511

          SKT          IA             13                   345       4,485          16        400
                       IB             40                   265      10,600          51        400
                      IIA              5                   165        825           21        200
                      IIB              5                   155        775           29        200
                     IIIA              5                   100        500          100        200
                     IIIB              7                    80        560          150        200

          SPM          I              16                   555       8,880         10          611
                     IIA               2                   330        660          30          429
                     IIB               2                   290        580          48          429

          Total                       345                           153,465

        Source: World Bank team calculation (2015–2017).




        Table 13. The effects of raising cigarette taxes on government revenue
TYPE       A:       B:                 E:              G:           H:         I:          G: CHANGE
           TIER     CONSUMP-           % CHANGE        ESTIMATED    NEW        ESTIMATED   IN ESTI-
                    TION               IN              CONSUMP-     TARIFFS    REVENUE     MATED
                    (BILLION OF        DEMAND          TION         (RUPIAH)   (BILLION    REVENUE
                    STICKS)                                                    RUPIAH)     (BILLION
                                                                                           RUPIAH)

SKM           I             212             -4.94           202        594       119,622     7,262
            IIA              17             -16.48           14        511        7,255      1,050
            IIB             21              -21.84           16        511       8,388       1,353

SKT          IA             13               -6.59           12        400        4,860       375
              IB            40              -21.01           32        400       12,643      2,043
             IIA             5              –8.65            5         200         912         87
             IIB                            –11.95                     200
                             5                               4                    880         105
            IIIA                            –41.20                     200
                             5                               3                     588         88
            IIIB                            –61.80                     200
                             7                               3                     535        -25

SPM           I             16              –5.02            15        611       9,278        398
            IIA              2              –15.06            2        429        729          69
            IIB              2              –24.10            2        429        652          72

Total                       345                             309                 166,340      12,875

        Source: Authors' estimates.




                                                                                                       51
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




The proposed cigarette tax increase is predicted to reduce tobacco employment by
32,132. We summarized the effects of the higher cigarette taxes on employment in the
cigarette industry in Table 14. The largest employment impact is expected to happen in
the SKT firms with a reduction of 8.6 percent or about 24,710 posts. Most of the impact
will happen in the small-scale SKT firms (20,355 job losses) given the fact those are more
labor intensive within the industry. Note that we assume identical output elasticity of
employment in the SKT and SKM firms owing to data limitations. Unfortunately, we do
not have a strong prior statistic on the difference in the elasticities between SKT and SKM
firms owing to a lack of information from previous studies. Nevertheless, if output elas-
ticity of employment is relatively more elastic in the SKT firms, then we should expect a
higher negative impact on future employment in the SKT firms.

It is important to note that these analyses qualified as the effects of raising ciga-
rette taxes on gross employment. Consumers may shift their consumption to other
goods and services when prices of cigarettes increase. Over time, a higher demand of
other goods and services leads to a higher demand in labor. Workers laid off from the cig-
arette industry due to higher cigarette taxes can be employed in another sector. Former
cigarette industry workers may fulfill the higher labor demand. However, a subsequent
study is required to identify these sectors, and whether former cigarette industry workers
have the skills to work in these sectors. While it is more ideal to evaluate the effects on
net employment, this study provides an estimate to the government of the number of
workers who would need immediate income support and training programs during the
transitional period.




52 // Simulations on the Effects of Raising Cigarette Taxes on Employment
                  Table 12: Simulations on the effects of raising cigarette taxes on employment

TYPE            A:       B:               C:              D:         E:        F:         G:        H:
                TIER     PROPOSED         NUMBER          PRICE      CHANGE    LABOR      CHANGE    LOSS
                         TAX              OF              ELASTIC-   IN        ELASTIC-   IN        OF
                         INCREASE         WORKERS         ITY OF     DEMAND    ITY OF     EMPLOY-   EMPLOY-
                         (%)              (2014           DEMAND     (%)       OUTPUT     MENT      MENT
                                          ESTIMATE)                                       (%)

SKM                I           12                 1,167    -0.412     -4.94      0.160     -0.79       -9
                 IIA           40                7,005     -0.412     -16.48     0.160     -2.64      -185
                 IIB           53               12,342     -0.412     -21.84     0.160     -3.49      -431

Total: A                                                                                              -625

SKT                IA          16              651         -0.412      -6.59     0.160     -1.05        -7
                   IB          51             9,771        -0.412     -21.01     0.160     -3.36      -329
                  IIA          21            3,909         -0.412      -8.65     0.160     -1.38       -54
                  IIB          29             9,771        -0.412     -11.95     0.160      -1.91     -187
                 IIIA         100            57,326        -0.412     -41.20     0.160     -6.59     -3,779
                 IIIB         150           205,851        -0.412     -61.80     0.160     -9.89    -20,355

Total: B                                                                                            -24,710

SPM                I             I               408       -0.502     -5.02      0.160     -0.80        -3
                 IIA           IIA              2,853      -0.502     -15.06     0.160      -2.41      -69
                 IIB           IIB              7,337      -0.502     -24.10     0.160     -3.86      -283

Total: C                                                                                              -355

Tobacco                                     352,086                   -19.89    0.092      -1.83     -6,442
processing: D

Total loss of                                                                                        -32,132
employment
(A+B+C+D)

                  Source: Authors' estimates.




                                                                                                               53
SMOKING HAS
BEEN A MAJOR
CONTRIBUTOR O
DISEASE BURDEN
INDONESIA. SMO
   V LENCE
PREVA

AGE INDIVIDUAL
HAS EXCEEDED 3
PERCENT SINCE 2
     5
         CONCLUSION

O        This report provided an overview of the main economic issues related to tobacco
         taxation and employment to inform current debate over tobacco tax reform in
         Indonesia. Overall, there is consistent global evidence suggesting that raising tobacco




N
         taxes has a positive effect on government revenues and a small negative effect on
         employment in the tobacco sector. However, research has demonstrated that the job
         losses in the tobacco sector (gross effect) are usually compensated with job creation in
         the other sectors (net effect).27

         This report used data from the Central Bureau of Statistics to estimate trends in employ-




O
         ment and output in the tobacco sector and estimated the potential impact on tobacco
         employment (gross effect) from raising cigarette taxes in Indonesia.

         The share of tobacco employment to total manufacturing and economy-wide
         employment was quite low at 5.13 and 0.60 percent in 2014, respectively. Tobacco
         jobs were heavily concentrated in Central Java, East Java, and West Nusa Tenggara—about
         94% of tobacco manufacturing workers and about 91% of tobacco farmers were concen-
         trated in these three provinces. In these provinces, several districts were quite dependent
         on the tobacco sector. For example, the share of tobacco employment to local employ-
         ment was 30 percent in Kudus, 27.6 percent in Temanggung, and 26 percent in Kediri.
         Any effect from tobacco taxation to the tobacco sector affected these districts more.

         Most tobacco manufacturing workers were female and production workers.
         Additionally, there was a considerable male-female wage gap in the tobacco industry
         (female production workers earned 25% lower wages than male production workers).
         We found that about 43 percent of tobacco households were poor. The World Bank/ACS
         survey among kretek workers provided more details on the livelihoods of these workers




L
         and how they would be affected by an increase in cigarette taxes (World Bank, 2017b).

         We predict that raising cigarette taxes by an average of 47% and simplifying the
         cigarette tax structure to 6 tiers will reduce cigarette demand by 10.4 percent,
         increase government revenue by 8.4 percent, and reduce gross employment in
         tobacco manufacturing sector by 4.79 percent. That means that a reduction of 32,132




3
         tobacco manufacturing jobs, most of them in the SKT industry (24,710 less jobs). Given
         the additional revenues government will obtain with the reform (IDR 12,875), there is


         27 For Indonesia, Ahsan and Wiyono (2007) estimated positive net effects of 84,340 jobs (25 for a percent tax increase), 140,567 jobs
         (50 percent tax increase), and 281,135 jobs (100 percent tax increase) (Ahsan and Wiyono, 2007).




 2
                                                                                                                                             55
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




scope to implement measures to reduce the impact on the tobacco workers’ livelihoods
(such as cash transfers or expanded access to social safety nets) or to find alternative
occupations for the workers affected (retraining programs, educational grants, etc.).

In line with the other reports of the World Bank/ACS Indonesia Tobacco Studies,
this report recommends:

•	   For kretek hand-rollers

     o	 First, the most vulnerable groups in the affected population who would need
     immediate income support in the event of job loss include the workers who are less
     educated, older, heads of their households, and who contribute a significant pro-
     portion of total household income from kretek rolling. The government can provide
     income support to these workers with less than 2% of the revenue gained from a tax
     increase;

     o	 Second, the additional revenue or part thereof can be allocated for re-skilling and
     redeployment of laid-off kretek workers to smooth their transition to an alternative
     source of employment in the short to medium term.

•	   For (tobacco and clove) farmers:

     1)	 The government should help to improve supply chains and value chains for
     other goods in tobacco-growing areas. Many former tobacco farmers are making
     a better living growing other common, locally grown crops (e.g., corn, sweet potato,
     and green vegetables), an outcome that could be further enhanced with even small
     investments by governments in improved supply chains for these products. Results
     from the World Bank/ACS survey suggest that current tobacco farmers are already
     growing many of these crops, so it is an issue of shifting their factors of production to
     maximize economic opportunity.

     2)	 The government should help to facilitate access to credit for tobacco
     farmers. Greater access to capital through improved credit schemes could help to
     improve the possibilities for tobacco farmers to cultivate other crops and/or develop
     other nonagricultural economic enterprises. Access could be in the form of grants or
     low-interest loans to farmers willing to move away from tobacco cultivation.




56 // Conclusion
REFERENCES
Ahsan, A. (2011) Cigarette Tax and Price: Affordability and Impacts on Consumption and Rev-
enue.

Ahsan, A. (2015) Ekonomi Tembakau di Indonesia. doi: 10.1596/978-0-821-36179-5/Chpt-46.

Ahsan, A., and Wiyono, N. (2007) An Analysis of the Impact of Higher Cigarette Prices on
Employment in Indonesia.

Bader, P., Boisclair, D., and Ferrence, R. (2011) “Effects of tobacco taxation and pricing on
smoking behavior in high risk populations: a knowledge synthesis,” International journal
of environmental research and public health. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute
(MDPI), 8(11), pp. 4118–39. doi: 10.3390/ijerph8114118.

Blakely, T., Cobiac, L. J., Cleghorn, C. L., Pearson, A. L., van der Deen, F. S., Kvizhinadze, G.,
Nghiem, N., McLeod, M., and Wilson, N. (2015) “Health, Health Inequality, and Cost Impacts
of Annual Increases in Tobacco Tax: Multistate Life Table Modeling in New Zealand,”
PLOS Medicine. Edited by T. E. Novotny. Public Library of Science, 12(7), p. e1001856. doi:
10.1371/journal.pmed.1001856.

Burns D, Lee L, Shen L et al. (1997). Cigarette smoking behavior in the United States. In:
Burns D, Garfinkel L, Samet J, eds., Changes in Cigarette-Related Disease Risks and Their
Implications for Prevention and Control. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph N°2.
Bethesda, MD, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of
Health, National Cancer Institute, NIH Pub No. 97-4213 13-112.

Chaloupka, F.J., Yurekli, A. and G.T. Fong (2012). Tobacco taxes as a tobacco control strat-
egy. Tobacco Control. 21:172e180. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050417

Chen, M. A. (2005) “Rethinking the Informal Economy,” 2005(30).

Chen, M. A. (2012) “The informal economy: Definitions, theories and policies,” Women in
informal economy globalizing and organizing: WIEGO Working Paper, 1.

Contreary, K. A., Chattopadhyay, S. K., Hopkins, D. P., Chaloupka, F. J., Forster, J. L., Grimshaw,
V., Holmes, C. B., Goetzel, R. Z., and Fielding, J. E. (2015) “Economic Impact of Tobacco Price
Increases through Taxation: A Community Guide Systematic Review,” American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 49, pp. 800–808. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2015.04.026.

De Loecker, J., and Goldberg, P. K. (2014) “Firm Performance in a Global Market,” Annual
Review of Economics, 6(1), pp. 201–227. doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080113-104741.

Dwi Kurnaini, Z. (2016) Kebijakan Cukai Hasil Tembakau. Available at: http://www.fkm.ui.ac.
id/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/KEMENKEU-Paparan-Kebijakan-Cukai.pdf (Accessed:
November 1, 2016).

                                                                                                     57
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Fuchs, A., and Meneses, F. (2017) Are Tobacco Taxes Really Regressive? Evidence from Chile.
Washington DC.

Goodchild, M., Perucic, A.-M., and Nargis, N. (2016) “Modelling the impact of raising
tobacco taxes on public health and finance,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization.
World Health Organization.

Hamermesh, D. S. (1986) “The Demand for Labor in the Long Run,” in Ashenfelter, O. and
Layard, R. (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics. Elsevier Science Publishers.

Hidayat, B., and Thabrany, H. (2010) “Cigarette smoking in Indonesia: examination of a
myopic model of addictive behaviour,” International journal of environmental research and
public health. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute (MDPI), 7(6), pp. 2473–85. doi:
10.3390/ijerph7062473.

IAKMI—Tobacco Control Support Center (2014) Buku Bunga Rampai—Fakta Tembakau
dan Permasalahannya [Anthologies Books: Facts about Tobacco and Its Problems]. Jakarta
Pusat. Available at: http://www.tcsc-indonesia.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/
Buku-Fakta-Tembakau-2014__Web-Version.pdf (Accessed: November 1, 2016).

IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention, Tobacco Control, Vol. 14: Effectiveness of Tax and
Price Policies for Tobacco Control (2011: Lyon, France)

Iglesias, RM (2016). Increasing excise taxes in the presence of an illegal cigarette market:
the 2011 Brazil tobacco tax reform. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2016;40(4):243–9.

Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), (2017), Indonesia. Available at: http://
www.healthdata.org/indonesia

Jha, P., and Chaloupka, F. (2012) Tobacco Control in Developing Countries. Edited by P. Jha,
and F. Chaloupka. Washington DC.

Jha P, Jacob B, Gajalakshmi V et al. RGI- CGHR Investigators (2008). A nationally represen-
tative case-control study of smoking and death in India. N Engl J Med, 358:1137–1147.
doi:10.1056/NEJMsa0707719 PMID:18272886

John, R. M., Rao, M. G., Deshpande, R. S., Selvaraj, S., Rao, R. K., Moore, J., Sengupta, J., Cha-
loupka, F. J., and Jha, P. (2010) The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Taxation in India. Paris.

Kosen, S., Hardjo, H., Kadarmanto, Sinha, D. N., Palipudi, K. M., Wibisana, W., and Tarigan, I.
(2012) Global Adult Tobacco Survey: Indonesia Report.

Kristina, S. A., Endarti, D., Prabandari, Y. S., Ahsan, A., and Thavorncharoensap, M. (2015)
“Burden of Cancers Related to Smoking among the Indonesian Population: Premature
Mortality Costs and Years of Potential Life Lost,” Asian Pacific journal of cancer prevention :
APJCP, 16(16), pp. 6903–8. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26514465
(Accessed: March 5, 2017).

58 // Conclusion
Ministry of Industry (2009) Roadmap Industry Pengolahan Tembakau. Available at: https://
www.bps.go.id/Subjek/view/id/9.

Nasrudin, R., Trialdi, L., Hartono, D., and Ahsan, A. (2013) Tobacco Economic of Indonesia:
Poor Households’ Spending Pattern, Tax Regressivity and Economic Wide Impact of Tax Simpli-
fication. 2. Available at: http://econ.fe.ui.ac.id/workingpage (Accessed: February 19, 2017).

(NCI-WHO) National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization (2017) NCI Tobacco
Control Monograph Series 21: The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Control, WHO. World
Health Organization. Available at: http://www.who.int/tobacco/publications/economics/
nci-monograph-series-21/en/ (Accessed: September 5, 2017).

OECD (2017), Exchange rates (indicator). doi: 10.1787/037ed317-en (Accessed on 25 Sep-
tember 2017).

Raghunathan, T. E., Lepkowski, J. M., Van Hoewyk, J., Solenberger, P., and van Hoewyk, J.
(2001) “A Multivariate Technique for Multiply Imputing Missing Values Using a Sequence
                                                001). Available at: http://citeseerx.ist.
of Regression Models,” Survey Methodology, 27(12­
psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.405.4540&rep=rep1&type=pdf (Accessed: May 5,
2017).

Salma K, Chiang CY, Enarson DA, Hassmiller K, Fanning A, Gupta P, et al. Tobacco and
tuberculosis: a qualitative  systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis.
2007;11(10):1049-61.

Setyonaluri, D., Adioetomo, S. M., Barber, S., and Ahsan, A. (2008) Tobacco Economics in
Indonesia.

Sumartono, W., Sirait, A. M., Holy, M., and Thabrany, H. (2007) “Smoking and Socio-Demo-
graphic Determinant of Cardiovascular Diseases among Males 45+ Years in Indonesia,”
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 8, pp. 528–539. doi: 10.3390/ijerph8020528.

Szabo, A., Lazar, E., Burian, H., Rogers, T., Foley, K., Abram, Z., Meghea, C., Ciolompea, T., and
Chaloupka, F. J. (2016) The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Taxation in Romania. Tirgu
Mures.

Tobacco Control Support Center - IAKMI (2014) Buku Bunga Rampai - Fakta Tembakau
dan Permasalahannya [Anthologies Books: Facts about Tobacco and Its Problems]. Jakarta
Pusat. Available at: http://www.tcsc-indonesia.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Buku-Fakta-Tem-
bakau-2014__Web-Version.pdf (Accessed: November 1, 2016).

USAID Health: Infectious Diseases, Tuberculosis, Countries, Indonesia." U.S. Agency for Inter-
national Development. May 2009. Web. 07 Dec. 2010. http://www.usaid.gov/our_work/global_
health/id/tuberculosis/countries/asia/indonesia_profile.html.



                                                                                                 59
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2014). The health consequences of
smoking—50 years of progress: a report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Cen-
ter for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health;
2014. Available from: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress.  

U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization, 2016, The Economics of
Tobacco and Tobacco Control. National Cancer Institute Tobacco Control Monograph 21.
NIH Publication No. 16-CA-8029A. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute; and Geneva, CH: World
Health Organization.

World Bank (2017a). The Economics of Kretek Rolling in Indonesia. Indonesia Tobacco
Employment Studies. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank (2017b). The Economics of Tobacco Farming in Indonesia. Indonesia Tobacco
Employment Studies. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank (2017c). The Economics of Clove Farming in Indonesia. Indonesia Tobacco
Employment Studies. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Health Organization. WHO global report: mortality attributable to tobacco.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstr
eam/10665/44815/1/9789241564434_eng.pdf.  

World Health Organization (2008). WHO report on the global tobacco epidemic 2008: the
MPOWER package. Geneva, World Health Organization.

World Health Organization, Noncommunicable Diseases (NCD) Country Profiles, Geneva:
World Health Organization; (2014). Available at: http://www.who.int/nmh/countries/idn_en.pdf.

World Health Organization, Fact sheet on tobacco, Geneva: World Health Organization;
(2017a). Available at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs339/en/.

World Health Organization, Fact sheet on Noncommunicable diseases; Geneva: World
Health Organization; (2017b). Available at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs355/en/.

Zhang, P. (2002). Understand and Evaluate the Impact of Tobacco Control Policies on
Employment, Word Bank Tobacco Control Toolkit, Tool 5, World Bank.




60 // Annex
Annex I. Estimation of the wage Wage equation
We use the basic Mincer model to estimate the wage equation. Let wist indicates the real
monthly wage of worker i in industry s at time t. The specification of the model is:

	logwist = b0 + b1educi + b2femalei + b3productioni + BXist + uist

where educ indicates the years of schooling completed, female takes a value of one for
female workers, and production takes a value of one for production workers. The vector X
includes age, age squared, a dummy for urban status, dummies for employment status
(employee, casual workers, etc.), dummies for type of work (managers, administrative, sales,
services, etc.), dummies for industry, dummies for districts, and year dummies. We cluster
the standard errors for the district level and we use the sample weights for the estimations.

We estimate the model using the August National Labor Force Survey from year 2000 to
2015. The August National Labor Force Survey data is an individual-level data system that
includes workers’ characteristics and labor market variables. The availability of survey data
for multiple years allow us to construct a pooled cross cross-section data for the estimation.
We present the summary statistics of variables used in the estimation in Table 815.


Table 15: Summary statistics, National Labor Force Survey Sample

 VARIABLE                             MEAN              SD             MIN        MAX         N

 Log of wage                              13.416           0.802        7.853      18.449     152,377,119

 1 if female                              0.398            0.490          0             1     152,377,119

 Years of schooling completed             8.959            3.436          0             16    152,377,119

 1 if production worker                   0.866            0.340          0             1     152,377,119

 Industry code                            21.644           6.540          15           37     152,377,119

 Type of work                              6.501           1.349          1             8     152,377,119

 Age                                      33.321           11.432         15           98     152,377,119

 1 if lives in urban area                 0.678            0.467          0             1     152,377,119

 Employment Status                         3.719           1.209          1             6     152,377,119

 Hours worked in a month                  178.241         50.421          0            392    152,377,119

 Province ID                              33.968           11.041         11           94     152,377,119

 District ID                             400.927          139.346         1            1001   152,377,119

 Year                                    2008.514          4.385        2001           2015   152,377,119

Source: Calculated using data from the August 2001–2015 National Labor Force Survey.
Notes: Sample weights are used for the estimation.




                                                                                                            61
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Annex II. Sample Selection Procedure for the Manufacturing
Industry Data
We do not obtain data on the quantity of production outputs and inputs such as capital,
machine, materials, and energy. This is quite common when using survey data. Thus, we use
sales data for the outputs and expenditure data for the inputs. A study shows that estima-
tions of production functions using sales and expenditure data are sensible (De Loecker and
Goldberg, 2014).

We also face thorny issues of unbalanced panel data and missingness in our data. In this
section, we discuss the procedure that we use to deal with the unbalanced panel data and
missingness. Our data include 48,739 manufacturing firms with 332,360 firm-level observa-
tions from 2000 to 2014 (Table 16). However, many firms have gap observations with undis-
closed reasons which leads to unbalanced panel data.


Table 16: Selected sample, Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry

                                INITIAL SAMPLE          SELECTED SAMPLE           SAMPLE KEPT (IN
                                                                                  PERCENTAGE)

 All Manufacturing
 Industry

 Number of firms                       48,739                    27,580                56.69

 Number of observations               332,360                   275,280                82.83

 Tobacco Industry

 Number of firms                        2,322                     1,208                52.02

 Number of observations                 14,101                   11,270                 79.92

 Kretek Industry

 Number of firms                         764                      453                  59.29

 Number of observations                 4,757                     4,031                84.74

Source: Calculated using the 2000–2014 Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry.


Thus, we create a selection criteria based on observation gaps within each firm and the
length of observations. First, we drop firms with more than three unbroken chains of
observations. For example, we keep firms with three unbroken chains of observations
between 2000–2006, 2009–2011, and 2013–2014. Second, we drop firms with less than 5
total observations in the data. As shown in Table 10, we keep about 57 percent of initial
firms but these firms account for 83 percent of initial observations. This selection proce-
dure is important because we rely on a fixed-effects model to estimate the output elastic-
ity of labor demand.




62 // Annex
The second issue that we face is data missing, particularly in terms of capital, machine,
energy, and materials. In the data, several firms only have one, or just few, observations of
capital and machine across periods. First, we assume that firms without any observation
of capital and machines do not use capital and machines in their production processes.
Thus, we impute zeros to the missing observations. Second, for firms with one or just a
few observations of capital and machines, we impute the maximum value to the missing
observations.

We use univariate imputation using linear regressions for the energy and materials
variables (Raghunathan et al., 2001). We choose linear regressions for the imputations
because energy and materials are continuous variables. For the imputation, we regress
the variables on log of output, log of wage, log of production workers, share of produc-
tion workers, a dummy for firm scale, year dummies, and industry dummies. We simulate
the imputations for 30 times for each variable. We then use the 30 sets of imputed vari-
ables to estimate the output elasticity of labor demand.




                                                                                            63
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Annex III. Estimation of Output Elasticity of Labor Demand
We assume that tobacco manufacturers follow a constant-elasticity of substitution (CES)
production function. Given this production function, we can derive the labor demand
function for the estimation of the output elasticity of labor demand. The derivation of the
labor demand function is beyond the scope of this paper but it is available in previous
publications (Hamermesh, 1986).

Let eist be the number of workers that firm i in industry s employ at time t. The specifica-
tion of the model is:

		logeist = b0 + b1logwist + b2logqist + BXist + uist

where w indicates wage rate, and q indicates output, proxied by the value of output.
The vector X includes capital, material expenditures, energy expenditures, the share of pro-
duction workers, scale of production, investment status, dummies for districts, dummies
for industries, year dummies, and the interaction between industry and year dummies.
All nominal variables are adjusted with the industry-specific wholesale price index.
The standard errors are clustered at the firm level to account for autocorrelations of the
unobservables within each firm.

We use the 2001 to 2014 Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry published by the Indo-
nesian Central Bureau of Statistics to estimate the model. The survey collects firm-level
data including, but not limited to, production, employment, capital, material and energy
expenditures, ownership status, and type of industry. Note that the survey data allow us
to construct an unbalanced panel data of firms. In Table 17, we present summary statistics
of the variables used in the estimation.




64 // Annex
Table 17: Summary statistics, Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry

  VARIABLE                            MEAN           SD             MIN            MAX             N


 Log of labor                            4.046          1.228            0           10.893         275,280

 Log of wage rate                        12.541          1.179         –1.531        19.475         275,280

 Log of output                           14.501         2.224          6.480         24.846         275,280

 Log of capital                         12.480          4.991         –0.550         29.692         275,280

 Log of material expenditures            13.376         0.006         –0.106         24.230         275,280

 Log of energy expenditures              9.917          0.005         –0.448         21.553         275,280

 % of production workers                84.350          16.114         0.370           100          275,280

 Investment status                       2.456          0.910            0              3           275,280

 Industry                                17.732         7.057            10            33           275,280

 District unique ID                     199.659        67.205            1             444          275,280

 Year                                    2008             4            2000           2014          275,280

Source: Calculated using the 2000–2014 Annual Survey of Manufacturing Industry..
Notes: Statistics for log of material and energy expenditures are estimated using univariate imputation methods
with 30 replications.




                                                                                                              65
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Annex IV. Estimation of Price Elasticity of Demand
We estimate price elasticity of cigarette demand using the 2015 National Socioeconomic
Survey conducted by the Indonesian Central Bureau of Statistics. Let qi be the number of
cigarette sticks consumed by individual i. The specification of the model is:

	logqist = b0 + b1logpricei + b2kreteki + b3logpricei•kreteki + BXist + uist

where price indicates the price per cigarette stick. The price is estimated by dividing total
cigarette expenditure to total cigarette sticks consumed. We include a dummy for kretek
cigarettes and the interaction between log of price and this dummy. The interaction
terms allow us to investigate whether price elasticities of demand between kreteks and
white cigarettes differ significantly.

The vector X includes age, a dummy for female, a dummy for marital status, a dummy for
urban status, dummies for highest schooling completed, a dummy that indicates working
status, a dummy that indicates poverty, dummies for occupation sector, dummies for dis-
tricts, and a dummy for possession of health insurance. We include per-capita expenditure
in the vector X which is a proxy for income. We use the sample weights for the estimations.

Table 18 presents the estimate of the price elasticity of cigarette demand in 2015. The
estimates show that price elasticity of demand significantly differs by cigarette type. As
implied by the estimates in column 1 of Table 18, the price elasticity of demand for kreteks
is about –0.42, while the price elasticity of demand for white cigarettes is about –0.51.
These estimates are quite close to previous estimates which range from –0.29 to –0.67
(Setyonaluri et al., 2008).




66 // Annex
   Table 18: Estimation of price elasticity of cigarette demand, 2015

DEPENDENT            ALL             ALL              ALL             KRETEKS         KRETEKS          WHITE
VARIABLE: LOG                                         KRETEKS         W/ FILTER       W/O
OF QUANTITY                                                                           FILTER
(CIGARETTE
STICKS)

Log of price          -0.421***        -0.510***       -0.416***        -0.476***       -0.376***      -0.502***
                     (0.000278)        (0.00110)      (0.000285)       (0.000391)      (0.000385)      (0.00103)
Log of price x                        0.0945***
kreteks                               (0.00112)

N                    53,584,645       53,584,645       50,113,104      29,553,444      25,065,756       5,477,027
R-squared               0.158            0.158           0.160            0.170           0.154           0.185
Year                     2015            2015             2015            2015            2015            2015
District-FE                Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y
Controls                   Y               Y                Y               Y               Y               Y

  Source: Calculated using data from the 2015 National Socioeconomic Survey.
  Note: ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level. The control variables include per-capita
  expenditure, age, a dummy for female, a dummy for marital status, a dummy for urban status, dummies for high-
  est schooling completed, a dummy that indicates working status, a dummy that indicates poverty, dummies for
  occupation sector, dummies for districts, and a dummy for possession of health insurance. Sample weights are
  used for the estimations.




                                                                                                                  67
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia




Annex V. Simulation of the Effects of Raising Cigarette Prices on
Employment
The simulation of the effects of raising cigarette prices on employment in the tobacco indus-
try consists of three steps. The first step is an estimation of the change in cigarette consump-
tion followed by an estimation of the change in output. Lastly, we estimate the change in
employment in the tobacco industry. We discuss these steps in more detail below.

Step 1: Estimation of the change in cigarette consumption
We use the estimates of price elasticities of demand to predict the change in cigarette con-
sumption. Let qj be consumption of type j cigarette, Eqp,j be the price elasticity of demand for
type j cigarette, and Pj be the price of type j cigarette. The estimated change in consumption is:

				%∆Cj = Eqp,j ˙ %∆Pj

Step 2: Estimation of the change in the value of output (sales)
We do not have evidence about the elasticity between cigarette consumption and produc-
tion, and between cigarette consumption and the value of output. Therefore, we assume
that changes in consumption will be reflected in equivalent changes in cigarette production
and the value of output (sales) of cigarette firms. This is a strong assumption but it is neces-
sary given the lack of data about consumption and production.

Let Qj be the output of firms that produce type j cigarette. Then:

				%∆Cj = %∆Qj

We also need to make an additional assumption that changes in cigarette consumption
will be reflected in equivalent changes in output of tobacco processing firms. We use price
elasticity of demand for all types of cigarette (column 1 of Table 18) to estimate the change
in output in the tobacco processing firms.

Step 3: Estimation of the change in employment by industry
Lastly, we can estimate the change in employment by using our estimates of output elasticity
of labor. Let EeQ be the estimated output elasticity of labor. Then, the change in employment is:

				%∆Ej = EeQ,j ˙ %∆Qj

Given the base number of employment, we can calculate the change in terms of number of
workers. Specifically, let E1 be the number of workers before the price change. The change
in the number of workers is:

				%∆Ej /100 ˙ E1




68 // Annex
69
The Economics of Tobacco Taxation and Employment in Indonesia
