Toward Integrated Disaster
Risk Management in Vietnam
Recommendations Based on the Drought
and Saltwater Intrusion Crisis and the Case
for Investing in Longer-Term Resilience

Overview
Toward Integrated Disaster
Risk Management in Vietnam
Recommendations Based on the Drought
and Saltwater Intrusion Crisis and the Case
for Investing in Longer-Term Resilience


Overview
@2017 The World Bank

1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433

Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank, with external contributions. The
findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect
the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this
work.

The boundaries, colors, denominations and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the
privileges and immunities of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.

All queries on rights and licenses should be addressed to the Publishing and Knowledge
Division, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433, USA;
fax: 202-522-2625; email: pubrights@worldbank.org.
O v er v iew C ontents                                                                                iii




Overview Contents



Foreword	                                                                                        v


Acknowledgments	                                                                               vii


Abbreviations 	                                                                                viii


Overview	                                                                                        1


Key Findings	                                                                                    3


Next Steps: Developing an Action Plan	                                                           5


Recommended Actions 	                                                                          16


Support from the World Bank 	                                                                  21


References	                                                                                    22




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
iv                                                                                                OVERVIEW




     Boxes
     O.1: Mexico’s National Program Against Drought	                                                           6

     O.2: Transition to Proactive Drought Management Approaches in Brazil	                                     7

     O.3: Public-Private Partnership in Agricultural Disaster Insurance in China 	                           10

     O.4: Examples of Ongoing Activities In Vietnam to Support Integrated DRM
     Across Sectors	                                                                                         11

     O.5: Restricting Rice Production and Sales as Emergency Response in Thailand	 14

     O.6: Helping Chinese Farmers Adapt to Climate Change
     Through Comprehensive Agricultural Development (CAD)	                                                   15


     Figures
     O.1: Drought- and SWI-affected provinces	                                                                 1


     Tables
     O.1: Overview of Damage Impact of 2015–2016 Drought and SWI in
     Eighteen Severely Affected Provinces in Vietnam	                                                          3

     O.2: Summary of Recommended Actions Based on National and International
     Experiences to Address Drought and SWI and to Promote Short- and Longer-
     Term Resilience	                                                                                        17




                     T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
O v er v iew C ontents                                                                         v




Foreword



Vietnam’s economic success, initiated by the Đổi Mới reforms in the late 1980s,
lifted over 40 million people out of poverty. Lately, however, Vietnam has been
facing a new wave of challenges. Adverse impacts of natural hazard shocks and
rapid degradation of natural resources threaten its gross domestic product (GDP)
and related social development gains. The 2015–2016 drought and saltwater
intrusion (SWI) event has had far-reaching socioeconomic effects, including
food insecurity, water scarcity, associated health issues, and loss of livestock.
It developed into a national crisis, with close to 2 million people affected due
to damaged livelihoods and the country seeking international help. Though
drought and SWI are cyclical events, the severe impacts in 2015–2016 were
exacerbated by the combination of adverse El Niño effects and the complex
water resource management challenges in important tributaries of the Mekong
River. Given that over 18 percent of GDP comes from the agricultural sector,
the crisis revealed an urgent need for the government of Vietnam (GoV) to
take immediate and long-term actions to address the critical gaps in disaster
preparedness and to adopt a holistic and integrated approach toward a
resilient future for people and their livelihoods.

Climate change is real and is having broad impacts across the world. Climate
change projections draw a grim picture of Vietnam’s climate vulnerability in the
coming decades. A transformation of different sectors—including agriculture,
water resource management, energy, fisheries, forestry, and infrastructure—is
needed to counter climate threats and enhance Vietnam’s adaptive capacity.
To improve disaster preparedness and build longer-term resilience, Vietnam
should act now to adapt to changing climate. As in many countries, Vietnam’s
risk and vulnerability are intensified by unplanned urban development,
inappropriate land use, and ecosystem degradation. Yet it is still possible for
the country to correct course if its policy makers and communities take action.

This report takes a deeper look at the drought and SWI crisis faced by Vietnam,
identifies the gaps across key sectors, and recommends the principal short-
and longer-term actions needed for integrated disaster risk management.
The recommendations are based on global experiences in good governance
with intersectoral coordination in disaster forecast and early warning, and in
community empowerment in water resource management and agricultural
production.


T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
vi                                                                                               OVERVIEW




     Several of the measures proposed by the GoV to strengthen critical infrastructure
     and to build capacity for greater climate resilience are already part of the
     World Bank’s active portfolio. With the Bank’s financial and technical support
     to the GoV in implementing and adopting the identified measures, the country
     will be better prepared to sustain its growth in the face of increasing climate
     risks. The Bank has substantial experience in helping to build resilience of
     communities through sustainable development of agriculture and water
     resources, disaster risk management, and climate change adaptation. The
     Bank aims to support Vietnam’s recovery efforts, including its efforts to increase
     resilience by adopting longer-term vulnerability reduction measures.

     These challenges are not unique to Vietnam, and are being experienced by
     other developing countries as well. In view of this, this report is highly relevant
     and provides timely recommendations for both Vietnam and other countries
     in the fast-evolving climate change context.




                                         Ousmane Dione
                                 Country Director for Vietnam
                                 East Asia and Pacific Region
                                       The World Bank




                    T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
A cknowledgments                                                                               v ii




Acknowledgments




This report was prepared by a team led by Abigail Baca and Dzung Huy
Nguyen, and comprising Jitendra Srivastava, Mamatha Hanumappa,
Ian Wilderspin, Ngo Cong Chinh, Yann Kerblat, and Brendan Chia. The team
recognizes and appreciates the substantive sectoral inputs provided by Anjali
Acharya, Alwaleed Fareed Alatabani, Thomas Vaughan Bowen, Binh Thang
Cao, Thi Ba Chu, Gustavo E. Diaz, Puja Vasudeva Dutta, Nathan Lee Engle,
Franz Gerner, Hoa Thi Hoang, Jolanta Kryspin-Watson, Hung Duy Le, Iain
Menzies, Phuong Thu Nguyen, Cuong Hung Pham, Madhu Raghunath, Natalia
Limones Rodriguez, Son Thanh Vo, and Thu Hang Vu. Valuable feedback was
provided by peer reviewers William Sutton and Doekle Wielinga. The report
was edited by Anne Himmelfarb and designed by Lauren Kaley Johnson.

It was prepared under the oversight and guidance of Abhas K. Jha, Nathan
M. Belete, and Iain G. Shuker. The team would like to extend its gratitude to
Victoria Kwakwa, Ousmane Dione, and Achim Fock for their valuable insights
and support.

The report has greatly benefited from the discussions and feedback kindly
provided by representatives from the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Ministry of
Planning and Investment, and Ministry of Finance, as well as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and Consultative Group on International
Agricultural Research (CGIAR) in Vietnam.

Financial support provided by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery (GFDRR) is gratefully acknowledged.




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
v iii                                                                                            OVERVIEW




        Abbreviations



        ASP	          adaptive social protection

        CAD	          Comprehensive Agricultural Development

        CCA	          climate change adaptation

        CCNDPC	       Central Committee for Natural Disaster Prevention and Control

        CONAGUA 	     National Water Commission (Mexico)

        CSA	          climate-smart agriculture

        DARD 	        Department of Agriculture and Rural Development

        DRM 	         disaster risk management

        GAP	          good agricultural practices

        GDP 	         gross domestic product

        GEF	          Global Environmental Facility

        GFDRR	        Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery

        GoV 	         government of Vietnam

        GWP	          Global Water Partnership

        ha	           hectare(s)

        IAIL	         Irrigated Agriculture Intensification Loan Project

        MARD 	        Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development

        MoLISA 	      Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs

        MoNRE 	       Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment

        MPI 	         Ministry of Planning and Investment

        MT	           metric ton(s)


                    T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
A bbre v iations                                                                               ix




MY	                     marketing year

NAWAPI	                 National Center for Water Resources Planning and Investigation

NGO 	                   nongovernmental organization

PMPMS	                  Prevention and Mitigation Measures for Drought Programmes

PRONACOSE	 National Program Against Drought

SASSP	                  Social Assistance Strengthening Project

SEDP	                   Socio-economic Development Plan

SOCAD	                  State Office of Comprehensive Agricultural Development

SWI	                    saltwater intrusion

VnSAT	                  Vietnam Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project

WMO	                    World Meteorological Organization

WPP	                    Water Partnership Program

WUA	                    Water User Association

WUC	                    Water User Cooperative

Currency: Vietnamese dong (VND)




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
x                                                                                OVERVIEW




    T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
Overview




Vietnam is one of the most hazard-prone                         FIGURE O.1: Drought- and SWI-affected provinces
countries in the East Asia and Pacific
region, with droughts, severe storms,
and flooding causing substantial
economic and human losses. Over the                                                                              LAO
past two decades, disasters in Vietnam
                                                                     THAILAND
                                                                                                                P.D.R.
have caused more than 13,000 deaths                                                                                       Kon Tum

as well as property damage in excess of                                                                                                       Binh
US$6.4 billion. 1 Climate change is                                                                                                           Dinh
                                                                                                                                  Gia Lai
projected to increase the impact
of disasters, especially the timing,                                                                                                             Phu
                                                                                                                                                 Yen
frequency, severity, and intensity of                                                                                            Dak Lak

hydro-meteorological events. Vietnam’s                                      CAMBODIA                                                          Khanh
                                                                                                                         Dak
                                                                                                                                               Hoa
2015–2016 drought and associated                                                                                         Nong

saltwater intrusion (SWI) offer a preview                                                                   Binh Phuoc
                                                                                                                                Lam Dong
                                                                                                                                              Ninh
                                                                                                                                             Thuan
of what could become the new normal,                                                              Tay
                                                                                                  Ninh
and make clear the need to take action                                                                                      Binh Thuan

to ensure the country’s economic and                                                             Long An

societal well-being. According to                                                                Tien Giang
                                                                                                         Ben
                                                                                               Vinh
the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
                                                                                                                lta




                                                                                                         Tre
                                                                                   Kien Hau Long Tra
                                                                                                                De




                                                                                  Giang Giang       Vinh                  DROUGHT AFFECTED PROVINCES
Development (MARD), 18 provinces                                                              Soc
                                                                                                           ng




                                                                                                            o             SEVERELY AFFECTED PROVINCES
                                                                                       Bac Trang         ek
were severely affected (figure O.1, table                                              Lieu           M                   SALTWATER INTRUSION
                                                                                                                          AFFECTED PROVINCES
O.1), resulting in direct economic losses                                       Ca Mau

of VND 15,032 billion (about US$674                                                                                             IBRD 43082 | SEPTEMBER 2017
million), representing 0.35 percent of                          Sources: UN and GoV 2016; World Bank.
national GDP and resulting in negative
                                                                The boundaries, colors, denominations and other information shown
agricultural growth for the first time in                       on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
                                                                The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
decades.2                                                       endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




1	    World Bank 2010.
2	    UN and GoV 2016.


T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M                                                                  1
2                                                                                                            OVERVIEW




    The drought and SWI may make it harder for Vietnam to meet its targets under
    the Socio-economic Development Plan (SEDP) 2016–2020. These targets include a
    gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 6.5–7.0 percent a year, and a reduction
    in the share of poor households by an average of 1.0–1.5 percent a year. The impact
    of adverse climate conditions on the economy is already evident: in the first half of
    2016, GDP growth was recorded at 5.5 percent3, much lower than the 6.5 percent
    average growth in 2015. The World Bank lowered its 2016 growth projections to 6.2
    percent, down from earlier estimates of 6.5 percent. The average GDP growth was
    recorded at 6.2 percent for 2016,4 below the government’s 6.7 percent target.

    Like past floods and typhoons, the prolonged drought and SWI of 2015–2016 have
    hurt people’s livelihoods and assets, making it difficult for affected households
    to bounce back and recover. Although disasters do not discriminate, poor and
    near-poor households are often more exposed to and disproportionately affected by
    the impacts of disasters. Other disproportionately affected groups include women
    and girls, who are typically responsible for household water gathering, and ethnic
    minorities located in the drought-stricken provinces of the Central Highlands. Such
    impacts underscore the importance of efforts that target the most vulnerable and
    that promote inclusive planning and implementation at the local level.

    The serious socioeconomic and environmental effects of the 2015–2016 drought
    and SWI in Vietnam are due to both adverse climate conditions associated with
    El Niño and gaps in the capacity of the government and communities to manage
    the impact of those conditions. Although many good practices have been initiated
    in programs and policies across the country, the current situation shows that more
    investment is needed to meet the growing challenges arising from climate change
    and from increasing disaster risks.




    3	    See Eckardt et al. (2016).
    4	    AEC News Today, “2016 Vietnam GDP Grows 6.2%,”January 15, 2017, https://aecnewstoday.com/2017/
    vietnams-economy-grows-6-2-in-2016/.


                                T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
OVERVIEW                                                                                                                    3




TABLE O.1: Overview of Damage Impact of 2015–2016 Drought and SWI in Eighteen
Severely Affected Provinces in Vietnam

                                       Production area affected (ha)                   Number of
                                                                                                                  Total
                   Number of                                                           households     Number
                                                                                                                economic
                    severely                                                         lacking access       of
  Region                                                                                                           loss
                    affected             Rice        Crop      Aquaculture            to water for    livestock
                                                                                                                 (billion
                   provinces                                                          consumption        lost
                                                                                                                  VND)
                                                                                      and daily use
  National               18            243,762 168,064              69,008               457,796         —       15,023
                          3
   South
   Central       (Ninh Thuan,          10,776       15,000             —                  43,482       5,126     1,457
   Coast         Binh Thuan, &
                  Khanh Hoa)
                          5

  Central  (Kon Tum, Gia
                                       17,541 141,756                  —                  72,060        496      6,004
 Highlands Lai, Dak Lak,
            Dak Nong, &
             Lam Dong)
                   10 out of 13
                (Long An, Tien
                  Giang, Ben
  Mekong         Tre, Tra Vinh,
   Delta        Vinh Long, Soc 215,445                 —            68,916               342,254        933      7,517
                   Trang, Hau
                  Giang, Bac
                 Lieu, Ca Mau,
                 & Kien Giang)
Source: MARD 2016.
Note: — = not available.




Key Findings
Vietnam’s capacity to manage drought and SWI risks with timely warnings
linked to effective disaster preparedness, response, and recovery needs to be
strengthened. Institutional fragmentation across water supply, energy, and agriculture
sectors limits efficient and sustainable land and water resource management,
particularly at the river basin or watershed level. In addition, Vietnam’s disaster
risk management (DRM) and climate change adaptation (CCA) policies, plans, and
investments are fragmented. As a result, DRM and CCA are not consistently or
effectively integrated into socioeconomic development planning at national and
subnational levels or within sectors. Furthermore, given the absence of a systematic,
participatory, and inclusive approach to socioeconomic development planning, it is


T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
4                                                                                                              OVERVIEW




    difficult for the country to ensure that resilience measures are appropriately planned
    and implemented at local level.

    Fragmented sectoral approaches and institutional arrangements are limiting
    Vietnam’s capacity to manage risks from drought and disasters more broadly.
    There are existing interministerial coordination bodies related to DRM, climate change,
    and water resource management;5 but their mandates overlap somewhat and also
    leave potential gaps in critical functions of integrated drought risk management.
    These gaps are reflected both horizontally (between ministries), and vertically
    (between central and subnational levels). Furthermore, many actions developed under
    the planning processes of these interministerial committees are not implemented
    because the bodies lack both the necessary authority and the necessary budgetary
    and financial resources.

    The country has plans to improve and better coordinate regulations, policies, and
    actions related to climate change, disaster risk, natural resources, environmental
    protection, and land use. The SEDP 2016–2020 recognizes that drought and SWI in
    particular require immediate attention. To accommodate both the broader and more
    specific agendas, Vietnam needs an integrated approach that not only addresses the
    recent crisis but also institutionalizes mechanisms to promote longer-term resilience and
    address the country’s vulnerabilities to drought, SWI, and other hydro-meteorological
    hazards.6 These efforts must also recognize that unplanned urban development,
    vulnerable rural livelihoods, inappropriate land use, and ecosystem degradation are
    key drivers of risk in Vietnam and compound the country’s vulnerability.




    5	     The relevant bodies are the Central Committee for Disaster Prevention and Control, chaired by the Ministry
    of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) minister, with a standing office in the MARD Department of Disaster
    Prevention and Control; the National Committee on Climate Change, chaired by the prime minister, with a standing office
    in the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE) Department of Hydrometeorology and Climate Change;
    and the National Water Resources Council, chaired by the deputy prime minister, with a standing office in the MoNRE
    Department of Water Resource Management.
    6	     See Eckardt et al. 2016; Hallegatte et al. 2015; World Bank 2010.


                                  T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
OVERVIEW                                                                                                       5




      VIETNAM’S POLICY MAKERS AND COMMUNITIES ARE IN CONTROL OF THE
      DRIVERS OF DISASTER RISK IN THE COUNTRY

      Not investing in risk reduction today misses an opportunity for social, economic, and environmental
      progress that will have impacts for years to come. Potential solutions and opportunities for
      action sit at the nexus of these core development questions:
        •	 Although the average 2016 GDP growth of 6.2 percent represents a recovery from a lagging
           5.5 percent in the first half, it was still below the government’s target of 6.7 percent, and can
           partially be attributed to the agricultural losses due to the drought and SWI. How does the
           current rice production policy increase Vietnam’s risks for even greater losses in the future?
        •	 Vietnam could see losses of over 9 percent of GDP per capita in the case of a major
           disaster, and given that currently only about 5 percent of assets in the country are covered
           by insurance, is the government prepared to pay the outstanding bill?
        •	 Water is Vietnam’s most precious natural resource, but the per capita use of nearly 1,000 liters
           per year is about twice the global average. Without changing incentives for more sustainable
           water usage, how can the country manage the increasing risks of drought and water scarcity?
        •	 Climate hazards are a threat to vulnerable people across the world, with the power to push
           more than a million people back into poverty in the next 15 years. Given that farmers are
           especially likely to fall back into poverty, how many of these million people will be in Vietnam?
      Sources: Standard & Poor’s 2015; FAO Aquastat main database 2016.




Next Steps: Developing an Action Plan
A phased approach is proposed to address urgent needs for drought and SWI
risks and longer-term resilience to all types of disaster risks across key sectors.
Vietnam needs to undertake strategic planning and coordinated implementation of
critical measures and recovery efforts to tackle the impacts of drought and SWI and
work toward greater climate resilience. Such an approach will raise awareness among
stakeholders in both the public and private sectors. One main goal is to ensure that
current and future development activities are sustainable and climate resilient. Such
planning must be backed by sound knowledge and scientific understanding in order
to target and prioritize investments in technology development and adoption, in
infrastructure, and in capacity building. The phased approach would include actions
for the short, medium, and long term:
  •	 In the short term, Vietnam must evaluate the multi-sector coordination and
     implementation challenges specifically related to drought and SWI.
  •	 In the medium term, it must empower the existing Central Committee for Natural
     Disaster Prevention and Control (CCNDPC) to assist interministerial coordination
     and serve in an advisory role for integrated DRM.

T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
6                                                                                                                OVERVIEW




           •	 In the long term, it must mainstream multi-hazard DRM and CCA planning
              mechanisms for managing natural resources and land use across all climate-sensitive
              sectors.



    BOX O.1: Mexico’s National Program Against Drought

    In January 2013, in response to recurrent drought that had affected most parts of Mexico since
    2010, the country’s president announced the National Program Against Drought (PRONACOSE).
    Coordinated by the National Water Commission (CONAGUA), the program aims to develop tools
    for a new proactive and preventive approach for integrated drought management at the level
    of the 26 basin councils across the country. Its specific objectives can be summarized as follows:
     •	 Initiate a targeted training program on drought basic concepts and best practices in order
        to develop local capacity for sustainable integrated drought management in Mexico.
     •	 Raise awareness at the basin level and develop a host of drought prevention and mitigation
        measures.
     •	 Establish an interagency committee to coordinate and direct existing drought programs,
        guide and assess PRONACOSE, and fund the actions proposed by stakeholders at the
        basin level.
     •	 Involve experts and researchers in responding to the identified needs in drought management.
     •	 Develop a communication and outreach program that emphasizes vulnerability, participation,
        prevention, and the evolution of drought.

    Assessing implemented activities and ensuring sustainability through feedback in various phases
    are important elements of the framework of PRONACOSE, which is due to run till 2018. As a
    starting point in 2013, CONAGUA developed the Prevention and Mitigation Measures for Drought
    Programmes (PMPMS) for each basin council, building on global experiences. PMPMS addresses
    the drought characteristics and vulnerability of each basin. CONAGUA staff and researchers
    from 12 national institutions were trained to standardize the activities and contents of these
    programs, which were implemented in the second and third years (2014–2015). After evaluation
    of the implemented programs in 2016–2017, the programs are to be improved, updated, and
    implemented again from the sixth year (2018). A continued gradual implementation beyond
    the sixth year is expected through ownership of the programs by the basin councils.
    Source: Adapted from WMO and GWP 2014.




          In the short term, Vietnam should evaluate the multi-sector coordination and
          implementation challenges specifically related to drought and SWI. The objective
          is to identify gaps in the policies, programs, and investments undertaken by MARD,
          the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE), and other relevant
          ministries. Based on the detailed evaluation, overall guidance could be provided to
          improve the effectiveness and coordination horizontally across sectors as well as


                                    T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
OVERVIEW                                                                                                         7




vertically at national, regional, and provincial levels. The CCNDPC should establish
a dedicated task force to identify measures that specifically address drought and
SWI. Selected global experiences from Mexico and Brazil show how drought
management has been integrated effectively into government policy, as highlighted
in boxes O.1 and O.2.




      BOX O.2: Transition to Proactive Drought Management Approaches in Brazil

      Northeast Brazil experienced a prolonged and severe drought between 2010 and 2014—the region’s
      worst drought crisis in 100 years. The event focused federal attention on drought management
      approaches, with authorities seeking to move away from ad hoc and reactive crisis response
      mechanisms toward a more proactive drought preparedness, planning, and management approach.

      There were considerable short- and long-term challenges that threatened to hamper the transition.
      For instance, the paucity of information available on the economic and social impacts of the
      drought made it difficult to draw up disaster preparedness plans. In addition, the responsibilities of
      different institutions for the various drought preparedness activities (e.g., vulnerability assessments,
      monitoring, and recovery) were ill-defined. To close these gaps, national and state dialogues were
      held with the aim of introducing an integrated National Drought Policy and highlighting specific
      priority areas for the institutions involved. Led by the Ministry of National Integration, these
      discussions resulted in the formalization of a National Drought Policy with three broad pillars:
        •	 Monitoring and forecasting/early warning activities
        •	 Vulnerability/resilience and impact assessments
        •	 Mitigation and response planning and measures

      The policy was piloted within regions most affected by the drought, and concrete adaptation
      plans were implemented at the regional and local levels. For example, in Northeast Brazil, an
      online drought monitor was launched, and tailored drought preparedness plans relevant to
      different environments were catalyzed and put in place—e.g., for river basins, urban water supply
      systems, and rural agricultural systems. Based on the forecasted severity of an upcoming drought
      and the affected geographical areas identified by the drought monitor, different preparedness
      activities are triggered.
      Source: Gutiérrez et al. 2014.




Medium- and long-term actions are needed to strengthen the country’s path
toward institutionalizing resilience through integrated disaster risk management
and climate change adaptation approaches. In the medium term, an empowered
CCNDPC offers a new model for implementing integrated DRM, one that requires
multi-sector coordination. A national program should be integrated within the broader
DRM and CCA policy frameworks, and empowerment of the CCNDPC should be


T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
8                                                                                                                    OVERVIEW




            facilitated by enabling legislation to carry out coordination and advisory roles at the
            central and provincial levels.

            To sustain economic growth and build climate resilience, there must be a long-term
            commitment to integrated water resource management and land-use planning.
            Vietnam needs to implement comprehensive water-use policies that maximize efficiency
            between and within sectors and that are appropriate across the country at the river
            basin or watershed level. To optimize efficiency within sectors, policy interventions
            should encourage adoption of water-saving and soil moisture–retaining technologies.
            Through area-based planning, DRM, community engagement efforts, and other
            interventions, policy tools should facilitate the “waterproofing” of economies. Policies
            should seek to reduce the socioeconomic impacts of extreme weather events, rainfall
            variability, and uncertainty.

            The actions listed and discussed below take account of the impacts at national, eco-
            regional, and community levels and bring a multi-hazard perspective to bear on
            climate change impacts and extreme events.



                 Short Term: Design, pilot, and standardize proven practices
                 Medium/Long Term: Scale up and institutionalize practices



    Smarter Disaster Preparedness,                                   Tools for Mainstreaming Resilience in
    Response, and Recovery                                           Development
    1.	 Integrated drought monitoring and warning                    5.	 Systems to enable integrated water
        systems linking hydro-met systems to                             resource management (both supply and
        preparedness and response procedures                             demand side) and climate-sensitive land-
    2.	 Financial protection strategy for effective                      use planning at river basin, coastal zone,
        financing of response and recovery                               and watershed levels

    3.	 Adaptive social assistance systems to                        6.	 Climate-smart good agricultural practices
        support vulnerable household                                     from crops, livestock, aquaculture, and
                                                                         other productive assets
    4.	 Risk and vulnerability analysis for target
        areas and populations to provide location-                   7.	 Inclusive, community-based approaches
        specific and effective last-mile delivery of                     for DRM and CCA, and skilled human
        support                                                          resources to implement them
                                                                     8.	 Empowerment of vulnerable populations to
                                                                         access available risk reduction opportunities
                                                                         to enhance risk resilience and livelihoods

Sources: UN and GoV 2016; World Bank.



                                        T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
OVERVIEW                                                                                       9




1.	Balance investments in modernizing hydro-meteorological monitoring and
   forecast systems with processes to enable effective use of forecast and early
   warning for better disaster preparedness and response actions. Location-specific
   drought monitoring and seasonal forecasts are critical to improving the effectiveness
   of drought mitigation measures for agriculture. Timely and accurate information
   is critical for rural communities; there must be better operational guidelines for
   issuing warnings connected to a drought monitoring system. Translating weather
   and early warning information into different sets of user advisories will ensure more
   efficient use of information. It will also maximize benefits of favorable weather
   conditions and reduce the adverse impacts of hazardous weather events. Advisories
   that are linked to well-designed preparedness plans and response protocols are
   an essential element of proactive risk management.

2.	Devise a national financial protection strategy so that the government can
   better plan for the efficient financing of rapid response and recovery in the
   aftermath of disasters. A cost-effective financial protection strategy builds on
   an optimal combination of financial instruments that allows disaster losses to be
   absorbed. The mix of instruments could include contingency budgets, multi-year
   national and local disaster reserves, contingent credit, and risk transfer instruments
   such as insurance. International experience shows that if large-scale agricultural
   insurance is properly implemented as a public-private partnership, it can smooth
   agricultural income during droughts and other extreme weather events and thereby
   provide protection for vulnerable populations (see box O.3 for an example). It is
   also important to thoroughly review the policy, legal, and operational frameworks
   for the disaster reserve funds, as well as the funds’ actual operations, particularly
   in drought-hit provinces where existing funds were not used effectively.

3.	Use social assistance programs that provide livelihood support to help people
   recover from disasters. Regular social assistance programs like cash transfers
   and public work programs buffer individuals from shocks; they also equip them
   to improve their livelihoods and create opportunities to build a better life for
   themselves and their families. Some countries have successfully adapted these
   programs and their delivery systems to make them more responsive to disasters,
   and such solutions are also being considered in Vietnam. Under a pilot program
   currently being carried out in Can Tho City, the local social assistance delivery
   system is being strengthened and adapted so that in the event of flooding it can
   scale up operations and deliver assistance to flood-affected households.
   Institutionally, the role of Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MoLISA)
   and its social assistance portfolio and programs would need to be elevated within
   the overall national DRM framework. This would allow MoLISA to play a meaningful
   role in DRM, and by extension create an enabling environment for post-disaster


T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
10                                                                                                                     OVERVIEW




                social assistance. Example 1 in box O.4 describes ongoing social protection work
                in Tra Vinh Province in the Mekong Delta.



     BOX O.3: Public-Private Partnership in Agricultural Disaster Insurance in China

     China has implemented many policy measures to strengthen agriculture insurance. These
     include (i) providing a legal foundation for the management of agriculture insurance operations;
     (ii) providing premium subsidies for certain crops covered by insurance; and (iii) providing tax
     benefits for agriculture insurance operators. In addition, China is in the process of establishing
     a more mature catastrophe insurance framework. An agriculture insurance disaster risk reserve
     system has been established as protection against the risk of major agricultural disaster. Under
     this system, insurance companies set aside reserves at a defined ratio to the agriculture insurance
     premium and accrued underwriting profit, to gradually establish a mechanism for dealing with
     agricultural disaster shocks.

     To improve insurance coverage and compensation standards for large-scale farmers, agricultural
     disaster insurance will be piloted in a total of 200 major grain-producing counties in 2017–2018.
     These pilot counties mainly plant rice, wheat, and corn, and are located in 13 major grain-
     producing provinces, including the top three producers, Heilongjiang, Henan, and Shandong.
     As post-disaster reconstruction is mostly financed by the state, the disaster insurance system
     is designed to ease the government’s financial burdens.

     In 2016, about 26 insurance companies operating at the agricultural insurance market offered
     about 170 types of insurance products covering main crops, cash crops, livestock, forest, fruits,
     vegetables, medicinal herbs, and local agricultural products. In this successful public-private
     partnership model, from 2014 to 2016, the average agricultural insurance coverage amount
     accounted for 20 percent of agricultural output value. Moreover, 9.67 percent of direct economic
     loss of agricultural production was covered by the compensation amount of RMB 26.7 billion,
     which is seven times the amount of government relief funds.
     Sources: OECD 2015; State Council of China 2017; XinhuaNet, “Chinese Counties to Pilot Agricultural Disaster
     Insurance,” May 31, 2017, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-05/31/c_136328581.htm.




            4.	Undertake a thorough analysis of risks and vulnerabilities. Different risks are
               faced by different sectors (agriculture, water management, and natural forests)
               and different regions (for example, the Mekong Delta and Central Highlands),
               and these differences have to be understood to properly tailor risk reduction.
               Vietnam has to shift focus from post-disaster crisis management to pre-disaster risk
               management for drought and SWI, just as it has done for other more frequent and
               rapid-onset disasters. Factors in different eco-regions that compound communities’
               vulnerability—for example, population density and rice monoculture practice—have
               to be taken into account. A more comprehensive nationwide risk and vulnerability


                                          T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
OVERVIEW                                                                                                           11




      BOX O.4: Examples of Ongoing Activities In Vietnam to Support Integrated DRM Across
      Sectors

      1. Adaptive Social Protection Feasibility Assessment for Tra Vinh Province in Mekong
      Delta: Since January 2016, more than 2 million people in 18 provinces in southern Vietnam
      have been affected by the El Niño–linked drought and saltwater intrusion crisis. The capacity
      of the government and communities to manage the impact of the adverse climate conditions
      was limited by fragmented sectoral approaches and institutional arrangements; as a result,
      there was no policy integration, and the serious socioeconomic and environmental effects of
      the crisis were exacerbated. Efforts are now under way to adapt social assistance programs
      to provide livelihood support to affected people to help them recover from climate disasters.
      For example, Tra Vinh—one of the 18 provinces to declare a state of emergency during the
      crisis—is now piloting the World Bank’s Social Assistance System Strengthening Project (SASSP).
      In collaboration with MoLISA and the Tra Vinh Department of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs
      (DoLISA), the World Bank is currently assessing the feasibility of developing adaptive social
      protection (ASP) in Tra Vinh. Building upon and leveraging the work already undertaken on
      flooding (a rapid-onset disaster) in neighboring Can Tho City, the Tra Vinh engagement focuses on
      both flooding and drought (slow-onset disaster). The objective is to better prepare the provinces
      to manage household disaster risk. Specifically, it is intended to help to integrate MoLISA and
      social assistance into ASP and move Vietnam toward more integrated DRM.

      2. Water Balance Assessment in Ninh Thuan Province in South Central Vietnam: To improve
      the institutional framework and technical capabilities for better drought preparedness in Ninh
      Thuan Province, and to assess gaps in and opportunities for water resources management, a
      preliminary assessment of water resources availability was conducted in the Dinh River basin in
      2015–2016. In view of DARD’s (Department of Agriculture and Rural Development’s) 2020–2030
      Agriculture Development Plan (pending the government of Vietnam’s approval) for new reservoir
      construction in the province, new water supply alternatives have to be identified to make Ninh
      Thuan’s water supply systems more resilient to extreme weather conditions. In October 2016, the
      Water Partnership Program (WPP) approved a work plan to enhance drought/climate resilience
      with full technical support from government counterparts acting at national and provincial levels,
      including NAWAPI (National Center for Water Resources Planning and Investigation). The program
      has undertaken water system analysis in the entire Dinh River basin. It addresses water use across
      sectors (hydropower, irrigation, urban/rural water supply, and aquaculture) and covers both surface
      water and groundwater sources. Keeping environmental constraints and minimum supply cost in
      mind, the ultimate objectives are to determine the optimal size of reservoirs (present and future)
      and the optimal level of groundwater extractions to meet current and future demands.

      3. Supporting Sustainable Coffee Production and Rejuvenation in Central Highlands: Climate
      change–induced higher temperatures and frequent dry spells have significantly affected coffee
      yields in the Central Highlands. To facilitate a sustainable transformation in coffee production that
      would increase farmers’ income while reducing negative environmental impacts, a component of
      the Vietnam Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (VnSAT) is under way. A total of 62,000


                                                                                               box continues next page


T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
12                                                                                                                     OVERVIEW




     small-scale coffee plantations were selected in five target provinces in the Central Highlands
     to promote good farm management practices, increase adoption of water-saving technologies
     and tree management, and train farmer organizations and cooperatives. The objective is to
     integrate DRM into all these activities while helping provinces to improve coffee production.
     In 2016, VnSAT provided training on “three reductions, three gains” (3R3G) and “one must,
     five reductions” (1M5R) cultivation techniques. 3R3G refers to reduction in three inputs (seed,
     chemicals, and water) and gains in three outputs (productivity, quality, and economic efficiency).
     1M5R refers to use of registered seeds and reductions in five inputs—seed, chemical fertilizer,
     pesticide, water use, and post-harvest losses. In May 2017, an assessment of coffee planters
     who had received training revealed that Dak Lak and Lam Dong Provinces achieved positive
     results in general, though some criteria were not met.
     Note: The three examples above are the most recent activities supported by GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster
     Reduction and Recovery) to strengthen and integrate DRM into ongoing larger World Bank–supported projects.




                analysis, carried out at commune level (as mandated under the government’s
                community-based DRM program) will identify the priorities and provide solutions
                for a more efficient last-mile delivery of support for risk reduction and adaptation.

            5.	In deltas, river basins, and other ecosystems, work to coordinate integrated
               water resources management and appropriate land use across the water,
               energy, and agriculture sectors. The interlinked impacts of development from
               various sectors, and the efficacy of different investments in the face of climate
               change and dynamic upstream development, remain poorly understood in these
               highly complex environments. More generally, a sustainable urban and rural water
               supply will require province- and basin-wide integrated planning in addition to
               new technical and institutional solutions, given that groundwater and surface
               water are two major and separate water sources. Local communities affected by
               water insecurity need to become more involved in decision making about water
               management, and provinces should develop their own integrated water resource
               management plans. Example 2 in box O.4 describes a project to assess water
               balance in the Dinh River basin in Ninh Thuan Province in South Central Vietnam.

            6.	Climate-smart agriculture practices should be more widely adopted. Climate-
               smart agriculture (CSA) leverages good agricultural practice (GAP) and integrates the
               three dimensions of sustainable development (economic, social, and environmental)
               by jointly addressing food security and climate challenges. While rice remains
               Vietnam’s dominant food staple, its importance in the national economy and diet
               is declining; policy makers should therefore consider forward-looking approaches
               to enable flexible land-use planning based on agro-ecological suitability, likely
               climate change impact, and risks and profitability to the producers. Existing policies

                                          T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
OVERVIEW                                                                                        13




     and incentives that encourage rice production in marginal areas need revisiting.
     To reduce the risk that climate change poses to agriculture, it is also important
     to identify the exposure, sensitivity, and vulnerability of different eco-regions and
     take appropriate measures to meet their specific needs. Various short-, medium-,
     and long-term solutions for increasing the adaptive capacities and resilience of
     communities are available, revolving around early warning and climate information
     services, “designer” crop varieties, adjustments to cropping calendars and intensities,
     proper natural resource management (water, soils, forests, aquaculture), diversification
     (rice-shrimp; salt- and drought-tolerant fruit trees; grass/fodder and vegetable
     intercropping; multi-species fish culture; livestock), and improved information and
     knowledge dissemination. Investment in research and development and continuous
     technology generation are important with effective information dissemination.
     Example 3 in box O.4 describes an ongoing activity under the Vietnam Sustainable
     Agriculture Transformation Project (VnSAT) to promote sustainable agriculture by
     helping small-scale coffee farmers in the Central Highlands to increase income
     while reducing negative environmental impacts. Box O.5 gives an example of
     how farmers in Thailand benefited from the government’s policy to restrict winter
     dry-season rice cultivation as an emergency response to climate disaster.

7.	Use community-based approaches—including investments, capacity building,
   and planning activities—to promote the implementation of resilience measures.
   Community-based approaches enable genuine participation in decision making
   across all sectors and can be implemented as stand-alone projects or as part of
   larger-scale investment programs. Experience shows that mainstreaming DRM and
   CCA in socioeconomic development plans needs to happen first in communes,
   where budgets are small but risk and vulnerability reduction can be achieved.
   Several international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) have supported
   local planning in communes and at higher administrative levels.7 This approach
   has proved successful when carried out as part of community-based projects in
   provinces with high levels of poverty, significant climate-related vulnerabilities,
   and limited financial and human resources. Given that the drought-stricken areas
   involve many micro-climate zones, the planning of recovery investments should
   involve the participation of stakeholders at the commune level. In this way solutions
   can be tailored to specific circumstances.

8.	Identify vulnerable populations and communities that are at most risk to
   climate change and support communities by empowering individuals. Livelihoods
   can be improved by providing timely information and adequate training about
   good agricultural practices and opportunities available for risk reduction and
   mitigation. Communities can also be empowered through building farmers’ groups,

7	    See United Nations Vietnam (2016).


T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
14                                                                                                                     OVERVIEW




     BOX O.5: Restricting Rice Production and Sales as Emergency Response in Thailand

     Thailand’s rice harvest dipped to its lowest in nine years in 2016 due to El Niño–caused water
     shortages. The following measures were taken to manage the water crisis:
      •	 A shift from rice to corn production: The government worked with private associations,
         including the Thai Feed Mills Association, the Thai Seed Trade Association, and the Bank for
         Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC), to encourage farmers in irrigated areas
         to shift from marketing year (MY) 2016/17 off-season rice production to corn production.
         Close to 0.3 million hectares (ha) of farmland located in the northern and northeastern
         regions was targeted to reduce off-season rice supply by 1.25 million metric tons (MT) and
         increase corn production by 1.4 million MT. Participating farmers are eligible for a loan of
         B 4, 000 per rai (US$714 per ha) from the BAAC.
      •	 Stabilization of domestic rice prices: In November 2016, the cabinet approved the On-Farm
         Rice Pledging Program for fragrant and glutinous rice (for farmers) and the Interest-Rate
         Subsidy Program (for millers/traders) with the aim of keeping about half the newly harvested
         fragrant and white rice off the market in order to stabilize domestic prices. Participating
         farmers receive a direct payment of B 13,000 per MT of pledged fragrant rice (US$371 per
         MT). Nonparticipating farmers receive a direct payment of B 2,000 per MT (US$57 per MT).

     The restriction on winter dry-season rice cultivation was lifted following abundant rainfall in
     early 2017, which replenished major reservoirs supplying the agriculture sector and resulted in
     a remarkable recovery in rice crop acreage (estimated increase of 975,000 ha) and vegetative
     vigor compared to 2016.
     Sources: USDA Foreign Agricultural Service 2017; GAIN 2016, 2017.




                 improving gender and overall equality (by involving women and youth in local
                 development), encouraging good governance, and promoting cooperation from
                 government agencies. Such inclusive approaches also help vulnerable groups and
                 individuals to understand their rights, responsibilities, and entitlements. For
                 example, a dynamic partnership between the government, an international NGO,
                 and local communities enabled farmers in Thanh Hoa Province in the North Central
                 Coast region of Vietnam to successfully form the Water User Cooperative (WUC)
                 to manage their water resources.8 Set up by the Cam Phu Commune as part of
                 the Thai Long Dam Project, the WUC mobilized local farmers to actively participate
                 and manage the local resources in a sustainable manner, leading to increased
                 government responsiveness and accountability. The farmers were fully involved
                 in decision making regarding water distribution plans and schedules, and in
                 resolving conflicts. The WUC benefited people at multiple levels—for example,
                 by promoting better access to irrigation and drinking water through controlled


            8	    See Sinh (2002).


                                          T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
OVERVIEW                                                                                                     15




    water supply. This, in turn, reduced the work load of men, women, and children,
    as farm activities became easier and collection of water for domestic use became
    less time-consuming. Farmers gained better incomes due to increased crop yields,
    crop diversification, and livestock and fish farming. For an example of a comprehensive
    development project in China, see box O.6.



      BOX O.6: Helping Chinese Farmers Adapt to Climate Change Through Comprehensive
      Agricultural Development (CAD)

      Irrigated Agriculture Intensification Loan Project III (IAIL3) in China was a large-scale initiative
      under Comprehensive Agricultural Development (CAD) implemented by the State Office of
      Comprehensive Agricultural Development (SOCAD) within the Ministry of Finance. Activities
      under CAD are funded by the central government of China to support agricultural and ecological
      development, strengthen agricultural infrastructure, ensure national food security, advance
      agro-processing production, and increase farmers’ income. Building on the success of IAIL1
      and IAIL2, and partly financed through a World Bank loan, IAIL3 aimed to enhance adaptation
      of agriculture and water management practices by increasing awareness about climate change
      and through capacity building. It was implemented from 2005 to 2010 in five provinces—Hebei,
      Jiangsu, Anhui, Shandong, and Henan—in the 3H Plain of the Yellow, Huaihe, and Haihe River
      basins. The 3H Plain is the major agricultural zone in China. SOCAD incorporated climate change
      adaptation actions into IAIL3 with additional funding by the Global Environmental Facility
      (GEF) through the Mainstreaming Climate Change Adaptation in Irrigated Agriculture project.
      Engineering, agronomic, and management measures were taken to promote water saving,
      increase agricultural yield, and secure farmers’ livelihood, as summarized below:
        •	 Yield improvement. Farmers’ income was increased by the use of early maturing and
           drought- and pest-resistant varieties of wheat to improve yields. Greenhouses were built
           through the project to encourage farmers to grow off-season vegetables, thus increasing
           their income.
        •	 Infrastructure improvement. Water-stopping walls and sluices were introduced as an
           adaptive water-saving measure. The walls help maintain the water table in addition to
           containing discharge of harmful chemicals into water bodies, and the sluices enable storage
           of irrigation water.
        •	 Education and outreach. Expert teams organized farmer training to raise awareness of and
           build capacity for climate change adaptation. Experts from China Agriculture University
           and the Home of Rural Women, a nonprofit organization, delivered targeted training to
           women, particularly addressing their active role in the project and adaptation activities.
        •	 Farmers’ participation. To encourage active participation of farmers, specifically women,
           water user associations (WUAs) and specialized agricultural associations were promoted.
           To encourage farmers to take ownership of managing and maintaining the facilities and
           adaptation methods, irrigation facilities were constructed and handed over to WUAs.
      Source: Wang and Li 2013.




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
16                                                                                                       OVERVIEW




     Recommended Actions
     A holistic and integrated approach that includes both structural and nonstructural
     measures is proposed to address impacts of drought and SWI and to promote
     longer-term resilience measures across key sectors. Tackling the impacts of all
     types of disaster risks nationally will require well thought-out strategic planning and
     coordinated implementation of medium- and long-term measures from a multi-hazard
     perspective. Such planning must be backed by sound local knowledge, scientific
     understanding (for targeting and prioritizing investments for technology development
     and adoption), infrastructure creation, and capacity building. To effectively address
     the drought and SWI, an integrated approach using both structural and nonstructural
     interventions (policies, capacity building, information, technologies, infrastructure,
     and services) is needed.

     Table O.2 provides options drawn from global good practices as well as from Vietnam’s
     experience with the 2015–2016 drought and SWI. To develop location-specific action
     plans (short and longer term) for different geographic areas based on their vulnerability
     to external shocks (such as extreme weather) and socioeconomic characteristics, these
     preliminary recommendations should be further prioritized and refined.

     Some recommendations are grouped together in the table below, but they can be
     further expanded as necessary. Actions that are needed in the immediate or short
     term (less than two years) are given under the “short term” time frame. Those that
     require a longer implementation period (more than two years) are addressed under
     the “medium/long term” time frame. In the table, the time frames are indicated by
     green bars. When action begins in the short term and continues over a longer term,
     the green bar spans both time frames.




                            T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
                                                                                               TABLE O.2: Summary of Recommended Actions Based on National and International Experiences to Address Drought and SWI and to
                                                                                               Promote Short- and Longer-Term Resilience
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OVERVIEW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Proposed Time Frame
                                                                                               Sectoral
                                                                                                                         Options to be considered based on national and global good practices                    Short Term        Medium/Long Term
                                                                                                Scope
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (less than 2 years)       (2–5 years)
                                                                                                                   Institutional
                                                                                                                     •	 Coordinate programs and investments across ministries and agencies at national and
                                                                                                                        subnational levels
                                                                                                                    •	 Establish high-level interministerial commission to oversee drought and SWI risk
                                                                                                                       management activities
                                                                                                                    •	 Improve institutional capacities and accountability to ensure effective response to
                                                                                                                       future crises and longer-tem resilience
                                                                                                                   Social
                                                                                                                    •	 Integrate drought and SWI resilience into socioeconomic development plans
                                                                                                                    •	 Enable household-level recovery through effectively delivered social assistance and
                                                                                                                       promote community-based approaches
                                                                                                                   Capacity Building




                                                                                                  Cross-sectoral
                                                                                                                    •	 Empower all stakeholders, especially vulnerable groups, through capacity building
                                                                                                                       and training at all levels (e.g., administrative/technical staff, community level)




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
                                                                                                                    •	 Involve local communities, especially vulnerable groups, in decision making and
                                                                                                                       community asset building
                                                                                                                    •	 Enable productive vertical and horizontal linkages between stakeholders through
                                                                                                                       community-based approach
                                                                                                                   Financial
                                                                                                                     •	 Develop a viable financial protection mechanism for emergency response and
                                                                                                                        recovery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   table continues next page
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Proposed Time Frame
                                                                                               Sectoral
                                                                                                                         Options to be considered based on national and global good practices                      Short Term        Medium/Long Term
                                                                                                Scope
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (less than 2 years)       (2–5 years)
                                                                                                                   •	 Remove inconsistencies in existing subsidy policies being implemented, particularly
                                                                                                                      those that encourage rice production in high-risk areas
                                                                                                                   •	 Identify and pilot a functional insurance program such as weather index–based
                                                                                                                      insurance to protect affected households and small value-chain enterprises from
                                                                                                                      financial impacts of drought, floods, and SWI
                                                                                                                   •	 Provide adequate resources for both short- and longer-term priority activities and
                                                                                                                      improved impact monitoring and accountability
                                                                                                                   •	 Support private and public agribusiness enterprises and farmers’ cooperative
                                                                                                                      organizations
                                                                                                                   •	 Consider protective financing to establish shrimp breeding enterprises and
                                                                                                                      greenhouses in Mekong Delta




                                                                                                 Cross-sectoral
                                                                                                                  Hydro-meteorological
                                                                                                                   •	 Develop detailed current and projected risk profiles for different regions for natural
                                                                                                                      hazards such as drought, SWI, floods, landslides, coastal storms, and wildfires
                                                                                                                   •	 Implement user-focused hydro-meteorological services, improve medium- and
                                                                                                                      longer-duration reliable weather forecasting, and raise awareness of the threat from
                                                                                                                      related hazards among all stakeholders
                                                                                                                   •	 Produce and continually validate maps of high-risk areas for early warning and
                                                                                                                      advisory services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     table continues next page




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OVERVIEW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proposed Time Frame
                                                                                               Sectoral
                                                                                                                                    Options to be considered based on national and global good practices                       Short Term        Medium/Long Term
                                                                                                Scope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (less than 2 years)       (2–5 years)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OVERVIEW




                                                                                                                             •	 Improve surface water and groundwater resource monitoring (availability, flows, quality,
                                                                                                                                and salinity levels) and management; improve emergency water allocation at basin
                                                                                                                                and subbasin scale, including transboundary and inter-basin water transfer initiatives
                                                                                                                             •	 Coordinate integrated water resource management across the water, energy, and
                                                                                                                                agriculture sectors and for different purposes
                                                                                                                             •	 Maximize the benefits from existing urban and rural water supply and irrigation
                                                                                                                                infrastructures using climate-resilient and efficient water storage, supply, on-farm
                                                                                                                                irrigation, and drainage systems for sustainable water use
                                                                                                                             •	 Conduct economic and financial analysis of all water-related activities to assess
                                                                                                                                productivity and efficiency; conduct water systems analysis to serve as a modern
                                                                                                                                planning tool
                                                                                                                             •	 Consider water charges to reduce wasteful use of water
                                                                                                                             •	 Ensure appropriate water management practices during high-salinity period
                                                                                                                             •	 Implement watershed management and water-saving technologies in upstream




                                                                                                 Water Resource Management
                                                                                                                                provinces to allow higher water flow to coastal provinces
                                                                                                                             •	 Support groundwater recharge practices in suitable locations as well as rainwater




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
                                                                                                                                harvesting
                                                                                                                             •	 Support communities and local authorities in developing suitable desalination plants
                                                                                                                             •	 Improve wastewater treatment and biosecurity standards to better control shrimp
                                                                                                                                disease as part of GAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 table continues next page
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Proposed Time Frame
                                                                                               Sectoral
                                                                                                                      Options to be considered based on national and global good practices                        Short Term        Medium/Long Term
                                                                                                Scope
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (less than 2 years)       (2–5 years)
                                                                                                               •	 Ensure availability and affordability of food stocks in the affected areas and maintain
                                                                                                                  strategic grain reserves
                                                                                                               •	 Shift away from a current emphasis on rice production in favor of more diversified
                                                                                                                  agriculture and cash-cropping systems
                                                                                                               •	 Identify and deploy location-specific climate-smart agriculture and GAP, including
                                                                                                                  appropriate land use, to reduce the damage from drought, floods, and SWI; facilitate
                                                                                                                  compulsory adoption through improved policies and investments
                                                                                                               •	 Support R&D and promote the use of cultivars tolerant of drought, salt, and water
                                                                                                                  submergence
                                                                                                               •	 Protect animal assets from these disasters by improving fodder and feed stock
                                                                                                                  availability, pasture management, drinking water, and veterinary services
                                                                                                               •	 In the highlands, improve tree cover in watershed areas and promote integrated




                                                                                                 Agriculture
                                                                                                                  crops, agro-forestry, and livestock mixed farming systems
                                                                                                               •	 In the coastal areas, facilitate transition from freshwater crops to sustainable brackish
                                                                                                                  water aquaculture
                                                                                                               •	 In the Mekong Delta, provide economic incentives and other support services to
                                                                                                                  seafood value chains and households converting salinity-affected rice fields into
                                                                                                                  integrated rice- shrimp and other aquaculture farming
                                                                                                               •	 Enhance farm-to-market links to strengthen value chains, including improvement of
                                                                                                                  storage facilities
                                                                                                               •	 Employ targeted preventive interventions for risk and vulnerability reduction (for
                                                                                                                  example, protecting seed reserves, improved agricultural extension services, etc.)




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OVERVIEW
OVERVIEW                                                                                       21




Support from the World Bank
The World Bank can offer both financial and technical assistance to support
the government of Vietnam (GoV) in implementing resilient development
investments. Drawing on lessons from global good practices and from tested and
proven measures in Vietnam, as well as on country-specific knowledge from an active
and long-standing investment portfolio, the Bank has developed priority actions
for the short, medium, and long term. Using proven global practices and involving
stakeholders at all levels will encourage adoption of the identified measures and
thus help to build resilience to drought and SWI.

The World Bank’s development assistance objectives fit into the longer-term
recovery time frame. The emergency response plan prepared by the United Nations
and the GoV provided both a summary of recommended actions for the humanitarian
phase (three to five months) and recommendations for longer-term recovery. An initial
review of the Bank’s active portfolio focused on several of the actions listed in the
emergency response plan’s recovery table, including measures to strengthen priority
infrastructure and to build capacity for greater climate resilience in the government
and among local communities. Considering that a portion of recovery could be
supported by reprogramming from existing development allocations, there is also an
urgent need to transform risk management over the longer term so that the normal
flow of development interventions is not jeopardized. Efforts that build on or address
gaps in the country’s ongoing programs to promote resilience will have immediate
and substantial benefits for future economic growth.




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
22                                                                                                 OVERVIEW




     References



     Eckardt, Sebastian, Viet Tuan Dinh, Philip B. O'Keefe, Sandeep Mahajan, and Nga Quynh
        Nguyen. 2016. “Special Focus: Promoting Healthy and Productive Aging in Vietnam.”
        World Bank Group, Washington, DC.

     FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2016. AQUASTAT main
        database. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/data/query/index.html?lang=en.

     GAIN (Global Agricultural Information Network), USDA Foreign Agricultural Service. 2016.
        “Thailand: Grain and Feed Update: October 2016.” GAIN Report TH6124. October
        31. https://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/Grain%20and%20
        Feed%20Update_Bangkok_Thailand_10-31-2016.pdf.

     ———. 2017. “Thailand: Grain and Feed Annual, 2017.” GAIN Report TH7032. March
       15. https://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/Grain%20and%20
       Feed%20Annual_Bangkok_Thailand_3-16-2017.pdf.

     Gutiérrez, Ana Paula A., Nathan L. Engle, Erwin De Nys, Carmen Molejón, and Eduardo
        Sávio Martins. 2014. “Drought Preparedness in Brazil.” Weather and Climate
        Extremes 3: 95–106.

     Hallegatte, Stephane, Mook Bangalore, Laura Bonzanigo, Marianne Fay, Tamaro Kane,
         Ulf Gerrit Narloch, Julie Rozenberg, David Olivier Treguer, and Adrien Camille Vogt-
         Schilb. 2015. “Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on Poverty.”
         Climate Change and Development Series. World Bank Group, Washington, DC.

     MARD (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development). 2016. “Presentation on Summary
       Report on Drought and SWI Situation, Impacts, and Response Plan for 2016–2020.”

     OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2015. “Disaster Risk
       Financing: A Global Survey of Practices and Challenges.” OECD Publishing, Paris.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264234246-en.

     Sinh, B. T. 2002. “Government and NGO Partnership in Managing Community-based
         Water Resources in Vietnam: A Case Study of Thai Long Dam Project. Business
         Strategy and the Environment 11: 119–129.

     Standard & Poor’s, Global Credit Portal. 2015. “Storm Alert: Natural Disasters Can
         Damage Sovereign Creditworthiness.” September 10. http://www.standardandpoors.
         com/RATINGSDIRECT.

     State Council of China. 2017. “Chinese Counties to Pilot Agricultural Disaster
         Insurance.” May. http://english.gov.cn/state_council/ministries/2017/05/31/
         content_281475672465534.htm.


                      T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
R eferences                                                                                    23




UN (United Nations) and GoV (Government of Vietnam). 2016.
   “Viet Nam: Emergency Response Plan 2016/17, Update on
   Recovery—October 2016.” http://reliefweb.int/report/viet-nam/
   viet-nam-emergency-response-plan-201617-update-recovery-october-2016.

United Nations Vietnam. 2016. “Details for Viet Nam: Drought and Saltwater Intrusion—
    Situation Update No. 3 (as of 15 June 2016).” http://www.un.org.vn/en/publications/
    government-agency-publications/doc_details/507-viet-nam-drought-and-saltwater-
    intrusion-situation-update-no-3-as-of-15-june-2016.html.

USDA Foreign Agricultural Service. 2017. “Thailand: Rice Production Rebounds Following
   El Niño.” Commodity Intelligence Report. February 15. https://pecad.fas.usda.gov/
   highlights/2017/02/Thailand/index.htm.

Wang, Lanying, and Qun Li. 2013. “World Resources Report Case Study. Adaptation to
   Climate Change in Action in China’s Agricultural Development.” World Resources
   Institute, Washington DC. http://www.worldresourcesreport.org.

World Bank. 2010. “Weathering the Storm: Options for Disaster Risk Financing in
   Vietnam.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and Global Water Partnership (GWP). 2014.
   “National Drought Management Policy Guidelines: A Template for Action (D. A.
   Wilhite).” Integrated Drought Management Program (IDMP) Tools and Guidelines
   Series 1. WMO, Geneva; and GWP, Stockholm. http://www.droughtmanagement.info/
   literature/IDMP_NDMPG_en.pdf.




T O W A R D I N T E G R AT E D D I S A S T E R R I S K M A N A G E M E N T I N V I E T N A M
