A Roof Over Our Heads




  Housing in Bulgaria


         October 2017
A Roof Over Our Heads
              Housing in Bulgaria




The Government of Bulgaria (GOB) is in the process of developing a new National Housing Strategy. This
World Bank ASA (Advisory Services and Analytics) was requested by GOB to complement their efforts,
and assist them in establishing strategic pillars to serve as the foundation of the forthcoming Strategy.


This is a short summary extracted from the full report titled “Bulgaria: Housing Sector Assessment.”
Currency: Bulgarian Lev (BGN) = 100 stotinki		   Exchange Rate: BGN 1 = 0.51 EUR (as of 2017)
CONTEXT
4       A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria




Bulgaria’s housing sector provides a window into the broader issues of the country’s social, political,
and economic transformation in the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region over the last 25 years. The
country’s transition has been difficult, and the Government of Bulgaria (GOB) has played an active
role in reforming the housing sector – starting in 2004 with a Housing Strategy, to more recent large-
scale initiatives to improve energy efficiency in residential buildings. Still, many challenges remain,
and while these challenges are not unique to the region, they appear to be more acute in Bulgaria.

Bulgaria consolidated its transition after most other transition economies, with the result that,
unlike other reformers, sustained economic growth took hold almost a decade later than it did
elsewhere. Indeed, it took 14 years for real per capita income to return to pre-transition levels. The
country suffered through hyperinflation, a financial crisis, and considerable political turmoil, falling
increasingly behind other reformers such as Hungary or Poland. Until the end of the century, Bulgaria
remained locked in a lower income status, and its economic performance diverged from other
reformers and its European Union (EU) neighbors. For example, if it had been able to stabilize in, say,
5 years rather than the 11 it took (1989-2000), and grow at the average rate, its per capita income
would be 40% higher than it is now.

Some evidence of how different things would be if Bulgaria’s transition legacy were less pronounced
is offered by its performance after it achieved political and economic stability in 2000. It experienced
the strongest growth record of the reforming economies for the next 6 years, just under 6% per
year, made significant progress in converging with average EU income levels, and was also granted
membership in the EU in 2007. Unfortunately, these more benevolent trends were disrupted by the
global financial crisis of 2008 when it experienced one of the sharpest slumps among transition
countries.1

One of the main reasons Bulgaria weathered the downturn badly was the bursting of its housing
bubble; it is still experiencing one of the deepest and longest persisting housing downturns among
transition countries.2 This downturn has been one of the main contributors to the increase in poverty
that occurred post-2008 as construction employment – one of the largest employers of low-skilled
workers – plummeted. Moreover, unlike the usual underlying causes of housing bubbles, in Bulgaria the
bubble was not caused by too much mortgage credit; the country continues to have the lowest share
of mortgage debt among transition countries. Instead, as this report will show, more fundamental
housing market obstacles are at play. Sectoral distortions slow the sector, increase costs, reduce
employment, and contribute to the country’s inability to close the income gap with the EU-28.

Besides the strong and somewhat disruptive legacy of Bulgaria’s transition, perhaps the most
important and closely related aspect of the country’s economic performance is its extreme age
distribution. It has become one of the oldest (ageing) societies in the world and, at the same time,
is experiencing one of the world’s sharpest reductions in population: a decline of 20% since the
transition began in 1989 – see Figure (i).




1
 Between 2008 and 2014, the global financial crisis and the subsequent Eurozone crisis led to annual growth in real per capita
income of just over 1%, and today Bulgaria remains the poorest EU member state with a per capita GDP of around 47% of the EU
average.
2
    Eurostat 2015.
                                                                                                                      Context           5


                                      Figure (i). Population growth from 2001-2013




                                                                                            Population 2013            Percent Change
                                                                                                0 - 50,000             2001 - 2013
                                                                                                50,001 - 100,000          < -10,0
                                                                                                100,001 - 500,000         -9,9 - -5,0
                                                                                                500,001 - 1,000,000       -4,9 - 0,0
                                                                                                                          > 0,0
                                                                                                > 1,000,000



                                                  Source: Cities in ECA, World Bank, 2016


Moreover, the United Nations (UN) predicts that the decline will intensify over the next generation.3
Neither of these qualities lead to an increase in housing demand; indeed, they have the opposite
effect. Why then study the performance of the housing sector when it appears to be one with
considerable over-supply?

One of the main reasons to do so is to achieve a better understanding of a seeming paradox: how
do housing costs rise relative to incomes – to a point where the country has the second highest
share of households burdened by high housing costs among all transition countries – when the total
population is both declining and aging? One would think that an over-supply of units relative to the
number of households would lead to a decrease, not increase, in prices. Moreover, the paradox is more
perplexing considering the low employment rate among the working age population. Bulgaria has the
third lowest share in employment among the working age population, i.e., those between 25 to 54
years of age, in transition economies, and a youth unemployment rate of 22%.4 If housing costs are
high compared to income levels, the opportunity costs of not working would be considerably higher
in a country where the largest household expense is so high. Similarly, the elderly tend to move less
frequently and usually have lower rather than increased demands for housing. To better understand
the paradox, one must also understand these following key aspects of Bulgaria’s housing sector:

-	 Since 2008, poverty rates have been on the rise and income gains for the bottom 40% of
   the population have slowed significantly. Over 40% of the population is at-risk-of-poverty5
       or social exclusion, and this problem is particularly prevalent among Roma families and other
       ethnic minorities.6
3
    It is expected that Bulgaria’s working age population will continue to shrink, by as much as by 30%, until 2050.
4
    Eurostat 2016 (http://www.tradingeconomics.com/bulgaria/youth-unemployment-rate).
5
    Eurostat definition of at-risk-of-poverty: those earning below 60% of median equalized income.
6
    World Bank; Bulgaria National Statistics Institute; EU-SILC.
6           A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria


-	 The country has a large stock of deteriorating multifamily residential buildings. It has
            the largest share of pre-1990s housing built by a centrally planned socialist state – which is
            questionable in terms of its quality, design, and location. A large proportion of the population is
            either unable to afford basic maintenance or has little incentive to do so.

-	 The 2008-2010 global financial crisis resulted in a large drop in house prices. The drop was
            30-50% since 2007 in many prime locations, which bankrupted many private developers, and
            resulted in many households suffering major losses in wealth and equity. The market is only now
            slowly recovering from the shock, but remains volatile.

All these factors – population decline, poverty, deteriorating housing stock, and the aftermath of the
financial crisis – have exacerbated the housing demand-supply imbalance. As a consequence:

-	 The cost of housing relative to prevailing income levels is very high, which makes it virtually
            impossible for households earning less than BGN 1000 (EUR 510) per month, i.e. those in the
            60th-70th income percentile, to purchase or rent any housing in the market. More than a third of
            young adults are unable to afford a house, and hence are continuing to live with parents or other
            family.7

-	 The number of informal and illegal settlements has been on the increase, with people living
            in poor quality housing and inadequate infrastructure.8 The situation is precarious for the Roma,
            more than 90% of whom are categorized as poor.

-	 Job mobility and corresponding productivity is very low,9 and emigration is high, particularly
            among the educated youth in whom the country has invested so much.




Moreover, Bulgaria’s housing market may in fact be in worse shape than its aggregate numbers
indicate. This is because there is no single housing market, but rather many different markets in
different parts of the country. The average figures obscure the huge variability that exists across
the country’s cities. In some places, such as Sofia, where productivity is higher and opportunities
more abundant, housing costs are very high relative to income. In other places, those with little to no
opportunity, the costs are very low and the housing is deserted.

These problems, at least in part, stem from the fact that Bulgaria followed the planning approach
used by the Former Soviet Union (FSU) more closely than did other transition economies outside
the FSU (and Albania). This approach created one of the most over-industrialized economies among
transition countries. It called for the creation and expansion of many cities that would not be so
large in a more market-oriented economy. The result today is that employment prospects are dim in
many locations where state-owned factories of the old regime have closed, and housing vacancies are
extremely high, with some villages and towns facing complete abandonment.

Not only are many of the cities in the “wrong place”, so too are many housing developments in the
wrong locations within cities. Bulgaria has city density patterns in which the population appears to
be dispersed to the outer parts of the city, rather than concentrated in the central city. While the
Bulgarian pattern is not as extreme as some of the other countries in the region, it does exist. This
distribution of the housing stock results in much longer commuting times, and also creates demand
7
    Ibid.
8
    National Report for Bulgaria on the Tenancy Law review, “TenLaw: Tenancy Law and Housing Policy in Multi-level Europe”.
9
 Between 2001 and 2011, only 380,000 people, or 5.1% of the total population, changed residence within Bulgaria (30% within the
same town, and 70% into a different town). Nearly half of all people who migrated internally moved to Sofia or Varna.
                                                                                                               Context           7


for new infrastructure while existing infrastructure is under-utilized, thus creating urban management
problems. More importantly, however, such spread-out cities reduce the agglomeration economies
that underlie the incentives to urbanize in the first place. This pattern of housing investment across
cities creates a situation of feast and famine. Those in desirable cities face intense competition, and
correspondingly high prices for units, while those in less attractive locations are trapped in units that
have little to no value and face problems with on-going maintenance and utility costs.

At the same time, public expenditure in the housing sector, and especially that targeted to lower
income and vulnerable groups, is a small fraction of the overall budget.10 Public social housing,
which constitutes less than 3% of the housing stock, is essentially an unfunded mandate. While the
legacy of the old regime suggests good reasons for moving away from publicly-provided housing,
international experiences shows that such housing can be an essential component of a city’s overall
development and social assistance strategy. Indeed, governments have a significant role in improving
the functioning of housing markets that is quite commonly overlooked – both at the national and
the local level.




10
     In 2013, little less than 1.5% of GDP went into government support of housing and community amenities and housing development.
Key Findings
  10           A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria




1 High vacancy rate, surplus, and overcrowding
             Massive vacancy

             Bulgaria has a very high incidence of vacant or “uninhabited” housing – some 1.2 million housing
             units, which is more than 30% of the country’s housing stock. The incidence of vacancy is 43%
             in rural areas, and 25% in urban areas (see Table (i)).11, 12

             Some of this might be attributed to declining populations in rural areas and small towns, and
             hence a declining housing demand for rent or purchase. Based on data from 2001 to 2011, all
             but two districts – Sofia (+10.3%), and Varna (+2.8%) – have witnessed net depopulation.13

                                       Table (i). Vacant dwelling units in Bulgaria, 2011


                                                               #                                       %
                                    Total                             Uninhabited or                        Uninhabited or
                 
                                   dwellings                          “vacant” dwellings                   “vacant” dwellings

       Total                       3 887 149                            1 220 416                                 31.4

       Urban                       2 566 601                             653 105                                  25.4

       Rural                       1 320 548                              567 311                                 43.0




       Sofia district               176 842                               85 277                                 48.22


       Sofia capital                607 473                              142 608                                 23.48


                                                 Source: 2011 Census, National Statistical Institute


               Another explanation for this high vacancy rate may lie in the data itself – from two aspects:
               First, these data are from 2011, one of the peak years of the global financial crisis in Bulgaria,
               when the property market was depressed. And second, the data on “uninhabited dwellings”
               collected by the National Statistical Institute (NSI) includes cottages, holiday homes, apartment
               hotels and such – more predominant along the Black Sea coast – which are not necessarily
               “housing units” in the traditional sense. So, the numbers might be a bit exaggerated.

               Still, while this may, in part, explain the numbers at the national level as well as in the declining
               towns and tourist destinations, it is puzzling to see such vacancy in otherwise growing and
               seemingly vibrant housing markets. For example, vacancy is 24% in Sofia capital, 48% in the
               surrounding Sofia district, 26% in Plovdiv district, and 30% in Varna district.

  11
       2011 Census, National Statistical Institute.
   “Uninhabited” houses, as defined by NSI, include vacation homes, apartment hotels etc. (more prevalent in the Black Sea coast) as
  12

  well as dilapidated housing that is unfit for habitation (prevalent in rural areas and small towns).
  13
       2011 Census, National Statistical Institute.
                                                                                                      Key F i n di ngs   11




        Housing “Surplus”

        There is a housing surplus in all districts of Bulgaria, which has grown from 677,053 units in
        2010 to 926,853 units in 2014 - see Figure (ii).

                                       Figure (ii). National housing surplus

          950000
                                                                                            899 209
          900000                                                                                               926 853


          850000


          800000


          750000                         714 000
                                                                           742 151
Units




          700000


          650000         677 053


          600000


          550000


          500000
                  2010                     2011                     2012                      2013               2014
                                                                    Year


                         Source: Population and dwelling data from NSI; household size data from Eurostat


        The national data for each district show that there is a weak negative correlation between
        housing surplus and higher district populations, meaning that the housing surpluses in less
        populated districts are of greater magnitude, as shown in Figure (iii). This may, at least in part,
        be attributed to the significant population decline in smaller towns located in less populated
        districts. However, even the smaller of the major cities (Varna and Burgas) have large surpluses
        compared to Sofia and Plovdiv, indicative of the net effects of migration on a national scale.
12                                             A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria


                                                                 Figure (iii). Housing surplus as a percentage of district housing stock compared to
                                                                                district population as percentage of national population


                                                                20


                                                                18                             Sofia (City)
        District Population as Percent of National Population




                                                                16


                                                                14


                                                                12


                                                                10
                                                                                                     Plovdiv

                                                                8

                                                                                       R2 = 0.6751                      Varna
                                                                6                                                                                             Burgas
                                                                                                                                                                       Kyustendil
                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                      Montana
                                                                         Blagoevgrad
                                                                 2


                                                                0
                                                                     0                    10                    20                    30                     40               50
                                                                                    Housing Surplus as a Percent of Total District Housing Stock

                                                                                Source: Population and dwelling data from NSI; household size data from Eurostat




                                                   High incidence of doubling-up and overcrowding

                                                   While the 3.9 million dwelling units for 3 million households might, at first glance, suggest a
                                                   “surplus”, the fact that 1.2 million of these units are uninhabited implies that, effectively, 3
                                                   million Bulgarian households are living in 2.7 million housing units.14 About 1.05 million people, or
                                                   15% of the population, live in dwellings that are shared by more than one family.15 In other words,
                                                   “doubling-up” is common, especially among lower income households in the larger urban centers:
                                                   often, up to 3 generations, or some 6-8 family members, live in a small 60 m2 apartment.

                                                   The national housing overcrowding rate is 41%. Among households at-risk-of-poverty, nearly half of
                                                   all people, 80% of children below 18 years, and 59% of young adults (aged 16-29 years), live in an
                                                   overcrowded house. Also, 82% of all tenants paying market-rate rent live in an overcrowded unit.16

                                                   The overcrowding rate in Bulgaria in both urban and rural areas is very high compared to the
                                                   EU-27 average (see Figure (iv)).

14
     2011 Census, National Statistical Institute.
15
     EU, National Report for Bulgaria, “TenLaw: Tenancy Law and Housing Policy in Multi-level Europe”, p. 40.
16
     Eurostat, 2015. http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/income-and-living-conditions/data/main-tables.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Key F i n di ngs                                                                 13


                                                                    Figure (iv). Overcrowding rate by degree of urbanization

         70

         60

         50

         40

         30

         20

         10

          0
               EU-27 (1)
                           Romania
                                     Poland
                                              Hungary
                                                        Latvia
                                                                 Bulgaria
                                                                            Slovakia
                                                                                       Greece
                                                                                                Italy
                                                                                                        Lithuania (2)
                                                                                                                        Czech Republic
                                                                                                                                         Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                    Estonia
                                                                                                                                                              Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                       Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                 Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                            Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          France
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ireland (3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Malta (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Croatia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Iceland (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Switzerland
                           Thinly populated areas                                                                                        Intermediate density areas                                                                                               Densely populated areas
                                                                                                                                                      Source: Eurostat (2011) 17




2 Poor quality of old stock, potential seismic risk
              Age and quality

              Most of Bulgaria’s housing stock comprises old socialist-era multi-family buildings, many of
              which are made of prefabricated panels blocks. More than three-fourths of apartments in the
              country are in buildings that are older than 30 years – see Figure (v).18

           Figure (v). Number of housing units by construction materials and period of construction19



   300,000

   250,000

   200,000

   150,000

   100,000

        50,000

               -
                                     - 1949
                                     <                              1950-1959                                   1960-1969                                          1970-1979                                    1980-1989                               1990-1999                                          2000-2011
                                 Panels                                     cement concrete                                                                     Brick                                 Other
                                                                                                                                                     Source: World Bank, 2013
   17
      Eurostat (http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/File:Overcrowding_ rate,_by_degree_of_
   urbanisation,_2011_(%25).png).
   18
        World Bank, Bulgaria housing stock overview, 2013.
   19
        World Bank, Bulgaria housing stock overview, 2013.
14    A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria


Panel buildings, shown in Plate (i), are very prevalent, with some 11,128 of them housing 2 million Bulgarians.

                                         Plate (i). Panel buildings

                         Panel buildings in Sofia (left) and Blagoevgrad (right).




      Lack of maintenance

      While the age of a building may not in itself be a problem per se, the lack of maintenance
      of these buildings over the last several decades has led to their rapid deterioration. This is
      attributed to a combination of several factors: a lacking sense of responsibility for common
      areas and elements of the building, non-payment of fees by absentee owners of vacant units
      and some of the poorer residents, differences in income levels among residents, dissatisfaction
      about the buildings’ conditions and service levels, and a general apathy resulting from a sense
      of entitlement that the state will take care and pay for the common areas, and the absence
      of properly functioning Homeowners Associations (HOAs). The result is all too common: leaking
      roofs, damaged facades with fallen plaster, dark and ill-maintained stairwells and hallways,
      and leaking water and sewer pipes in the basements. Fixing these buildings will require major
      capital repairs and entail huge costs, which many apartment owners cannot afford.

      Further, while the Condominium Law obliges HOAs to maintain their buildings, it does not
      ‘mandate’ the establishment of an HOA. The supporting legal framework or funding capacity of
      the public sector to intervene or enforce building management and maintenance is very limited.
      Management companies are increasingly coming into the fore, but they are unregulated/
      unlicensed, and hesitate to service older buildings given the complexity of the underlying
      maintenance issues and the poor level of organization of the residents.



      Potential seismic risk
      In addition to the above two issues, there is another reason to be concerned: the structural
      integrity of some of the older housing stock. Old prefabricated “panel” buildings built in the
      1970s-80s constitute over 40% of the current multifamily housing stock. The “links” joining the
      precast panels in these buildings are believed to be at the end of their 50-year lifespan, and in
      some cases, could be corroding/ rusting. Although the extent of this risk is unknown, the fact
      that the panels are load-bearing, even a remote possibility of disintegration of the links raises
                                                                                                         Key F i n di ngs          15


                  serious questions about the structural safety of these buildings. This is of particular concern
                  given Bulgaria’s propensity to seismic hazards (see Box 3.1), but there has been no comprehensive
                  study of the seismic vulnerability of this housing stock to date. In the meanwhile, the majority
                  of residential buildings – according to some estimates, over 95% – do not possess a “Technical
                  Passport”, which is the technical documentation of the building’s structure.20



3 Housing market failures
                  Negative impact of the financial crisis

                  Not only did the 2008 financial crisis bring an end to the construction boom in Bulgaria, it
                  also resulted in many unfinished housing projects. Banks, on their part, retracted from the
                  market and tightened their lending. The main investors in the construction boom prior to 2008
                  were foreigners (Russians, Irish, English etc.) and their withdrawal was an important factor for
                  the collapse of the construction sector. Many owners and investors saw their property values
                  shrinking to half or a third of the original value and, in many cases, lost money to developers
                  who filed for bankruptcy. However, since 2015 prices have begun to stabilize and, in the larger
                  cities, housing demand now appears to be making a comeback to pre-crisis levels. Figures (vi)
                  and (vii) show that the Bulgaria Real House Price Index as well as annual average market prices
                  of dwellings in district centers decreased significantly after the financial crisis.

                  More recently, however, banks have resumed lending and housing construction has picked up
                  in the larger urban centers. This is attributed to a combination of factors: growing incomes,
                  low mortgage interest rates, low deposit rates, and relatively larger returns on real estate
                  investment.



                                            Figure (vi). Bulgaria Real House Price Index
                 160


                 140
  Index Points




                 120


                 100


                 80


                 60
                          2006               2008                2010                  2012            2014                2016

                                                                           Year



                                                             Source: NSI, Eurostat21

    20
       According to a recent amendment to Ordinance No. 5 on Technical Passports, the deadline for all existing buildings to prepare
    their Technical Passports was moved from 2017 to 2022. Unlike the old building stock, all buildings built after 01.01.2007 have
    Technical Passports.
    21
           http://www.tradingeconomics.com/bulgaria/building-permits.
16                   A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria



                           Figure (vii). Annual average market prices of dwellings in district centers22
                     2500.00



                     2000.00
 BGN/ Square Meter




                     1500.00



                     1000.00



                      500.00



                        0.00
                               1995

                                      1996

                                             1997

                                                    1998

                                                           1999

                                                                  2000

                                                                         2001

                                                                                2992

                                                                                       2003

                                                                                              2004

                                                                                                     2005

                                                                                                            2006

                                                                                                                   2007

                                                                                                                          2008

                                                                                                                                 2009

                                                                                                                                        2010

                                                                                                                                               2011

                                                                                                                                                      2012

                                                                                                                                                             2013

                                                                                                                                                                    2014
                               Sofia (city)                       Plovdiv                              Burgas                           Blagoevgrad

                               Montana                            Kyustendil                           Silistra                         Vidin




                                                           Source: Data from NSI Macroeconomic Statistics23




                     Lack of affordability
                     The average housing price ranges from EUR 550-800/m2 for the less desired homes in older
                     buildings to EUR 800-1200/m2 in new buildings in more desirable locations in Bulgaria’s larger
                     cities. Given the national average monthly household income of EUR 477,24 this means that a
                     large majority of the population, i.e., people below the 60th income percentile, cannot afford to
                     buy or even rent a house in urban housing markets.25

                     According to Eurostat, the housing cost overburden rate is 42% for single person households,
                     15% for households constituting two adults, 7% for households constituting three or more adults,
                     24% for older residents aged 65 years and over, 31% for tenants of market priced rentals, and
                     17% for tenants of subsidized or rent-free accommodation.26 Among those who face a housing
                     cost overburden in Bulgaria, 46% are from households below the 20th income percentile, and
                     66% are from households below the 40th income percentile.




22
  Data only for existing stock, newly built dwellings excluded. Annual averages were calculated as an average of quarterly data for
each year.
23
       https://infostat.nsi.bg/infostat/pages/module.jsf?x_2=276.
24
       Source: http://www.tradingeconomics.com/bulgaria/wages (September 2016).
25
  Further, with the base cost already so high compared to income levels, the closing cost of a transaction (roughly 4.5-6.0% of sale price)
and a VAT of 20% imposed on new developer-built buildings has led to a common practice of underreporting the sale price on paper.
26
      Eurostat 2015. http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/income-and-living-conditions/data/main-tables.
                                                                                                         Key F i n di ngs       17



          Absence of a robust rental market
          According to NSI data, less than 5% of the country’s housing stock is leased out in the rental
          market. An additional 8% of the stock constitutes “shared”, “free”, or subsidized rental housing;
          how much of this is transaction-based or formal/ informal is difficult to ascertain from the
          data.27 Nevertheless, the high cost of rental housing suggests a constrained supply despite the
          housing “surplus” at the national level.

          This sort of situation often occurs in housing markets in which the regulations are preventing
          the rental market from functioning effectively. Several reasons may be attributed to landlords
          keeping their properties vacant rather than renting them out. Among them, (i) the current
          eviction laws, which lean in favor of the tenant and make eviction difficult; (ii) the inability to
          enforce formal lease agreements in the court of law, even when registered by a notary; (iii) a
          general hesitation on part of landlords to rent out the property based on the legacy of poor
          maintenance by tenants;28 and (iv) a flat 10% income tax which applies to rental income, which,
          although minimal, could be a disincentive to report rental income. From the tenant’s side, it is
          usually the high cost of market-based rental that is problematic.

          The ‘informalization’ of the rental market, on the other hand, has several negative impacts:

          -	 Informal rental denies both the tenant and the landlord any legal protection associated with
          	 an official contract.

          -	 Informal rental limits the market supply of rental housing, thereby making it more expensive,
          	 and locking out the bulk of households earning less than EUR 1,000 per month from the
          	 option to rent with a formal contract.

          -	 The absence of an efficient rental market limits mobility and compounds the affordability
          	 dilemma by pushing many young households to purchase smaller units with limited buying
          	 power instead of renting.

          Bulgaria’s vacant housing stock could present a real opportunity: a ready pool of “locked” but
          potentially valuable rental stock that can be leveraged to address the housing problems as part
          of new housing sector policies.


          Low penetration of housing finance
          Given the problems in the functioning of the housing market itself, and the hyperinflation and
          financial sector collapse experienced by Bulgaria, the low penetration of the mortgage is not
          surprising.29 Despite relatively favorable lending terms,30 it is common practice for buyers to
          finance house purchases with cash from savings or with the slightly more expensive consumer
          loans31 as these have no mortgage lien on the property. Few banks offer products for people with
          incomes lower than BGN 1,000 (EUR 510) per month, and those that do, require them to pay
          higher interest rates due to their higher risk profile. Such systems need time to develop, and the
          value risks of Bulgarian real estate have shown themselves to be among the highest in the region.

27
  One study suggests that the social housing stock is 3% of the total housing stock, but the NSI Census data identifies 0.02%
of housing as “institutional” housing. The definitions of these two terms and their respective data needs further investigation
and clarification.
28
     EU, National Report for Bulgaria, “TenLaw: Tenancy Law and Housing Policy in Multi-level Europe”, p. 21.
29
     The Bulgarian mortgage to GDP ratio is 8.0%.
30
   All major commercial banks offer mortgages, with a loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of upto 85% for newly built properties, and 50-60%
for flats in old buildings. The most common product is a local currency BGN adjustable rate (4-5% plus Sofibor) mortgage for upto 30
years, with a maximum debt-to-income ratio of 50%.
31
     @ 7% interest, for 5-7 years.
  18   A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria




4 Inadequate housing and infrastructure for
  low income groups
       Lack of public assistance for the poor and marginalized

       Little has been done or can be done under the current legal and fiscal structure to address the
       increasing housing informality and marginalization of poor households. Government assistance
       falls far short of the prevailing need of poor and vulnerable groups. The lack of both public and
       private investment in low-income areas, combined with social prejudices, has resulted in self-
       proclaimed ‘ghettos’ in which low-income communities (including a high proportion of Roma
       households) are marginalized.

       There is a lack of proactive interventions for poor and vulnerable communities with respect to
       the provision of better quality social housing, slum upgrading or land rights. The National Roma
       Integration Strategy 2012-2020 calls for the improvement of housing conditions in Roma
       neighborhoods including infrastructure upgrading and titling. However, it is unclear how much
       funding is set aside for this purpose. The two largest programs in the housing sector – National
       Program for Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings (NEEP) and Regions in Growth-Priority
       Axis 1 – focus heavily on energy efficiency, and are aimed at serving a broad population
       and do not necessarily target the poor. There is some funding for social infrastructure
       (including social housing) and promoting social inclusion for vulnerable groups but the focus
       is on providing “social housing” and “social infrastructure”. In other words, infrastructure
       upgrading in marginalized areas, which is a very critical and much needed activity, is not
       an eligible activity in this program. At the same time, the public social housing program is
       inadequate both in terms of quality and quantity.


       Growing informality and illegality

       Not only do a large percentage of Roma and other ethnic minorities live in slums or illegal
       settlements, these minorities are also spatially concentrated, i.e., the majority population in
       illegal settlements constitutes ethnic minorities, primarily the Roma. In some municipalities, if
       a person or their family have ever squatted, they are deemed ineligible to receive social housing
       benefits. The same may apply if they have ever been evicted on grounds of non-payment of rent
       or fees, non-maintenance of the leased property or its improper use.

                                 Plate (ii). Roma settlements in Sofia
                                                                                Key F i n di ngs      19


     With space already very limited in existing Roma settlements, newcomers tend to occupy the
     more dangerous or environmentally sensitive locations, for example, near garbage dumps, flood
     plains, forests etc. Local authorities are often unable to monitor – and sometimes unwilling
     to control – this influx. This has consequences for the municipality in terms of planning and
     infrastructure, as well as for the residents because many settlements that started out as
     “legitimate” are now largely seen as “illegal” as the original residents are vastly outnumbered by
     the new illegal migrants.



     Absence of appropriate “legalization” or upgrading instruments

     Government attempts to legalize illegal houses in informal settlements have had little success.
     The two amnesty programs offered by the government to legalize illegally constructed buildings
     – the Tolerance Certificates and the Building Legalization Document of 2012 – require that the
     applicant either be the owner of the land or have a legal right to build on the land. This, together
     with the complex and expensive procedures involved and, in some cases, the lack of awareness
     of the amnesty programs among the communities, has resulted in a very low uptake from Roma
     and other ethnic minorities.




5 Limited reach of national government initiatives
     National Energy Efficiency Program

     Since 2007, the government has implemented several energy efficiency programs in residential
     buildings, although there has been difficulty in scaling up these initiatives. Under the most recent
     (2015-16) NEEP, which is the largest housing program in the country – with a budget of EUR 1
     Billion for 2015-16 – the criteria were changed. The subsidy element was increased to 100%, the
     program was opened up to everyone, not just the poor, and the original requirement to have
     buy-in from 100% of homeowners was reduced to 95%. All these changes in the program criteria
     have contributed to a more rapid expansion of the NEEP compared to previous programs.

              Plate (iii). Residential buildings in Blagoevgrad retrofitted under NEEP
20        A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria


          However, despite the many hurdles that the government has overcome in moving this program
          forward, some challenges remain, as is recognized by the government. These are summarized
          below:
          1.	From the perspective of improving building management, NEEP requires that an HOA be
          	 established and registered with the municipality in order to be eligible for funding under the
          	program, and it is recommended that a capital improvement fund be set up for building
          	 repairs. However, experience indicates that while HOAs were established in buildings that
          	 participated in the program, their capacity and motivation to deliver their functions effectively
          	 remains questionable, and most beneficiary HOAs continue to operate without adequate
          	 capital reserves. Another common problem cited is the lack of participation of the HOAs in
          	 terms of decision-making or supervision or quality control of the works.

          2.	A technical audit is conducted as part of the NEEP package, which includes an “investigation
          	 and evaluation of the seismic security of the building.” While, on paper, this appears to be a
          	 reasonable requirement to ensure structural safety, some experts express concern that this
          	 is essentially a “visual observation” of the structural quality using X-ray technology, rather
          	 than a thorough seismic exam. In the event that a structurally unsafe building indeed manages
          	 to qualify for NEEP funding, its structural defects could get further concealed, exposing the
          	 residents to catastrophic seismic risk.

          3.	The 100% subsidy element also raises the issue of equity: essentially, the program offers full
          	 government funding for energy efficiency measures to every household in an eligible building,
          	 regardless of need, and without form of targeted assistance to the poor. This applies to
          	both, the poorest households within participating buildings, as well as buildings that have a
          	 large majority of poor households (including social housing). While recognizing the need for
          	 such a subsidy to mobilize this challenging program, and the value in getting it off the ground
          	 first with the “low-hanging fruit”, there is potential to improve the design in the medium and
          	 long term by gradually introducing user contributions over time.



          Municipal Social Housing
          The public social housing program is inadequate both in terms of quality and quantity.32 Local
          governments are required to provide social housing for those in need, but it appears to be an
          unfunded mandate. In the few municipalities where new social housing is being constructed
          with funding from the EU operational program (Regions in Growth), the target group is not
          necessarily low income households. This is perhaps a function of the ideology that housing is
          not an essential service that the state is obliged to provide. There is also a lack of technical
          capacity at the local level to plan for or implement social housing projects.33 This is exacerbated
          by the spatial legacy of fixed capital investments inherited from the old regime that restricts
          the ability of municipal governments to adjust to changing housing demand.

          Further, municipalities are at liberty to establish their own eligibility criteria for social housing.
          These criteria typically include income, employment, current living conditions, domicile with
          a registered address, household size, and so on. In most cases, regular income is required to
          be able to apply for social housing. Based on this, many of those with the most needs get
          relegated to the bottom of the long waiting lists for social housing. While it is clear that the

32
     National Centre for Regional Development: Monitoring and Analysis of the State of Housing Fund and Housing Market, 2012.
33
  For instance, the capacity to estimate the demand for social housing at the local level, i.e., which population groups to cater to,
and therefore, which types of units to build. (Source: OSI Europe Foundation, Housing in Bulgaria: Challenges and Perspectives, 2003.)
                                                                           Key F i n di ngs      21


problems facing local authorities vary widely so that there is need for greater flexibility in how
they address their somewhat unique problems, it is not clear that allowing them to establish
their own terms (tenure etc.) and eligibility criteria for social housing allocation is an effective
policy.

Finally, in some municipalities, sitting tenants of social housing units have the right to buy the
unit after a certain period of time, while in others, there is no term limit for the lease. This
policy puts an even bigger strain on the already limited pool of public housing stock.
Recommendations
  24    A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria




  As findings suggest, the Bulgarian housing market faces many constraints. This situation is costly
  for the broader economy in terms of employment opportunities and productivity, but it also makes
  it very difficult for municipalities to function effectively. When market responders are unable to
  respond as easily as they could if the market worked effectively, the costs of housing assistance are
  considerably higher and the ability of local authorities to carry out their functions are impaired. As
  a result, besides the difficulties faced by younger families who want to move to locations with job
  opportunities, it is very difficult to assist lower-income households in such a system.

  Creating a better functioning housing market is thus an important step as well as one that will improve
  the efficacy of housing and municipal programs. Consequently, attention to the sector’s broader
  reform agenda is at least as important as improving the functioning of specific programs. It is worth
  noting that the existing housing stock provides the bulk of housing services at any time so even minor
  improvements in the functioning of this stock can convey enormous benefits, far in excess of those
  offered by programs that affect the supply of new units. Hence, the following section presents some of
  the key recommendations for the government to consider for their forthcoming Strategy.




1 Housing Policy
  An overarching approach or strategy to housing is required to enable the government to better target
  scarce public resources to those who need them most, and to facilitate the development of a better
  functioning housing market. The core tenet of a good housing policy is to target public assistance to
  those most in need, as defined by income or vulnerability. More specifically, public investments need
  to be targeted first at the poorest households in the 20th income percentile before being directed to
  people higher up in the income spectrum.

  At the same time, it is critical to make the market work better. Subsidy programs, however well-
  designed and well-targeted, cannot work effectively in a dysfunctional housing market where the vast
  majority of the population (including middle income households) cannot afford adequate, decent, and
  safe housing. In such a situation, the subsidies intended for the poor inevitably get “hijacked” by the
  middle income segment. Here, the role of government as a “facilitator” of a well-functioning housing
  market – while effectively targeting scare public resources to the poor – cannot be overstated. This
  involves a proactive role of the government in creating the right environment through appropriate
  incentives and tools for the private sector to play its role in housing delivery more effectively.

  Accordingly, the underlying strategic vision should outline the types of interventions most appropriate
  at different income levels. For instance, the poorest households might need purely public assistance,
  other low income households might be targeted with a mix of public and private “hard” investments,
  while middle income households might require “soft” assistance in the form of affordable mortgages
  and tax breaks.

  Finally, given the many different markets in different parts of the country, geographical segmentation
  will be important - for example, customizing and differentiating solutions between urban versus rural
  areas, growing cities with increasing housing demand versus smaller towns with declining populations,
  and so on.
                                                                                    Recom m en dations                  25



  At a more general level, as illustrated in Figure (viii), a national strategy for housing should aim for an
  environment where:
  -	 The public sector plays a key role in providing direct housing assistance to the poorest and most
      vulnerable groups;
  -	 The public sector actively intervenes in specific themes or sectors facing market failure or negative
      externalities;
  -	 The public sector creates incentives to change behavior and leverage private investments for
      affordable housing through “assisted” market solutions; and
  -	 The private sector is enabled to serve the housing needs of middle and upper income groups.


        Figure (viii). Functional housing market: Roles of public and private sector stakeholders



                                                             Private Sector
                                                             Individual houses, flats,
   80th Income Percentile                                    Conventional Mortgages



                                              Public-Private                Public interventions
   60th Income Percentile                      Assisted Market              To Address Market Failures/
                                             Solutions to create               Negative externalities
                                                  Incentives
                                                                               •	 Energy efficiency
                                                 PPPs, Coops, DAs              •	Seismic retrofitting/
   40th Income Percentile                      Govt guarantees, VAT               reconstruction
                                              exemptions, subsidized           •	Building retrofitting
                                            loans, HF assistance, MFB          	 (for capital repairs)
                                              maintenance, increase            	 - cofinancing
                                                   transparency
   20th Income Percentile


                                                              Public Sector
                               Social housing, integrated urban upgrading, cash grants, rental vouchers, TA, increase
                                                                   transparency




2 Institutional Framework
  The condition of Bulgaria’s housing stock and the legacy of the way it was located and designed
  clearly have enormous and highly variable implications for the functioning of Bulgaria’s municipalities.
  Further, the management and control of the housing stock have important spill-over effects on the
  labor market and social integration. The role of municipalities in implementing a more effective policy
  cannot be overstated. At present, it appears that cities are burdened with more responsibilities than
  resources for addressing these problems.

  Thus, an analysis of how housing policy affects municipal functioning and how the central government
  policy affects municipal operations is an important next step in understanding this complex problem.
  In principle, the following is recommended:

       National government
       A much stronger Housing Policy Directorate with responsibility for all government programs
       spanning the housing sector (e.g., energy efficiency, HOAs and maintenance, accessing finance,
       monitoring, evaluation, and data collection) is highly recommended for Bulgaria. Such a
  26    A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria


       strengthened housing department can provide training to specialists at the district level, who
       can then provide support to local authorities.

       Local authorities

       The way a city’s housing stock and its management affects the functioning and responsibilities
       of local governments is an important part of the country’s fiscal system. It is very evident that
       technical and financial capacity of municipalities with respect to the housing sector needs to
       be strengthened, in particular in the delivery of social housing, and in collecting and maintaining
       housing data at the local level.




3 Government programs
        Social housing program
        The loss of the educated young population is of enormous consequence for Bulgaria, and efforts
        to ameliorate this situation need to be further investigated. In this context, it is essential that
        local authorities maintain a database of the many dimensions of the housing sector, including
        social housing in terms of available stock, prevailing demand from different population sub-
        groups (not only low-income households, but also youth, young starter families, professionals,
        students, etc.). Accordingly, housing assistance may be considered for young families so that
        they are able to move to another location in the country if the city in which they live has very
        limited job opportunities. Similarly, municipalities of declining towns might consider providing
        social rental housing for their youth and young professionals as an incentive to retain them
        in their hometowns. At the same time, it will be important to streamline the eligibility criteria
        set by municipalities for social housing to make them more equitable, transparent, and well-
        targeted.

        Further, some portion of the large pool of vacant housing units could be used as social housing.
        This would be a much more cost-effective option for the government rather than building
        new social housing, and at the same time, contribute to the upkeep of otherwise unused or
        under-utilized houses. However, this will require the appropriate legislation to be in place that
        provides landlords the necessary protections and incentives to rent their houses to people who
        need housing, with the guarantees necessary to ensure that their properties are maintained
        adequately. Rental vouchers could be particularly relevant under such a scheme, whereby an
        eligible household could find a private rental house and receive a subsidy in the form of a
        voucher from the government to cover the rent (partial or whole).

        Finally, the government may reconsider the current practice of some municipalities offering
        social housing units for sale to sitting tenants, because this effectively removes stock from
        the already tiny pool of public sector housing. It is also important that municipalities conduct
        a regular review of whether or not the residing tenant continues to meet the eligibility
        requirements rather than allowing occupancy for an indefinite period: this will make more
        houses available to people who have real housing needs.
                                                                      Recom m en dations           27



     National Energy Efficiency Program
     Recognizing the significant challenges faced in the design of the NEEP, and the need to make
     compromises to roll out the program, some suggestions to improve program design may be
     considered for the medium and long term. One among them is that the government consider
     introducing a sunset clause for the 100% co-financing subsidy. Such a clause could come
     into effect, say, in 5 years, after which an owner contribution would be required and the
     government co-financing element gradually reduced over time. Other include aspects related to
     better targeting, and linking EE improvements to a more robust structural retrofitting.




4 Old housing stock
     Maintenance and management

     One way to improve the maintenance of multifamily housing stock may be better enforcing
     the Condominium Law, by introducing incentives rather than penalties. This could include, for
     example, granting certification to HOAs/ condominiums that have adopted certain standards
     for management of the condominium – such as registering the HOA, having adequate reserves
     in a capital improvement fund, purchasing condominium/ hazard insurance, and so on – to be
     eligible for tax concessions and other benefits.

     Second, the current 100% subsidy element in the NEEP – while it lasts – could be used as a strong
     lever to make HOAs contribute into their capital repairs fund. What would otherwise have been
     expected as an HOA contribution – 5% or 10% or 20% of total project cost – could be required
     of the HOAs to put into a capital repair fund for the building, to be maintained at a certain
     minimum threshold at all times. Poor households who are unable to make this contribution may
     be supported through a Housing Allowance, discussed below (which could essentially be viewed
     as the equivalent of a rental voucher for eligible home-owners).




     Seismic risk assessment and mitigation

     It is a well-known fact that panel buildings (and all other buildings in Bulgaria) have high
     exposure to seismic activity. It is also a fact that the structural integrity of panel buildings
     relies on the metal “links” that hold the panels together. However, it is unclear whether or not
     those links continue to retain their structural integrity after 50+ years. This as an issue with
     high risk exposure and potentially catastrophic consequences. There is thus an urgent need for
     this matter to be investigated further; a comprehensive study of the seismic vulnerability of
     this housing stock is strongly recommended.
  28      A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria




5 Housing assistance to low income groups
          Informal and illegal settlements

          It is in the interest of the government to facilitate the legalization of informal/ illegal
          settlements, where viable,34 for several reasons: this will encourage private investment into
          these areas; it will also improve the health and productivity of poorer communities; and most
          importantly, once these areas are legalized and upgraded, they can be a potential source of
          revenue for local authorities (through property taxes). However, unlike the previous legalization
          window that was opened, any such new program should ensure that: (i) the process is simple
          and inexpensive, and residents receive all the technical and financial assistance necessary to
          facilitate the process; (ii) building and planning standards are relaxed; and, (iii) clear and legal
          ownership of the land underlying the house is provided.

          Also, rezoning some of the illegal/ informal settlements as “Improvement Areas” within which
          a different set of more relaxed infrastructure standards may be applied could potentially save
          the government the time and money to build social housing, and work as a much more effective
          solution for the residents.



          Housing Allowance

          The poorest households (bottom 20th income percentile) typically should not use more than 10-
          15% of their incomes on housing and related utility expenses combined. Similarly, those in the
          20-40th income percentile should not spend more than 20-25% of their income on housing and
          utilities. Subsidies for both housing and energy would be more effective and equitable if they were
          structured around a voucher framework, as is done in many EU countries. This Allowance could
          be used to assist poor households rent a social house, or pay for improvements or management/
          maintenance fees in multifamily buildings. That said, such an Allowance program for rentals will
          only work if the housing supply is responsive.




6 Housing market
          Vacant housing

          An essential first step to address the high vacancy rate is to establish a better understanding
          of its underlying causes, particularly in otherwise growing, vibrant housing markets. The data
          being collected by NSI could serve this purpose better by differentiating between the different
          types of vacant housing – and shed more light on what portion of the vacant stock could be
          potentially “unlocked” - for use as social housing, rental housing, and so on.

  34
     i.e. where the settlements are not located on environmentally sensitive or otherwise hazardous lands which are unfit for inhabitation,
  and they do not amount to an illegal “taking” of another person’s property In cases with disputed ownership traditional legal
  processes should be followed.
                                                                  Recom m en dations          29



Rental housing

The lack of rental housing and particular dearth of formal rental housing in Bulgaria acts
as a major deterrent to labor mobility, causes difficulties for newly-weds, and inflates the
rents of the limited stock available. Increasing the supply of rental housing will help increase
affordability, especially for young families, and lower income groups, and help make rental a
viable alternative to purchasing a house.

As mentioned earlier, the large pool of vacant housing – at least the share of it that is “usable”
– presents a massive opportunity in this regard. However, this will require the appropriate
legislation to be in place. Existing rental policy may accordingly be reviewed and amended to
ensure that an equitable balance is achieved between the rights and duties of the tenant and
those of the landlord. Examples of ways in which the legislation can be adapted to facilitate
renting include the following:
-	Introduction of a tax deduction on rental expenditure for tenants. This will induce people to
	 rent rather than buy homes, and also provide an incentive to formalize rental agreements;
-	Introduction of a rental income tax exemption for small landlords (with less than, say, five
	 units) to encourage the “formalization” and mainstreaming of the rental market;
-	Establishment of a quick and low cost system to resolve disputes between tenants and
	landlords.



Building permits

Developing a modern, effective and efficient planning and development review system is crucial
for streamlining the permitting process. It is recommended that the Spatial Development
Act accordingly be reformed to develop a planning and development review system that is
faster, better, concurrent, more predictable, simplified where possible, customer-focused, and
transparent, and one that maintains high-quality community standards, and protects the
public interest.
Concluding
   NotE
32    A Roof ov er our h eads - Hous i ng i n Bulgaria




While the poor suffer the most from a dysfunctional market, and require additional and better-
targeted assistance, the most effective way to improve such assistance is to improve the functioning
of the overall housing market. Such reforms can have significant beneficial effects on the economy,
the labor market, and the performance of municipal governments. Moreover, there are significant, low
cost ways to improve the functioning of the housing market that would reduce the burden of what
appears to be an unfunded mandate for the cities.

Accordingly, the more general market-oriented policies may be seen as a prerequisite to policies that
only improve the situation of the poor. With this caveat in mind, there is also a strong need for both
social policies that address the needs of the poor, as well as promote a better understanding of the way
that housing policy affects the functioning of local governments. Ultimately, it is local governments
who are responsible for implementing both housing regulations and programs. At present, it appears
that these obligations vary considerably across cities and are not fully understood. As the above
recommendations make clear, creating the basis for a well-functioning market is of highest priority.
An important dimension of that basis is how well local governments fulfill their essential role
                                                                    Concl u di ng note       33




For an electronic copy of the full report, please contact Ashna Mathema (amathema@worldbank.org)
                                   or visit www.worldbank.bg.
