               2018
BACKGROUND PAPER

LEARNING
to realize education’s promise




FRAGILITY, CONFLICT, AND
VIOLENCE
Stephen Commins
Luskin School of Public Affairs, UCLA
This background paper was prepared for the World Development Report 2018 LEARNING to Realize Education’s
Promise. It is made available here to communicate the results of the Bank’s work to the development community
with the least possible delay. The manuscript of this paper therefore has not been prepared in accordance with the
procedures appropriate to formally-edited texts. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments
they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
                                  Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
                                          Stephen Commins
                                Luskin School of Public Affairs, UCLA
                           World Development Report 2018 background paper1
                                           September 2017

Education is central to improving human welfare—both inherently and instrumentally—and yet
there has never been a World Development Report on education. The WDR 2018 represents an
opportunity to take stock of what we know and to provide guidance on how to expand the scope
and quality of education around the world. It aims to lay the foundations for a sustained
policy focus on learning outcomes and skills for life and work, and to provide guidance on how
education systems can be reformed to deliver them.

Education is a right: it serves as a powerful instrument for eradicating poverty and promoting
shared prosperity, but fulfilling its mandate and reaching its potential require better policies and
delivery—both within and outside the education system. Education can make a positive
contribution to both effective citizenship and social inclusion.

Getting an education is the surest route to escaping poverty: schooling typically leads to earnings
gains of 6–12 percent for each year of education. Education’s value also extends into other
pecuniary and nonpecuniary benefits. Educated individuals lead healthier lives and are more
engaged citizens, and their families end up healthier and better educated. Education is a key
intervention to narrow gender and other social gaps. At the societal level, education spurs
productivity and economic growth, and may increase social capital and improve the functioning
of institutions. Finally, education multiplies the effects of other interventions and policies, such as
agricultural extension, health care provision, and infrastructure improvements. All this evidence
provides a strong rationale for investing in education.
Unfortunately, there are major obstacles to these goals in countries and areas affected by fragility,
conflict, and violence. Fragility, conflict, and violence come in different forms and have
significantly negative impacts on education systems, learning outcomes, and the very nature of
how the pedagogical experience occurs. Such impacts can be lack of teachers, lack of finance,
trauma from school-based and community-level violence, exclusion based on ethnicity, religion,
or gender, or elevated disparities between neighboring regions.
This paper sets out to explore “fragility,” “conflict,” and “violence” as barriers to educational
attainment that are related but also have distinctions that are important for addressing obstacles to
learning (Appendix 1).

    •    Fragility involves the nature of the state and its relationship to its citizens—both the
         capacity and the will of the state to support educational goals.
    •    Conflict involves entrenched and frequently perpetuated differences and tensions between
         different identity groups that can be exacerbated by state fragility.



1
 This paper is dedicated to the memory of Jackie Kirk, a friend and advocate for education amid fragility, conflict,
and violence. The paper was funded by the Nordic Trust Fund, but the author is entirely responsible for its content.



                                                          1
   •   Violence is an outward and destructive manifestation both of state fragility (inability to
       provide security) and conflict (unresolved points of tension, power imbalances, lack of
       means to resolve conflicts in an equitable manner).

Manifestations of fragility, conflict, and violence have negative consequences for education,
undermining the environment for learning. These consequences include:
   •   Impacts on state-society relations, in which perceptions of the state and formal and
       informal institutions suffer—say, because of a loss of legitimacy of value systems and the
       institutions that embody them. There can also be a loss of trust in leadership and doubts
       that official institutions can or will provide protection.
   •   Impacts on social relations and trust. In the domestic sphere, these impacts can change
       gender as well as intergenerational relations.
   •   Impacts on behavioral norms, in which points of reference are shattered and the rules or
       norms of community members no longer guide allowed conduct. Such “cultural trauma”
       describes the loss or disintegration of cultural beliefs and values as new social patterns
       begin to emerge.
   •   Transformations of identities, which are connected to social cohesion, state legitimacy, and
       the shared memories of different communities.
   •   Impacts on economic well-being and development; see section below on violence
       (Pouligny 2014).

Challenges of Fragility, Conflict, and Violence

The effects on education of different elements of fragility, conflict, and violence have both
immediate and long-lasting impacts on children’s learning, well-being, and prospects (O’Malley
2010, UNESCO 2010). When governments lack the capacity or commitment to support education
systems, there are far fewer children in school, and when children are in school, there are often
either no teachers or schools lack resources for effective learning. In situations where the education
system contributes to different forms of conflict—ethnic exclusion, gender exclusion, language of
instruction—there will be reduced access to schools for certain groups as well as potential
exacerbation of existing conflicts. Finally, and centrally for this paper, violence—bullying, gangs,
forms of exclusion—exists in contexts that are not fragile states, including OECD countries, and
the overall effect of actual or threats of violence has likely been underestimated in terms of their
impact on access and learning.

Since the World Bank’s Low-Income Countries Under Stress report in 2000, numerous studies and
reports have sought to identify and address how fragility, conflict and violence affect education
(Rose and Greeley 2006; Dryden-Peterson 2013; Winthrop and Matsui 2013). This paper draws
on the 15 years of research and synthesis to identify the key aspects of education and fragility,
conflict, and violence, particularly in alignment with the framing of World Development Report
2018. Partly due to displacements from the Syrian civil war, more attention has been paid to the
education needs of refugees and internally displaced persons, both in camps and, increasingly, in
urban settings (LIRS 2016), and this paper will include aspects of education in emergencies and
displacement settings.




                                                  2
World Development Report 2011 generated a conceptual shift in assessing the contexts of fragility,
changing the language of “fragile and conflict-affected states” to “fragility, conflict, and violence.”
Part of the rationale for this change was the recognition that violence can afflict parts of states not
labeled as fragile under existing metrics, and the increased awareness of how criminal and
interpersonal violence have deleterious effects on individuals and communities, as well as states.
More recently, work on fragility, conflict, and violence has provided important grounding for
assessing the spectrum of factors that contribute to fragility (OECD 2016).

This paper argues that a combination of factors in different contexts, termed everyday fragility,
severely inhibit learning opportunities and outcomes for millions of children in both nonfragile
and fragile states. Furthermore, lack of trust in formal political structures can lead to support for
xenophobic and identity-based movements, acceptance of criminal networks, the use of violence
to resolve local conflicts, and undermine the legitimacy of local and state institutions. The paper
summarizes some of the main negative impacts on education regarding fragility, conflict, and
violence, including identifying pertinent literature and resources, particularly in the less explored
areas of violence as an interpersonal factor in relation to education.

For children, everyday fragility in relation to education means that part of their reality is the
intersection of some of the factors that underpin everyday fragility. They experience highly
unequal access to services, they live in differently governed—not ungoverned—spaces, and there
is a risk of interpersonal violence at schools, or in the areas around schools.

Everyday fragility provides a way to conceive of education and fragility from the world of the
child. In this case regarding learning more than education, there are also profound psychosocial
and brain development impacts, or invisible wounds.

Several factors contribute to a denial of the right to education—a violent ecosystem, the treatment
of displaced children and divisions within schools, attacks on schools due to the language of
instruction (International Alert 2015; 2016; UNESCO 1998; UNESCO 2011). A human rights-
based approach is particularly important to identify how less visible, individual, subtle forms of
exclusion affect students, and how duty bearers fail in the provision of safe, secure, equitable
education. This can include the ways in which teachers and principals treat lower caste members,
people with disabilities, and minority groups, the threat of or real violence against girls, as well as
the language of instruction or how textbooks portray history and culture.

The goals of this paper are to:

   •   Summarize policy issues related to education and fragility, conflict, and violence.
   •   Separate and reflect on fragility, conflict, and violence as related but distinct issues.
   •   Identify policy and programmatic responses.
   •   Identify connections with rights to education.
   •   Support operations that reduce factors that foster fragility, conflict, and violence.
Fragility and Fragile States and Regions

Fragile states are those that lack the capacity, will, or both to provide for the well-being and
security of their citizens (OECD 2006; DFID 2007). In large, federal states, sometimes there are


                                                  3
highly differentiated political realities so that subnational fragility becomes the key feature
(Examples include Mindanao, northeast Nigeria, and FATA in Pakistan; see Parks, Colletta and
Oppenheim 2013.) There are instances where regions of large, federally governed countries
provide some of the worst contexts for protecting children from harm, preventing conflicts from
becoming violent, and supporting quality education. The absence of—or lack of capacity in
sustaining—quality education programs in safe environments, as well as the frequency of
extensive violent conflict2 and reduced social cohesion within communities make children
significantly more vulnerable to education failures. In these situations, state parties and armed
groups are often implicated in increased levels of risk and toxic stress—including their
involvement in the recruitment of children into fighting forces and the separation of children from
their families.

Common features of fragile states include the:

    •    Presence of extensive violent conflict, significant violations of civil and political rights (or
         elevated risk thereof), or both.
    •    Limited capacity or will of governments or nongovernmental institutions to resolve
         conflicts or prevent violence.
    •    Weak capacity among governments at all levels to finance, regulate, or monitor education,
         making partnerships more difficult.
    •    Lack of aid delivery by donors directly to national governments, or active isolation of
         national governments by donors—and thus the use of a more diverse range of funding and
         education delivery mechanisms (World Bank 2011; OECD 2016).
    •    Fragmentation of services through multiple providers without effective regulation or
         oversight, so that some services may be delivered, but without a functioning education
         system (Appendix 2).

For this paper, “fragile states” and “fragile regions” refer to state capacity and legitimacy in service
delivery, but also to the lack of will or capacity by government to prevent conflicts from becoming
violent or creating forms of exclusion (OECD 2006; DFID 2006). They also include elements of
decisions on school financing, teacher training, protection of minority groups and women,
development of inclusive curricular materials, and mitigation of conflicts between contesting
groups.

Education system and learning outcome challenges are most severe in countries affected by
extensive violent conflict (UNESCO 2011). Children in the most affected countries consist of
about 20 percent of the global primary school-aged population, yet comprise around 50 percent of
those lacking access to education—up from 42 percent in 2008 (UNESCO 2013). They are nearly
three times more likely to be out of school than children in non-conflict contexts (World Bank
2011) and far more likely to drop out of primary school before completion: 35 percent compared
with 14 percent.

2
 This paper uses “extensive violent conflict” as distinct from “conflict,” which is broader and not necessarily
destructive, and from “violence,” which can be interpersonal rather than part of a wider political or social form of
violence. The distinction is important—first to ensure that conflict is not equated with violence, and second to
contribute to policies that would address larger-scale forms of violence as distinct from bullying or corporal
punishment.



                                                           4
Lack of access to primary education in turn leads to secondary school enrollment in conflict-
affected contexts that is more than a third lower than the low-income norm (UNESCO 2011). Of
the total number of adolescents at the lower secondary school age who were not in school, more
than a third were in fragile and conflict-affected states.

Furthermore, there are serious governance and capacity deficits in conflict-affected contexts that
make education reform more challenging and make providing and administering international
development assistance more complex and problematic (UNESCO 2011). Negative outcomes
include:

    •   A state’s inability or unwillingness to provide education (OECD 2006; World Bank 2011).
    •   Reduced access to education services, especially for girls (UNESCO 2011, 2013).
    •   Increased levels and forms of conflict, leading to violence or exclusion (Davies 2004; Bush
        and Saltarelli 2000).
    •   Fragile families and communities unable to support children educationally or emotionally
        (Science Daily 2016).
    •   Widespread breakdown of institutions (OECD 2016).
    •   Loss of the right to education (UNICEF 2000).3


Conflict

Conflict does not equal violence

For this paper, the concept of conflict is distinct from violence because all household, community,
societal, state, and interstate relations involve aspects of conflict. A conflict requires some type of
dispute or disagreement, which occurs daily in all societies but which is almost always resolved
nonviolently due to social norms, community norms, and political or other—religious, traditional
ethnic, patronage—institutions (Smith and Vaux 2003; Bekerman and McGlynn 2007). Conflict
is often a constructive element of a dynamic society, but it becomes destructive when the parties
to a conflict resort to violent means to advance their goals or cause. Over time, conflict resolution
requires not only a reduction in the use of violence, but above all a dissolution of the underlying
incompatibility so that the conflict cannot erupt into violence again (International Alert 2016;
Davies 2004).

Thus, unlike much of the literature on conflict-affected states, this paper argues that conflict is not
the same as violence, and is part of all societies. The greater problem arises when public and private
institutions, including social norms, do not effectively resolve conflict without violence (OECD
2016).




3
 This paper’s approach to rights and education is aligned with the background paper on rights and education
(Moriarty 2017)



                                                        5
Conflict and ethnicity

Conflict can negatively affect education in several ways, including the content and use of
textbooks, forms of teacher training, and the explicit or implicit exclusion of students (Minority
Rights Group 2015; Davies 2004; Bush and Saltarelli 2000). Education can also exacerbate
conflict, such as through the language of instruction, representation of history and boundaries in
textbooks, and teachers’ attitudes toward excluded groups (as in Guatemala, Nepal, and Sri Lanka).

A rich literature explores the dynamics between education and conflict, beyond fragile states and
separate from violence. Davies (2004) shows the complex ways that education can increase
conflict through education policies and practices that exclude or humiliate minorities, exacerbate
class and gender differences, and indoctrinate students through war or hate curriculums. Similarly,
Bush and Saltarelli (2000) summarize examples of different conflict drivers in education. These
include the uneven distribution of education and educational opportunities (Kosovo, Rwanda, Sri
Lanka), education as a weapon of cultural repression (Kurdish students denied the right to speak
in their mother tongue in schools in Turkey) and the denial of education as a weapon of war
(closure of Palestinian schools by Israel). Other negative or conflict-inducing examples include
the manipulation of history for political purposes, as well as the politicization of textbooks (Sri
Lankan textbooks in 1970s and 1980s declared Tamils the historic enemy of the Sinhalese). There
are also numerous instances of images asserting the superiority of one group over another (South
Africa under apartheid conveyed the black population as inferior to white), and different systems
of segregated education (South Africa and large parts of Sri Lanka).

A study in Nepal addressed the inherent potential conflicts that emerge out of changing education
systems as part of nation building, ethnic diversity, and identity formation (Pherali and Garratt
2014). The study focused on post-Peace Accord transitional politics since 2006 in which the
government sought to establish a universally recognized Nepali identity through the requirement
of an official national language, Nepali. The study notes that “the policy to adopt Nepali as the
only official language across all spheres of life has come at the cost of cleansing ethnic groups of
their indigenous languages and often precious cultural identities” (Pherali and Garratt 2014, p. 46).
Given that Nepal is home to more than 100 ethnicities and more than 70 linguistic communities,
this language policy, the authors argue, amounts to state-sponsored linguistic coercion supported
by “high caste elite groups” (Pherali and Garratt 2014, p. 43).

Education in Sri Lanka has been a contested area between the Sinhala (majority) and Tamil
(minority) communities since independence from the United Kingdom (and leading up to
independence; Lal 2016). The language of instruction and heavy emphasis on Sinhalese identify
was one of the many factors that led to the emergence of violent opposition to the government in
the 1980s, leading to a devastating civil war that culminated in the elimination of the Tamil Tigers
as an effective military force. The postwar period presents many ongoing challenges, ranging from
the availability of Tamil-speaking teachers to the presentation of the history of the civil war to
students. A survey of international agencies operating in Sri Lanka after the civil war found that
several agencies had country leaders who were openly supportive of the policies of the Rajapaksa
government.

In ethnically stratified societies, privileged ethnic groups usually attain higher average education
levels than do members of subordinate ethnic groups. Several factors underlie this pattern. A


                                                 6
privileged background enhances first, educational attainment, and students from advantaged ethnic
origins benefit from the educational, occupational, and economic attainments of their parents.
Dominant social groups use the education system to secure their privilege across generations.
Second, in many countries (for example, Guatemala, India, Nepal) educational selection is based
on criteria that favor the children of the cultural and political elite. Third, dominant ethnic groups
may control political processes for school funding and are able to promote the schools attended by
their children or their educational districts (Bush and Saltarelli 2000).

The structures and processes that appear to turn ethnic intolerance into unbridled violence are
highly complex. A list of causal factors might include historical forces, economic tensions, poor
governance, perceived threats to cultural identity and—in ways that are not fully understood—
formal and informal educational processes. Ethnicity itself is often asserted to be a key contributor
to ethnic conflict. But it is increasingly evident that “ethnicity neither causes conflict, nor in many
cases does it accurately describe it. Rather ethnicity/identity is increasingly mobilized and
politicized in contemporary extensive violent conflicts” (Bush 1997; cited in Bush/Saltarelli 2000,
p. vii)
The dynamics of societal change may generate more sustained social tensions, such as evolving
gender roles, changing population balances due to migration or displacement, or access to services.
Though this may be true in any context (see many OECD countries), it is particularly challenging
in fragile political systems. Yet most educational or other service delivery programs do not try to
address these elements of conflict. This disconnect creates a negative spiral in which education
systems contribute to greater factors of conflict, leading to possible violence, and the lack of
conflict resolution practices interferes with further education goals. Ignoring structural factors
means not only overlooking dimensions that take place at the macro level, but also not paying
enough attention to the micro-level effects of development and conflict in society (World Vision
2015).


Violence

The World Health Organization defines violence as “the intentional use of physical force or power,
threatened or actual, against oneself, another person, or against a group or community, which either
results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm,
maldevelopment, or deprivation,” though the organization acknowledges that the inclusion of “the
use of…power” expands on the conventional understanding of the word (WHO 2002, p. 5). This
definition involves intentionality with the committing of the act, regardless of the outcome it
produces.

For example, participants at the WHO sponsored 2014 Global Violence Reduction Conference
used the public health approach as their main analytical framework to develop a framework for
response to sustained violence reduction. This approach understands violence with the “ecological
model” developed by Urie Bronfenbrenner (WHO 2016). The model consists of four overlapping
levels that all influence violent behavior:

   •   The individual level, which includes biological and personal history factors that increase
       the likelihood for victimization, perpetration, or both.



                                                  7
   •   The relationship level, which includes factors in personal relations between peers, family
       members, and intimate partners that make involvement in violence more likely.
   •   The community level, which refers to wider social relationships such as schools, the
       workplace, and neighborhoods that can play a role in violence.
   •   The societal level, which consists of lager macro-level factors for violence such as violent
       norms and values, social and economic policies, and traditional belief systems.


For this paper, consideration of violence includes understanding its origins and impacts at various
levels, including political, intercommunal, school level, and intra-household. Education under
attack presents the most vivid example of violence and education. But while the most dramatic,
the most widespread forms of violence are corporal punishment and various manifestations of
bullying.

Violence and trauma

There are four main mechanisms through which individual trauma affects individuals and
communities. First, there are functional impacts, which to the ways in which households and local
communities relate to each other, and how they live out their daily lives. The ways in which
people within communities relate to each other will be affected by the presence of individuals who
have various symptoms of trauma. Trauma shifts from an individual’s experience to the overall
life of a community in the ways that actions and relations are changed. This is especially the case
in situations of complex trauma, which does not arise from a single event (Pouligny 2014).

A second mechanism is symbolic impacts, as trauma shapes how individuals and a community
perceive of social relations. It can change the forms and meanings that define a sense of
community and societal relations. These types of changes may be one of the notable differences
between the results of interpersonal violence and other forms of trauma such as natural disasters.

A third mechanism is a potential cycle of violence and trauma which can become repetitive if the
underlying facets of the specific traumas are not addressed. Cycles are inward and outward
expressions of reactive violence in which victims can become perpetrators and vice versa. This is
not a fixed cycle, but there is a greater risk of cyclical violence when the underlying traumas are
now addressed.

Related to this is a fourth mechanism in which trauma has intergenerational effects—the notion of
“historic trauma,” where narratives of traumatic events are passed to the next generation. This
relates to the narratives that identity communities construct out of their experiences, so that historic
events can become perpetual grievances between ethnic groups, as well as fuel for political
entrepreneurs to gain or maintain power through calling upon past trauma.

There are then five main dimensions of the impacts of trauma from violence (Pouligny 2014). The
first is the impact on social relations and trust. In the domestic sphere, these impacts can change
gender as well as intergenerational relations, as has been documented in Guatemala, Rwanda, and
Sierra Leone. In the public sphere, changes can occur between identity and social groups.
Transformations in the sense of community contribute to the weakening of informal social control
mechanisms. Finally, civic trust and collective action capacity can suffer greatly, an aspect


                                                   8
strongly related to a deep sense of not feeling safe. This lack of trust and sense of safety has been
borne out in several recent studies of community level perceptions in post-violent conflict
situations (SLRC 2017).

A second dimension is the impact on behavioral norms, in which existing ways of relating,
including resolving conflicts are broken, and the implicit structures and forms of behaviors are
weakened or suddenly changed. (see World Bank 2015 for an overview of social norms and
behavioral dynamics) This can be described as “cultural trauma” as it entails the loss or
disintegration of cultural beliefs and values as new social patterns emerge from the violence
induced trauma.

Third, the transformation of identities can be linked to various forms of social cohesion, shared
memories of communities, as well as an impact on state legitimacy. The role of “chosen trauma”
as it relates to identity describes how a community’s experience of traumatic events can be
deliberately mobilized for political and social action by an identity group. There can be both
positive and negative outcomes, as it may promote a sense of a shared history and feelings of
belonging for maintain social cohesion. There is also a dark of increased exclusion of other groups,
a deepened ‘insider’ versus ‘outsider’ form of identity, as well as aspects of revenge, and
increasing threats of violence.

Fourth, state-society relations can be shifted because of a lack of security, the belief that the state
promotes or perpetuates violence, and thus expectations or perceptions of change in state and
formal institutions. There can be a loss of trust in leadership and doubts that official institutions
can or will provide protection. (SLRC 2017)

Finally, there are impacts on a community’s economic well-being and development. There are
pressures on cooperation and levels of trust due to the demands of seeking to provide care for
individual traumas as well as seeking to manage their collective consequences. There can be a
reduction of mutual support mechanisms and increased tensions among individuals and groups.
The World Bank workshop, Invisible Wounds, highlighted how exposure to violence has a
significantly negative effect on young people’s ability to sustain livelihoods, which is echoed in
some of the long-term studies of young lives (World Bank 2014; World Vision 2015; International
Alert 2015)

Direct acts of violence against schools, teachers, and students

In many instances, particularly in countries or regions with elevated levels of violent political
fragility, there are daily acts of violence against teachers and students. These can range from sexual
violence to reduce girls’ access to education to the assassinations of teachers and school principals
as part of an overt political program of intimidation and threats. Sometimes school facilities are
also destroyed. In some cases, armed groups—both government forces and opposition militias—
will occupy schools as bases of operations, a means of enforcing their control over local
communities, or both (GCEA 2014).

In addition, aid workers in education have increasingly been targeted, either as a weapon of
intimidation or a statement of intent by the government or militia that education is not welcome



                                                  9
outside a specific ideology or set of norms. These acts of violence contribute to wider psychosocial
insecurity and fear of education systems, as well as undermine the authority of school systems.

Violence in schools

Violence against children and its impact on their learning goes far beyond fragile states or direct
attacks against schools, teachers, and students. The daily toll of corporal punishment and bullying
is likely to be severely underestimated in education systems, due to the reluctance of teachers and
principals to report problems and to the social acceptability of corporal punishment and bullying—
implicitly or explicitly—in many countries.

PLAN Canada (2012) found that more that, globally, 500 million children experience or are
exposed to violence every year. The principal areas of impact are:

   •   Sexual violence. This includes harassment, rape, abuse, coercion, and exploitation.
       According to the World Health Organization, globally, sexual violence had affected an
       estimated 150 million girls and 73 million boys under 18 in a single year. Most cases of
       sexual violence are committed by people a child knows, including teachers, peers, and
       community members. For example, authority figures may abuse their power to engage in
       “sex for grades” or for waiving school fees.
   •   Bullying. This is carried out through verbal or physical acts that inflict pain and suffering
       on a child over time. The way bullying is expressed is gendered: while boys are more likely
       to use fear, intimidation, or physical force, girls tend to bully one another through verbal
       abuse like gossip, rumors, or social exclusion. Teachers, too, may engage in bullying, by
       making children feel worthless or stupid.
   •   Cyber-bullying. A surge of modern technology is often accompanied with innovative ways
       to commit bullying. Text messages, email, and social media can turn violent and manifest
       in the classroom and beyond school grounds. Though digital channels can provide a
       positive space for girls, they also present dangers and new avenues for violence to occur.
   •   Physical and psychological violence as “discipline.” In many parts of the world, students
       are exposed to corporal punishment as a form of discipline. Being spanked, slapped, hit,
       shaken, kicked, beaten, or belted—these are all forms of violence that teachers or school
       administrators may inflict on students. Psychological violence is also present in schools,
       where children may be belittled, humiliated, threatened, or ridiculed by staff and peers.

In 2006, half of the world’s children lived in countries where corporal punishment was legal. As
of June 2011, corporal punishment in schools was unlawful in 117 countries, though 80 had not
yet fully implemented reforms that would move the legal prohibition into the classroom, where
social norms often remain supportive of the use of force against children, primarily for
“discipline.” Gender discrimination in this respect is sometimes reflected in law. In Singapore, for
example, corporal punishment of boys (but not girls) is legal. In some cases, the use of physical
force with the intention of inflicting pain reflects teachers’ impulsive reaction to behavior they
dislike. Teachers may be more likely to resort to punitive discipline under stressful teaching and
classroom conditions, such as overcrowding, insufficient resources, and increased emphasis on
student achievement.




                                                10
There is near total impunity for this violence, because it can be justified under the guise of
discipline. Impunity for corporal punishment reflects deeply entrenched beliefs about acceptable
forms of discipline, and often stems from a lack of institutional accountability. In addition to
physical violence, psychosocial punishment is also inflicted on children through actions designed
to belittle, humiliate, threaten, scare, or ridicule.

A 2012 study by PLAN UK, Learn Without Fear, reviewed the global impact of the use of physical
and psychological violence as discipline. The study found that students in many parts of the world
are routinely subjected to corporal punishment as a form of discipline. They argued that millions
of boys and girls in these schools live in daily fear of being spanked, slapped, hit, smacked, shaken,
kicked, pinched, punched, caned, flogged, belted, beaten, and battered by teachers, school
administrators, or security personnel—people whom students often know and may trust. In some
countries, more than 80 percent of students suffer corporal punishment at school. The work of
PLAN and the Global Initiative to End Corporal Punishments points to the significant psychosocial
costs, as well as the higher percentage of vulnerable children (lower caste, girls, LGBT, children
with disabilities) who are the frequent recipients of institutional violence in the school setting
(Vegneron 2017; GIECP 2016; PLAN 2014; O’Moore 2004; Young Lives 2016).

Local violence that affects students’ ability to learn

It is possible to measure what happens to young people’s education in situations of chronic
violence to assess the negative impact on educational outcomes. For example, a study in Mexico
measured exposure and persistence of violence in schools in Ciudad Juarez, where 60,000 students
in localities exposed to drug war violence were analyzed between 2006 and 2010. Some of the
main results highlight the strong correlation between violence and lost instructional time (students
in violent localities were 30 percent more likely to arrive to class late than students in schools not
exposed to drug wars; in addition, teachers were absent more often). The results also pointed to
the higher presence of youth gangs in schools affected by violence (52 percent for schools exposed
to drug wars against 24 percent for those not exposed), as well as the high proportion of schools
suffering from high-intensity violence located in urban areas—regardless of poverty levels. The
research also found a negative effect of drug-related violence on academic achievement (drug war
exposure accounted for 24 percent of the average annual reduction in standardized math test scores
between 2006 and 2011), with more severe effects on lower secondary schools than primary
(Rabling, et. al. 2016).

The Mexico study also showed more negative effects of criminal violence in lower secondary
schools with a widespread presence of street gangs in their surroundings. The researchers noted
that various possible mechanisms explained these results, including a higher incidence of violence
in the classroom when students are associated with gangs, the fact that more students are likely
drawn into a world of crime when gangs are present, and probable higher incidence of student
recruitment into drug cartels when gangs are present. A violent environment in the classroom likely
hinders student learning due to factors such as fear, psychological stress, and physical harm.
Moreover, the presence of gangs likely changes the opportunity costs for students to invest in their
education relative to a life of crime.

Displaced populations



                                                  11
One crosscutting aspect of fragility, conflict, and violence and education involves children whose
lives have been disrupted by being displaced from their home communities, due to violence, fear
of violence, threats of ethnic cleansing, or natural disasters. Internally displaced persons and
especially refugees face significant obstacles accessing schools and reaching their potential for
learning (Pavanello 2013; International Alert 2015).

An aspect of the displacement dynamic is that when refugees cross borders, they often settle in
areas that are relatively poor, unable to meet the requirements of the new population, or both
(Ethiopia border areas, northern Jordan, northern Uganda). Thus, in the borderlands, the displaced
increase the marginalization of local populations and find few resources for their own needs,
including education (DFID staff interview).

Because some refugees are stuck in borderlands with few resources, others are moving to cities.
Globally more than half of forced displaced persons reside in urban areas—with reportedly three-
quarters of the 2.5 million Syrian refugees in Turkey flocking to cities. Urban displacement has
emerged as a new dimension to the challenges faced in determining longer-term development,
beyond the short-term humanitarian responses to internally displaced persons and refugee issues
and needs. The movement of people to non-camp urban settings is exacerbating the vulnerability
of poor urban residents. Shelter is an immediate priority for those displaced by extensive violent
conflict. The temporary shelter they take up on arrival often becomes a longer-term home.

The educational plight of refugees is highlighted in a recent country study by three refugee
agencies (LIRS 2016). In all the Middle Eastern and Northern African countries, many refugee
children are out of school and—especially for those who have now missed up to six years of
schooling—are rapidly losing the ability to catch up. Primary school attendance in Syria was quite
high; before the war, almost all of Syria’s children had been enrolled in primary school and the
literacy rate was an impressive 95 percent for 15- to 24-year-olds. Now, with the ongoing conflict,
an estimated 2.8 million children are no longer in school and Syria is estimated to have one of the
world’s lowest enrollment rates.

The loss of schooling for the current generation of Syrians, whether refugees or those still living
in Syria, represents a real step backward in human development. Without education, young people
understand that their hopes for the future are circumscribed. Lack of education has long-term
impacts for children, their families, future generations, and the society that must contend with large
numbers of unskilled, embittered youth. Children who are not being educated become especially
vulnerable to exploitation and recruitment into military activity (Mercy Corps 2014).

One aspect of the displacement dynamics is that refugees and internally displaced persons are
increasingly settling in urban areas. Globally, urbanization is being driven by a range of factors
including economic migration from rural areas and displacement because of conflict, political
instability, or natural disasters.

The right to education for displaced children is often difficult to realize in urban areas, with
multiple pressures on access and availability of education services. Displaced children and young
adults in urban areas face barriers to accessing education, even where services are available, in
both formal and informal settings. These include lack of documentation, policy restrictions, actual
(fees) and hidden costs (including transportation), and insecure environments both while travelling


                                                 12
to school and in school. If they can access education, they can face further challenges related to
language or curriculum, and discrimination by teachers and other students, which further affects
their attendance, retention, and learning outcomes. A further barrier is that the cost of living in
urban areas is significantly higher than in rural areas. Vulnerable families often cannot manage the
loss in income they face if the child or young adult attends education.

International Alert (2015) presented the findings from a case study comparing the impact on social
cohesion of segregated and mixed schooling systems of Lebanese and Syrian refugee students.
Based on qualitative research with students, their families, and teachers, the report argues that
perceptions and relationships between students in mixed classes improve over time. Though this
change bears little impact on relationships beyond school or the attitudes and relationships of
family and community members, it does equip students with the ability to counter prevailing
prejudice. The adoption by ministries and partner donors of an integrated approach bridging
education reform with social cohesion programs within the school would support better social
relationships and educational attainment for all students.

Surveys by International Alert, LIRS/CRS, and others have found that Syrian students in mixed
classes also conveyed a better and more diverse perception of the Lebanese than did Syrians in the
segregated afternoon shift. In both Akkar and Burj Hammoud, Syrian students conveyed a positive
impression of their neighbors, describing them as “very supportive and helpful.” Students in Akkar
conveyed a positive impression of some classmates at school and acquaintances in their
neighborhood because they treated them fairly and humanely, including some teachers and the
school director. Syrian students in Burj Hammoud also noted that some close Lebanese friends or
neighbors would stand up for Syrian families against hostile or unpleasant encounters.
Nevertheless, others still described the Lebanese as discriminatory and expressed bitterness at
being harassed or humiliated as Syrian refugees.

Rights and Education under Fragility, Conflict, and Violence: How Does Accountability for
Human Rights Contribute to Education Programs in Such Situations?

Rights-based approaches can help ensure fragility assessments include a focus on the right to
education as part of understanding the rights of children and the roles of the state, civil society,
and donors. They contribute to an overall framework for identifying the obstacles to realizing the
right to education. From a basic analysis using a human rights-based approach, country programs
can engage with governments in situations where limits on state capacity or donor engagement
make issues fraught with uncertainty. An approach based on a child rights analysis can help donors
and civil society organizations find greater room for engagement with both governments and
communities.

Although human rights-based approaches are not explicitly designed as a resource for analyzing
fragility, conflict, and violence, they can identify some of their causes and manifestations by
analyzing and understanding violations of children’s rights and the root causes of violations,
examining the legal and institutional frameworks for addressing these, and determining the
capacity and will of duty-bearers—especially the state—to address violations

   •   A human rights-based approach strengthens the capacities of rights-holders to make their
       claims, and of duty-bearers to meet their obligations, including accountability for services.


                                                13
   •   Obligations flowing from a human rights-based approach: a human rights-based approach
       engenders policy and programmatic obligations, and thus accountability helps combat
       persistent inequities and exclusions from quality services.
   •   Value-added of a human rights-based approach: a human rights-based approach adds
       value to standard policy discourse, and helps identify the potential pitfalls of using
       technical approaches without addressing rights and accountability for those rights.
   •   Human rights-based approach, service delivery, and outcomes: poor service delivery
       undermines human rights to education, health, waster, and sanitation. These unfulfilled
       rights worsen life outcomes for children and youth from poor communities, and social
       accountability provides one way to support core goals of a human rights-based approach.

The right of access to education is the right of every child to education based on equality of
opportunity and without discrimination on any grounds. To achieve this goal, education must be
available for, accessible to, and inclusive for all children. Thus, it must be determined who is
excluded, why, and how can this be overcome.

The right to quality education is the right of every child to quality education that enables him or
her to fulfill his or her potential, realize opportunities for employment, and develop life skills. To
achieve this goal, education needs to be relevant, embrace a broad curriculum, and be appropriately
resourced and monitored. Thus, the learning crisis must be overcome and learning must be
measured.

The right to respect within the learning environment is the right of every child to be respected for
her or his inherent dignity and to have her or his universal human rights respected within the
education system. To achieve this goal, education must be provided in a way that is consistent with
human rights, including equal respect for every child, opportunities for meaningful participation,
freedom from all forms of violence, and respect for language, culture, and religion. Thus, children
must be protected from conflict and violence.

Policies to Address Fragility, Conflict, and Violence and Displacement

Reforms in fragile states

Donors need to gain a better understanding of the key governance challenges facing education in
different fragile situations and highlight implications for supporting the education sector during
diverse types of fragility, including situations where the state is not fragile but there are deeply
rooted sources of conflict, violence, or both. Addressing “sector governance” in fragile situations
contributes to better, more sustainable results in development. A related goal is to better understand
the key macroeconomic and sector governance features that enable or hinder the development
transition through emergency relief, recovery, reconstruction, and more sustainable sector
development (Wales, Magee, and Nicolai 2016).

Recent work by the Secure Livelihoods Research Consortium highlights that delivering education
is never a neutral or apolitical process. Instead, how education is delivered matters, with the key
point from the six-year, eight-country study concluding that “it is not what you do but how you do
it” (SLRC 2017).



                                                 14
Facing these issues, what can donors do? The design and approach to monitoring a program should
depend on whether a donor’s priority is to improve education outcomes, strengthen the education
system, or catalyze broader societal change. The scope of the program should recognize the scale
of the investment—where donors are contributing a small proportion of the education budget, their
impact is unlikely to be great. Although the risks of working through government may be greater,
the potential benefits and influence are usually greater when it is possible to work that way.

Whether to work with and through government systems will depend on political factors and the
balance of perceived risks. Within all the components of the education system (stewardship,
financing, resource management, and service delivery) there is a spectrum of interventions ranging
from those that directly support government to those working totally outside it. The middle of this
spectrum is where significant thinking and experimentation is occurring, and some of these more
innovative approaches are likely to prove effective. Donors do not need to exclusively fund
through either government or parallel/nongovernmental channels, and in most instances a blend
(with variable proportions) will be most appropriate. It should be possible for essential educational
needs (such as basic classrooms) to be met with minor risk of undermining broader and more
strategic reforms.

Wherever possible, donors should support core stewardship functions—helping national
governments lead the development of coherent and realistic education strategies and coordinate
various stakeholders. This is particularly important given the range of actors and instruments
working in education, with overlapping and competing agendas: United Nations, bilateral and
multilateral agencies, NGOs, and many global education partnerships. Strong leadership, effective
priority setting, and strategic capacity building are required. The needs for harmonization and
rationalization of support in fragile states are particularly pressing, and may necessitate some
agencies changing how they operate.

It is important to think ahead and use evidence emerging from countries that have recovered from
extensive violent conflict and from other low-income countries to develop approaches that reflect
current thinking, rather than just try and rebuild what worked in the past. Donors must be prepared
to invest in developing new roles and skills to reflect the new role of the state as it moves from
monopoly provider of services to steward of the entire sector.

Though education specialists may never agree on a list of priorities that fit every situation, the case
studies reviewed suggest a brief list that can be used as a starting point. These are presented below
for states coming out of fragility. In states heading toward fragility, the priorities would remain
the same, though the actions would take a different cast.

   •   Teacher training: there should be an immediate rollout of basic teacher training workshops,
       along with first steps to rebuild a teacher training system.
   •   Provision of learning materials: immediate delivery should commence of whatever useful
       materials are available for teachers and students, and first steps should be taken to build a
       relevant curriculum and quality textbook procurement and distribution system.
   •   Community support: immediate measures are needed to reconnect families and
       communities with their schools, as are first steps to institutionalize school-community
       relationships.



                                                  15
   •   Learning spaces: communities should receive immediate help in finding safe and healthy
       places to teach, even if temporary, and first steps taken to map schools and set construction
       standards and procedures (USAID 2006).

Humanitarian and development mix—strengthening education systems

Despite 15 years of work on better analysis and programming in situations of fragility, the
architecture of the international aid community remains fixed around humanitarian and
development assistance. The prolonged nature of humanitarian crises and state fragility requires
approaches that take a longer-term view, particularly with education, for which there can be no
quick fix (Rose/Greeley 2006; Commins 2009).

Coordinating education during emergencies and reconstruction: challenges and responsibilities.

Coordinated education systems in humanitarian settings have the following advantages:

   •   Become longer-term connective tissue linking together people from the same country.
   •   Address fundamental value shared by families, communities, and nations.
   •   Enhance the relevance of education for children by connecting them to their peers.
   •   Unify people thought to be separated by ethnicity, region, or religion by using a common
       education system.

A simple dichotomy between humanitarian and developmental approaches is unhelpful. Many
fragile and conflict-affected states are countries with protracted crises that last for many years, and
often leave large numbers of people extremely vulnerable. Donors and aid instruments need to
adjust to varying levels of extensive violent conflict, political uncertainty, and government
capacity. There needs to be clear analysis of the short-term and long-term tradeoffs and the specific
goals and objectives of humanitarian instruments, particularly if short-term interventions might
run counter to creating local institutional capacity and create parallel systems that further fragment
aid programs (Commins 2009).

Reforms must be approached by thinking beyond ministries of education. And, part of this is the
necessity of addressing the difference between government and governance. Within a state, there
need to be many instruments and approaches for service delivery, whether public, Non-State
Providers, or a combination. To have external support, programs and policies will need to address
mismatches of concepts and languages between donors and countries—that is, ministries of
education are about systems and levels of operations; donors are about programs.

One key element that would contribute to fragility-informed programming is an analysis of power
structures and social networks that shape education. This could be developed in relation to
Education Systems Strengthening (as with Health Systems Strengthening), as this is not just
technical, it is also about power relations. To ground this work, ESS approaches can be used
through the development of community-level approaches.

In the case of supporting reforms, too much of the discussion of aid instruments has been a debate
on design of instruments. But the key is implementation, not design. There are still serious



                                                  16
obstacles with donor organization mandates compared to time required: funding mechanisms, aid
instruments, and transitions driven by donor politics and bureaucracies, not the realities in the
country and the timeframes for making decisions.

New initiatives are emerging, such as the Education Cannot Wait Fund, which seeks to transform
the delivery of education in emergencies—one that joins up governments, humanitarian actors,
and development efforts to deliver a more collaborative, and rapid response to the educational
needs of children and youth affected by crises. The fund aims to reach all crisis-affected children
and youth with safe, free, quality education by 2030. (Nicolai et. al. 2016)

Social accountability

One avenue for overcoming the obstacles of fragility as it relates to learning is by engaging with
local communities using mechanisms that ensure accountability in education. The starting point
for many contexts of fragility is that these governments are poorly positioned for effective social
accountability. There are diverse experiences with approaches to these processes and types of
accountability structures that have emerged in selected contexts of fragility (Oosterom 2009).
Different experiences with service delivery in fragile and conflict-affected states have pointed out
the difficulties in establishing accountability mechanisms. In many contexts of fragility,
accountability mechanisms have been weak—and establishing these mechanisms is time-
consuming and fraught with obstacles (World Vision 2012).

There are useful lessons from experiences with implementing in fragile and conflict-affected
states, such as that working with civil society actors can be effective even in situations where they
have limited capacity and power to engage with the state (for example, in authoritarian settings).
To achieve change, it is usually necessary to broker relations between civil society groups, other
powerful nonstate actors, and the state (say, through policy days, public forums, and meetings
seeking to overcome division and exclusionary factors).

In fragile and conflict-affected states, external agencies need to be careful to pay more attention to
analyzing state and civil society capacity for engagement. Based on experience, external agencies
may:

   •   Identify and support local accountability mechanisms based on a mapping of existing
       capacity and identification of potential change agents
   •   Strengthen partnerships across sectors and demographic and geographic divides, including
       through peer support and network building.
   •   Strengthen the social contract by understanding power dynamics and supporting alliances
       that cut across the public-private divide (Oosterom 2009; World Vision 2012).

The International Refugee Committee (IRC 2015) has undertaken social accountability
mechanisms in the Democratic Republic of Congo under a long-term program called Tuungane.
The project involves working with local government officials to build trust and develop ways for
local development committees to engage with service providers. The rigidity and hierarchical
nature of DRC systems presented significant obstacles both for engagement with and openings for
greater citizen participation over time. Decades of conflict have both weakened services and
created levels of mistrust that cannot be overcome without support for both officials and citizens.


                                                 17
IRC and partners invested in the training of more than150,000 community members in the
community scorecard process and external evaluations found that community members noted an
increase in health and education user committee members’ involvement in the management of
health facilities and schools, which they attributed to the community scorecard process.

There are also useful lessons from the experience with implementing the DFID-funded Within and
Without the State program in Afghanistan, Israel, the Occupied Palestinian Territories, South
Sudan, and Yemen. The program found that working with civil society actors can be effective even
in situations where they have limited capacity and power to engage with the state (such as in
authoritarian settings). To achieve change, it is necessary to broker relations between civil society
groups, other powerful nonstate actors, and the state (again, through events such as policy days,
public forums, and targeted meetings). This triangulated approach helps support the development
of the social contract. Aid agencies should also develop a better understanding of gender inequality
as a driver of conflict, and informal power arrangements that support or constrain change. Overall,
the process of citizen-state engagement is as important as the outcome (Oxfam 2012).

There is a significant caveat, though, in terms of social accountability and citizen engagement,
which also ties in to the next section on human resources. Communities are not equal regarding
how social, political, and economic relations are shaped and then shape services, such as education.
Before promoting accountability or engagement initiatives, external agencies need to be attuned
to the forms of exclusion that exist within a community, and thus the potential for these initiatives
to increase or reduce conflict and fragility, depending on the design and structure of the process.

Human resources for education

Four major, interrelated areas of common concern for human resource development in the
education sector in conflict-affected and fragile states or situations of violence are:

   •   Quality and appropriateness of existing education and training programs.
   •   Gender.
   •   Aspiration and leadership.
   •   Employment issues (INEE/HFSN 2013).

The quality and appropriateness of current education and training models are problematic for
education workforce development. Low quality of education, a key challenge globally, is
particularly problematic in conflict-affected contexts in short supply of able school graduates.
Academic certification processes are flawed and do not always correlate with skills. While
secondary education is critical to long-term workforce development, informal and short-term
technical and vocational education and training are more appropriate to produce education workers
than school-based education, particularly in refugee, post-conflict, and other contexts where
schooling has been disrupted and populations displaced. Lack of appropriate, effective in-service
training also adversely affects workforce development.

Maintaining gender balance in the workforce is a challenge. In many conflict-affected contexts,
fewer girls graduate from secondary school and fewer young women enter employment than do
boys and young men. This perpetuates a vicious circle: fewer female teachers and healthcare
workers means fewer girls and women can go to school or access healthcare. Among the serious

                                                 18
issues that limit secondary education access of girls is security—particularly about sexual
predation in and on the journey to schools—and concerns for their safety and honor. Female
teachers face the same security and honor issues. Schools can become safer and more acceptable
for girls by increasing the number of female educators.

Closely related to the above concerns is that of aspiration: many marginalized and disadvantaged
young people, especially but not only young women, have difficulties seeing a path or role for
themselves in the education sector. Role modeling and mentorship are both useful strategies for
workforce development. A parallel problem is that in some contexts young people’s aspirations,
focused on formal, government-salaried jobs, are too high: education and health workforce needs
in conflict-affected and fragile contexts are not primarily for university graduates (doctors,
graduate teachers).

Finally, education workers who have acquired the essential training and skills often cannot be
employed where the needs are greatest due to irrationalities in the employment system, corruption,
patronage, discrimination, and failure to recognize the qualifications of returnees who received
training outside the country.

Addressing negative conflict

NGOs and civil society organizations (CSOs) can help address local forms of conflict when they
are able to analyze how and why parents and teachers participate in local school committees and
parent-teacher associations (PTAs). Where diverse groups are fragmented, agencies can assess the
impact of different forms of participation on civil society building by measuring social capital
indicators (types of networks among associations and program participants, confidence in elected
officials and public institutions among parents and teachers, participants’ levels of engagement,
glimpses of trust or lack of it).
Different forms of education and training, along with monitoring, are required to address how
teachers engage with students in situations of fragmentation or exclusion. Teachers and community
groups can be supported to create bridges across ethnic and religious groups. Parents may be
reluctant or even hostile toward meeting parents of other ethnicities and religions without careful
introductions and the establishment of shared goals.

Reducing violence
The community’s role in protecting education from attack is critical and should be an area of focus.
While the community can be part of the problem of attacks as well, community ownership of local
provision of education is essential to the protection of schools, teachers, and students. Educators
work to engage local communities, especially parents and parent-teacher associations, in
protecting and monitoring school safety. Finding synergies to improve community monitoring and
protection could be a key area of collaboration (GCPEA 2014).

In addressing violence, greater attention to how local, regional, and national social norms and
framing affect and sometimes promote bullying or corporal punishment is necessary. (Some of the
concepts can be found in World Development Report 2015, though the report does not directly
address this issue. The World Bank’s Invisible Wounds workshop also provided some relevant


                                                19
policy concepts.) Along with the norms and framing, the basic aspects of pedagogy are important
regarding how teachers, principals, and other administrators seek to reduce violence, as it is
difficult to change norms and pedagogy. One critical element in this effort is the recognition that,
particularly in poorly resourced rural areas, the teacher is the face of the state, and thus carriers of
authority that are not easy to question. Addressing forms of violence such as corporal punishment
or bullying will require approaches that promote agency of groups that seek to reduce violence,
and this often requires promoting girls’ agency. But it is not feasible or practical to promote agency
for just one individual: it is necessary to need to work with the community, however complex this
proves to be.
Areas of interest for addressing on personnel, facilities, and students include:

    •   School and community safety and protection committees that organize unarmed protection
        measures.
    •   Physical infrastructure such as boundary walls, razor wire around schools, safety and
        security equipment, security cameras, metal detectors, and visitor screening at schools.
    •   Demarcation of schools with symbols to prevent targeted attacks.
    •   Designing and constructing safe school sites, including by building safe play areas and
        using strong construction materials able to withstand attacks.
    •   Unarmed guards from schools and communities used as safety patrols and escorts to and
        from school.
    •   Teacher/student housing near or on campus made available to reduce the risk of travel on
        dangerous routes to and from school (GPCEA 2016).

Given that attacks are largely politically motivated and that identity is so heavily involved in
conflicts, the curriculum and content of education seem to be critical areas to analyze in explaining
why attacks occur and how they can be prevented (GCPEA 2014, 2016).

Psychosocial responses to trauma in children require more attention as a long-term impact, as well
as trauma that affects teachers. Mental health responses can be provided in schools, and teacher
training to identify signs of trauma and refer students to health services is an area that can be jointly
developed. A human resource gap exists in this area. Teachers and other education workers are
well placed not so much to treat trauma, but to refer trauma victims to appropriate healthcare
workers. In some cases, teachers contribute to the trauma due to entrenched practices that could
also be addressed by training and sensitization initiatives influenced by both sectors (Mercy Corps
2014b; LIRS 2016; International Alert 2016).

Responding to displacement

Education programs need to be designed to address the needs of the urban displaced, returning
refugees, and host communities in a way that promotes social integration and mitigates tension.
Broad, inclusive approaches that address the shared vulnerabilities and needs of both displaced
people and their host communities may help promote a sense of community that embraces the
displaced, encourages positive interactions between the displaced and local communities, and
helps dispel prejudice and hostility. A key focus should be expanding access to infrastructure and
services for both displaced people and their host communities in areas with high concentrations of
displaced people, which can alleviate the additional burden placed on host communities while


                                                   20
fostering perceptions that displaced people can bring positive benefits to the whole community
(Norwegian Refugee Council 2016; LIRS 2016; Mercy Corps 2014; World Vision 2015; al-Saadi
2015).

Displacements and thus refugees and challenges involving internally displaced persons are long-
term problems, not just humanitarian emergencies, and so cannot be addressed through
humanitarian instruments only. In the instance of large-scale and protracted displacements, the
approach should be to both respond to the current protracted crisis and prepare for future programs
by improving education for both local populations and the displaced. This would include closing
gaps in education services and balancing the requirements of local communities with the displaced.
As noted, displaced people may arrive in borderlands that are already poorly served in terms of
education services—or they may, increasingly, end up in urban areas where they are less visible
to both the government and donors.

Conclusion

Among the service sectors, education has unique relevance for issues of national and cultural
identity—issues that may be extremely contentious in situations of overt conflict. Education can
provide the glue for social cohesion, an entry point for children into better lives, and the potential
for reducing marginalization and improving cohesion. In situations of fragility, education services
can provide important normative bases, encouraging a sense of normalcy and social stability in
fragile contexts. There are specific ways in which fragility, conflict, and violence pose special
challenges for education development policy (Appendix 2).
   •   Educational attainment is related to long-term outcomes, rather than short-term indicators.
   •   Identifying appropriate partners—such as community and religious organizations, or
       subnational governments—requires careful attention to longer-term institutional
       implications.
   •   Assistance priorities and opportunities will depend on the current context and phase of
       fragility.
In addressing fragility, conflict, and violence, key goals involve carefully addressing the
complexities of how the timeframe or humanitarian versus development divide is manifested at
various levels of the education system. The priority must be maintaining or restoring education
services at some basic level, if the services have been destroyed or otherwise lost, and at the same
time, taking a long-term perspective on what activities are needed to have a stronger, more
effective, and more inclusive education system.

In situations of conflict or violence, the objectives in strengthening education will have some type
of dual dimension that involves both ensuring that there is continuity in service provision while
also seeking to significantly affect how the service is provided. This may involve such areas as:

   •   Teacher training. A focus on basic pedagogical skills for both teachers in the classroom
       (and done in the classroom, not separate from it); and the first steps to address existing
       norms and behaviors as related to mistreatment or marginalized groups, such as bullying
       or corporal punishment. This leads directly to the issue of:




                                                 21
   •    Provision of learning materials. In post conflict and other fragility settings, there is an
        understandable expectation that teaching will begin with whatever materials are useful and
        available. But steps must also be taken quickly to address how curriculums, textbooks, and
        the language of instruction may fuel future conflicts.
   •    Community engagement. A few measures are needed to reconnect families and
        communities with their schools and first steps taken to address how communities may
        reinforce negative forms of conflict, bullying, or violence unless there are direct and
        specific methods of reducing these problems.

A strong commitment is required to support policy and programmatic changes to address various
elements of fragility, conflict, and violence in education. This includes improving the ability to
institutions to function in protracted crises or amid sudden shocks (such as displacement), identify
the priority areas of support for government and nonstate providers, and assessment tools for
monitoring the impacts on children. Among the questions for further consideration are:

    •   What will support a greater focus on education in emergencies, as well as education in
        protracted crises, the conflict-laden aspects of pedagogy and the school site, and the social
        and political norms that condone or encourage violence against children?
    •    What type of additional support through governmental and nonstate systems are essential
         services and how should it be delivered? What kinds of essential services are most critical
         for diverse types of fragility, conflict, and violence in different contexts, especially for
         the most vulnerable (including girls, excluded groups, and those with disabilities)?
    •    How can data and information be used to better target essential services for those
         affected by fragility, conflict, and violence? The goal of this paper is to examine whether
         and how data can be used as part of decision making for when education services need to
         be scaled up as opposed to when basic reforms are required, as well as how to ensure that
         education services reach the most vulnerable when needs exceed capacity.
    •    How can programs delivering education essential services be maintained through
         protracted crises and long-term manifestations of fragility? The goal here is to determine
         how programs can be designed to enable education services to be maintained through
         humanitarian, transition, and post crisis phases, recognizing that these are not linear. This
         should include looking at financing mechanisms, delivery mechanisms, and how program
         design can adapt to fragility.
    •    How can systems—including public and private institutions—delivering education
         services be responsive to manifestations of diverse forms of fragility, conflict, and
         violence? Tailored approaches include an assessment of what makes an education system
         exceptionally vulnerable or resilient, and identifying way to strengthen positive elements
         in education programs.




                                                 22
Appendix 1: Fragility, Conflict, and Violence as Related but Distinct Factors




                                         Fragility




                          Conflict                      Violence




Fragility involves the nature of the state and its relationship to its citizens—both the capacity and
will of the state to support education goals. Conflict involves entrenched and frequently
perpetuated differences and tensions between different identity groups that can be exacerbated by
state fragility. Violence is an outward and destructive manifestation both of state fragility (inability
to provide security) and conflict (unresolved points of tension, power imbalances, lack of means
to resolve conflicts in an equitable manner).
    •   Fragility contributes to greater unresolved conflict because the state is either unable or
        unwilling to reduce negative forms of conflict, or the state contributes to greater conflict,
        either deliberately or through lack of capacity to address underlying issues.
    •   Conflict contributes to fragility when unresolved conflicts reduce trust in the state as a
        source of security, fairness or services, such as education.
    •   Fragility contributes to violence through the lack of security for people affected by
        violence, through the perpetuation of violence as a form of state intimidation and control,
        and through the spread of differently governed spaces occupied by “uncivil” society.
    •   Violence contributes to fragility by delegitimizing the state, increasing the willingness of
        individuals and identity groups to seek alternative forms of retribution, and fostering
        grievances that require remediation.




                                                  23
•   Unresolved conflict contributes to violence by promoting grievances from exclusion,
    giving legitimacy to violence against excluded groups, and undermining social norms that
    mitigate against violence.
•   Violence increases negative conflict through shared trauma and a shared sense of injustice.




                                            24
Appendix 2: Key Issues for Donors

Why Education Is Important to Address the Causes of Fragility

     •    Education can reduce conflict between groups when social cohesion is included as a core
          norm for programs, and can reduce exclusion by providing a shared platform for
          community cohesion.
     •    Education services can be an entry point for donors to engage with government and civil
          society.
     •    Education serves as one element of the “peace dividend” in post conflict countries.
     •    Good education services delivery enables government to be effective and increase its
          legitimacy.
     •    Good education services can help break the vicious cycle in which fragility causes poor
          education indicators, and poor education can be a cause of alienation and grievances.

Systemic Weaknesses of Education in Fragile States

Education systems in fragile states have myriad needs, including:

     •    Few functional management systems are in place and management capacity is lacking.
          Without systems, there is no basis for developing budgets, tracking expenditures,
          assessing workloads, or tracking the availability of human resources.
     •    Government is neither providing nor regulating education services. For the most part,
          education services are provided by nonstate providers but with no policy direction or
          monitoring by government.
     •    There are no systems for establishing policy. Education systems are like a ship without a
          rudder. There is no direction or course to follow. Education providers have been free to
          undertake whatever services they desire and to provide non-standardized training to
          education workers.
     •    Education systems lack infrastructure. There are insufficient facilities, human resources,
          equipment, and supplies.
     •    Policy implementation is nonexistent. Education systems and government have been in
          disarray, so national policies have not been established to steer education systems. Policies
          that do exist are not followed because there is no oversight of the education sector or of
          policy implementation.
     •    Education systems operate without adequate information. There may be no information at
          all. There is no information on learning outcomes, what kind of and how many education
          facilities exist, and where education workers are located.

Priority Tasks for Donors Assisting Fragile State Education Ministries

One feasible approach would be to develop a set of key systems indicators similar to those in
Health Systems Strengthening4. This could contribute to a sharper, agreed focus on basic elements
4 Health Systems Strengthening is a broad concept, and there is no single set of best practices that can be put forward as a model
for improved performance in every context. WHO, in an effort to fill this gap, developed the Framework for Action which consists


                                                               25
of Education System Strengthening—governance, finance, human resources, supply management
and school sites, inclusion/access, pedagogy—as required in different contexts.

    •    Donor coordination. Establish one platform for humanitarian and development resources,
         explore the potential for pooled funds or a basic package for education.
    •    Finance. Provide reliability by committing to long-term financing, ensure flexibility in
         financing from relief to transition to development, and be willing to cover recurrent costs.
    •    Outcomes. Address urgent education needs, starting with a basic package of education
         services and expand the range of services over time.
    •    Management systems. Generate information for planning and management and build
         capacity to manage the education system.
    •    Develop policymaking mechanisms for policy implementation and regulation, as well as
         for gathering information and monitoring performance.
    •    Capacity. Develop human resources for education, ensure a regular supply of educational
         materials, and rehabilitate or reconstruct education facilities.




of six building blocks that can be used to guide planning and priority setting by actors supporting health systems reforms. These
building blocks outline the essential functions of a health system. They apply across the continuum from humanitarian relief to
sustainable development, and they consist of (1) leadership and governance; (2) financing of health systems; as well as the
strengthening of (3) health information; (4) service delivery; (5) human resources; and (6) medical and drug supply systems. Since
each addresses a cross-cutting function of a health system, the building blocks complement and overlap with one another. (from
Commins and Ter Veen 2011)




                                                               26
References

al-Saadi, Yazan, “Restrictions, perceptions, and possibilities of Syrian refugees' self-agency in
Lebanon”, Civil Society Knowledge Center, Lebanon Support, 2015
Bekerman Zvi and Claire McGlynn, Addressing ethnic conflict through peace education:
international perspectives. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007
Bensalah, Kacem, ed., 'Guidelines for Education in Situations of Emergency and Crisis: EFA
strategic planning', UNESCO, Paris, 2003
Bruce, Beverlee, “Liberia: The Challenges of Post-Conflict Reconstruction,” Social Science
Research Council, September 2004
Blunt, Peter, ‘The Political Economy of Accountability in Timor-Leste: Implications for Public
Policy’, Public Administration and Development, vol. 29, 2009
Burde, Dana; Ozen Guven, Jo Kelcey, Heddy Lahmann, Khaled Al-Abbadi, ‘What Works to
Promote Children’s Educational Access, Quality of Learning, and Wellbeing in Crisis -Affected
Contexts’, Education Rigorous Literature Review. Department for International Development,
2015
Bush, Kenneth and Diana Saltarelli, Two Faces of Education in Ethnic Conflict, UNICEF, 2000
Christophersen, Mona; Cathrine Moe Thorleifsson and Åge A. Tiltnes, 'Ambivalent Hospitality
Coping Strategies and Local Responses to Syrian Refugees in Lebanon', Fafo-report, 2013
Commins, Stephen and Anne Marie ter veen, ‘From Services to Systems’, 2011
Commins, Stephen, ‘Treading a Delicate Path: NGOs in Fragile States’, Save the Children, 2009
Davies, Lynn, Education and conflict: complexity and chaos. London: Routledge, 2004
Davies, Lynn, Schools and war: urgent agendas for comparative and International Education,
Compare 35(4), 2005
Davies L., Capacity development for education systems in fragile contexts. Torino: European
Training Foundation, 2009.
Davies Lynn, Learning for state-building: capacity development, education and fragility,
Comparative Education 47(2), 2011.
Davies Lynn, Breaking the cycle of crisis: learning from Save the Children’s delivery of education
in conflict-affected states. London: Save the Children Fund, 2012
DFID, Why We Need to Work Effectively in Fragile States, 2007
DFID, Education Position Paper: Improving Learning, Expanding Opportunities; July 2013
Dryden-Peterson, Sarah, ‘Refugee Children Aspiring toward the Future: Linking Education and
Livelihoods’, in K. Mundy & S. Dryden-Peterson (Eds.), Educating Children in Conflict ones: A
New Agenda for Education in Fragile States: Research, Policy, and Practice for Systemic Change
(A Tribute to Jackie Kirk). New York: Teachers College Press, 2011
El-Bushra, Judy, Asha El-Karib and Angela Hadjipateras, 'Gender-sensitive Program Design and
Planning in Conflict-affected Situations', Research Report, Agency for Co-operation and Research
in Development, January 2002.
European Commission, Study on Governance Challenges for Education in Fragile States 2009
Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack (GCPEA), The Role of Communities in
Protecting Education from Attack: Lessons Learned, 2014
GCPEA, Summary Report of the Workshop on Promising Practices for Protecting Education from
Attack and Schools from Military Use, Istanbul (October 2015), March 2016
GPCEA Education Under Attack, 2014INEE/HFSN, Workshop on Health and Education in
Fragile States, 2012



                                               27
GIECP (Global Initiative to End Corporal Punishment), ‘Prohibiting All Corporal Punishment of
Children’, 2016
INEE/HFSN, ‘Health and Education in Conflict-Affected and Fragile Contexts: Bridging the
development gap and enhancing collaborations’, International Network on Education in
Emergencies and Health in Fragile States Network, 2013
International Alert: “Better Together: The Impact of the Schooling System of Lebanese and Syrian
Displaced Pupils on Social Stability”, November 2015
International Alert: “Teaching Peace, Building Resilience: Assessing the Impact of Peace
Education for Young Syrians”, May 2016
International Rescue Committee, ‘Accountability in Local Service Delivery’, 2015
Invisible Wounds, World Bank Workshop Report, May 2015
Kaur, Balvinder, Peace education: new trends and innovations. New Delhi: Deep and Deep, 2006
Lal, Aftab, ‘Don’t Tell Them Where We Live---Caste and Access to Education in Northern Sri
Lanka’, Working Paper 49, December 2016, SLRC
Lebanon Support, “The Conflict Context in Beirut: The Social Question, Mobilisations Cycles and
the City’s Securitization”, 2015
Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service; Islamic Relief; US Catholic Bishop’s Conference,
‘Childhood Interrupted’, 2016
Machel, Graça, 'Impact of Armed Conflict on Children: A review of progress since the 1996 United
Nations report on the impact of armed conflict on children', UNICEF, United Nations Publications,
New York, 2003.
McGlynn, Claire, and Michalinos Zembylas, Peace education in conflict and post-conflict
societies: comparative perspectives. Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2009
McKay, Susan and Dyan Mazurana, 'Girls in Militaries, Paramilitaries, and Armed Opposition
Groups', International Conference on War-Affected Children, Government of Canada, Winnipeg,
Canada, 2000
Mercy Corps, Seeking Stability: Evidence on Strategies for Reducing the Risk of Conflict in
Northern Jordanian Communities Hosting Syrian Refugees, 2014a
Mercy Corps, Lost Generation or Generation Now?, 2014b
Minority Rights Group: Minorities, Indigenous People and the post-2015 Framework, 2015
Moriarty, Kate, Achieving SDG4 through a Human Rights Based Approach to Education,
Background Paper for World Development Report 2018, 2017
Mosselson, Jacqueline; Wendy Wheaton, and Paul St. John Frisoli, ‘Education and Fragility: A
Synthesis of the Literature,’ Journal of Education for International Development, 4, no. 1, 2009
Nicolai, Susan and Carl Triplehorn, ‘The Role of Education in Protecting Children in Conflict’,
Humanitarian Practice Network Paper 42, March 2003
Nicolai, Susan et. al. ‘Education Cannot Wait: A Fund for Education in Emergencies’, ODI, 2016
Norwegian Refugee Council, Education Responses in Urban Settings, 2016
Norwegian Refugee Council, Education Handbook, 2009
OECD, ‘States of Fragility’, 2016
OECD, ‘Synthesis Paper on Services in Fragile States’, Fragile States Workstream, 2006
O'Malley, Brendan, Education under attack, 2010. Paris: UNESCO
O’Moore, Mona, Guiding Policy Framework for Policy Approaches to School Bullying and
Violence, 2004
Oosterom, Marjoke, ‘Fragility at the Local Level’, Hivos International, 2009
Oxfam, ‘Within and Without the State’, 2012



                                               28
Parks, Thomas; Nat Colletta and Ben Oppenheim, ‘The Contested Corners of Asia’, Asia
Foundation, 2013
Pherali, Tejendra and Dean Garratt, Dean, ‘Post-Conflict Identity Crisis in Nepal: Implications
for Educational Reforms’, International Journal of Educational Development, 2014
PLAN International, The Campaign to Stop Violence in Schools, Third Progress Report, 2013
PLAN International, ‘Are Schools Safe and Equal Places for Girls and Boys in Asia? Research
Findings on School-Related Gender-Based Violence’, 2014
PLAN Canada, ‘A Girl's Right to Learn Without Fear, 2012
PLAN UK, ‘Learn Without Fear’, 2012.
Pavanello, Sara and Victoria Metcalfe, with Ellen Martin, ‘Survival in the City: Youth,
displacement and violence in urban settings’, Humanitarian Policy Group Policy Brief 44, 2012
Pouligny, Beatrice, Presentation at the workshop, ‘Invisible Wounds’, World Bank, 2014
Rabling, Brenda; Beatriz Magaloni, Edgar Franco Vivanco and Gustavo Robles, ‘How the
Mexican Drug War Affects Kids and Schools’, International Journal of Educational Development,
51, 2016
Rose, Pauline and Martin Greeley, ‘Education in Fragile States’, 2006
Science Daily, Texas Tech University, ‘Researchers examine effects of toxic stress on children's
brain development’, December 2016.
Shields, Robin and Jeremy Rappleye, ‘Differentiation, Development, (Dis)Integration: Education
in Nepal’s ‘People’s War’, Research in Comparative and International Education 3, 2008
SLRC (Dan Maxwell, Dyan Mazurana, Michael Wagner and Rachel Slater), ‘Livelihoods, Conflict
and Recovery: Findings from the Secure Livelihoods Research Consortium’, 2017
Smith, Alan and Tony Vaux, ‘Education, Conflict and International Development’, DFID 2003
Stanford, Program on Poverty and Governance (POGOV), Educational and Entrepreneurial
Initiatives to Support Youth in Places of Violence, April 28-29, 2015
UNICEF, ‘Child Protection from Violence, Exploitation and Abuse: Children in Conflict and
Emergencies’, 2000
UNESCO, Learning to live together: values education for peace, human rights, democracy and
sustainable development for the Asia-Pacific region. Bangkok: UNESCO, Principal Regional
Office for Asia and the Pacific, 1998
UNESCO, ‘How Education Can Prevent Violence’, 2011
UNESCO, Protecting Education from Attack: A State-of-the-Art Review, Paris: UNESCO, 2010
UNESCO, EFA Global Monitoring Report 2011: The Hidden Crisis
UNESCO, EFA, Global Monitoring Report 2013: Children Still Battling to go to School
UNESCO, 'Assessment EFA/2000 – Thematic Study: Education in situations of emergency and
crisis', Paris, 2000
UNHCR, ‘Ensuring Access to Education: Operational Guidance on Refugee Protection and
Solutions in Urban Areas’, 2011
UNHCR, ‘Jordan Home Visits Report: Living in the Shadows’, 2014
UNIFEM, ‘Who is accountable to women?’, 2008
United States Fund for UNICEF, 'The Learning Tree: Education and reintegration for children
affected by war in West Africa', 2003.
USAID, ‘Delivering Education Services in Fragile States: Four Case Studies’, 2006
Uwazie, Ernest, ed., Conflict resolution and peace education in Africa. Lanham, MA:
Lexington, 2003
Caroline Vagneron, “Homophobic Bullying in Educational Institutions Undermines World Bank
Equity Efforts”, blog, World Bank, 2017


                                              29
Wales, Joseph; Arran Magee and Susan Nicolai, ‘How does political context shape education
reforms and their success?’ Lessons from the Development Progress project, 2016
WHO, World Report on Violence and Health, 2002
WHO, Global Status Report on Violence Prevention, 2014
WHO, Violence Prevention Alliance, 2016
WHO/Cambridge U. Institute of Criminology Violence Research Centre, Global Strategies to
Reduce Violence by 50% in 30 Years, 2015
Winthrop, Rebecca and Elena Matsui, ‘A New Agenda for Education in Fragile States’, 2013
World Bank, ‘Low Income Countries Under Stress: Task Force Report’ 2000
World Bank, World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People
Washington: World Bank, 2003
World Bank, World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development, Washington:
World Bank, 2011
World Bank, World Development Report 2015: Mind, Behavior and Society, World Bank, 2015
World Vision, ‘Social Cohesion Between Syrian Refugees and Host Communities in Lebanon and
Jordan’, 2015
Young Lives, ‘Understanding Children’s Experience of Violence in Peru: Evidence from Young
Lives’, 2016




                                            30
