                 REVEALING THE MISSING LINK:
      PRIVATE SECTOR SUPPLY-SIDE READINESS FOR PRIMARY
           MATERNAL HEALTH SERVICES IN INDONESIA1

          Executive Summary
Every six hours, the death of a woman from the complications of pregnancy serves as the most vexing
reminder of Indonesia’s challenges with maternal health (MH). This is incommensurate with
Indonesia’s strong economic development and stature compared with regional peers, especially as
MH is a marker of overall health system performance and affects economic opportunities especially
for the poor. The maternal mortality ratio (MMR) is high and progress on improving MH outcomes
has been slow, such that the MH Millennium Development Goal (MDG) has already been missed. This
contrasts starkly with Indonesia’s commendable commitment to improve the coverage and equity of
health services, as there are less than two years before the 2019 target date for the attainment of
universal health coverage under Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional (JKN), Indonesia’s social health
insurance scheme.

This policy paper analyzes new data on the ‘missing link’ of primary MH service provision, i.e., private
providers, which is critical given that 54 percent of all deliveries in Indonesia occurred in the private
sector, compared with 22 percent in the public sector, although overall rates of institutional
deliveries remain below target. Key findings from the analysis elucidate the potential value of the
private sector in expanding access to MH services covered by the financial purchasing and strategic
purchasing umbrella of JKN, the effectiveness of these private MH services, and patient satisfaction.

The analysis found that private MH providers expanded access to MH services through extended
opening hours, compared to public MH providers, but due to their distribution in urban areas and
concentration in Java island, there was no obvious expansion in geographic access attributable to
private MH providers. This was accentuated by the low coverage of private MH providers under JKN
(only one-third are empaneled) – reasons given for non-empanelment were financial (low
reimbursements rates) and non-fulfilment of the eligibility criteria.

Private MH providers were generally low-volume providers, with an average of only four deliveries
per month, and the service readiness of private MH providers, as measured using WHO’s Service
Availability and Readiness (SARA) framework, was generally lower and more variable than public
sector puskesmas. The service readiness of single practitioner providers was also generally lower
than multiple practitioner providers, but empanelment under JKN was associated with higher service
readiness. Surprisingly however, at an individual facility-level, there were generally no urban-rural



1 This policy paper was written by Wei Aun Yap (Consultant), Eko Setyo Pambudi (Research Analyst), Puti Marzoeki (Senior Health
Specialist), Jewelwayne Salcedo Cain (Consultant), and Ajay Tandon (Lead Economist) of the World Bank (WB). The team also received
substantive inputs during the review process from peer reviewers: Endang Achadi (Center for Family Welfare, University of Indonesia),
Zohra Balsara (USAID), Theingi Myint (WHO), Rouselle Lavado (Health Economist, WB), Ellen van de Poel (Health Economist, WB), and
Jeremy Maurice Veillard (Senior Health Specialist, WB). The team would also like to thank WB colleagues who have provided valuable
inputs: Pandu Harimurti (Senior Health Specialist, WB), Junedi (Consultant, WB), Ali Subandoro (Health Specialist, WB), and Vikram
Rajan (Senior Health Specialist, WB). We would also like to thank the expert panel for the clinical vignettes: Susri Rahayu (East Java
Provincial Health Office), Siti Fatimah (East Java Provincial Health Office), Parlyn Situmorang (DKI Jakarta Health Office), Lucas
Hermawan (MoH), Mularsih Restianingrum (MoH), Muhamad Yusuf (MoH), Dwirani Amelia (Budi Kemuliaan Hospital), and Shinta
Purwitasari (University of Gajah Mada). This policy paper received co-financing from the PFM MDTF and the Gender TF.
differences (a rural facility was often better equipped than its urban counterpart), when the mix and
distribution facilities were not considered. However, poskesdes and polindes, which are important
primary public MH facilities in the rural area had notably weak service readiness to provide basic
obstetric care. Although the government prioritized 64 districts which account for a substantial
proportion of maternal deaths in Indonesia, the analysis found that there were only minimal
differences between MH service readiness in these 64 high-priority districts compared with matched
comparator districts.

Compared with public MH providers, private MH providers were relatively weak in the availability
of emergency obstetric drugs and the actual use (measured by patient exit interviews) of diagnostic
tests; but both the public and private sector had major weaknesses in the service readiness domains
of medicines, diagnostics, basic obstetric care, and referrals. Provider ability, as measured using
clinical vignettes validated by a panel of expert clinicians, indicated that the provision of
comprehensive antenatal care and the management of obstetric emergencies was weak across both
sectors. The similarities in provider ability was not surprising given the prevalence of dual-practice,
whereby 36 percent of private midwives were also practicing in the public sector. Patients, however,
were generally more satisfied with public providers than private providers, due to the fees charged
and perceived discrimination, although patients perceived that private providers spent more time
with the them and had better facility supplies and equipment.

Key headline policy implications arising from the analysis, actionable by various key stakeholders,
are summarized below.

Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Social (BPJS): Advance strategic purchasing functions beyond
claims administration, given mandated role as JKN’s strategic purchaser

   •   Strengthen BPJS empanelment and contract renewal of private providers
       progressively, verifiably, and transparently, as BPJS is the key link to improving the
       quality and coverage of private MH providers. Firstly, service readiness standards should be
       progressively leveled-up to fully attain the norms set by an appropriate national and/or
       international technical authority, i.e., MOH or WHO. Secondly, relationship between volume
       and outcomes should be leveraged by encouraging the consolidation of low-volume
       providers in densely populated urban areas. Thirdly, the assessment process should be made
       more robust and verifiable. Lastly, BPJS should increase the amount of published information
       on empaneled providers, both public and private, so that patients can make informed choices
       of provider.
   •   Increase the supply of BPJS-empaneled private MH providers in viable yet
       underserved areas, by systematically identifying coverage gaps using geographic
       analysis and incentivizing private investment. The potential coverage of JKN’s maternal
       health benefits package at a particular locality could be limited. While unavoidable in remote
       rural areas, pockets of underserved areas in urban areas or areas with sufficient population
       densities need to be identified and understood in greater detail. This needs detailed
       geographic analysis to create a supply-side ‘masterplan’ to ensure effective depth of coverage
       throughout Indonesia. BPJS should then use financial and non-financial mechanisms in
       including private providers specifically in underserved areas.
   •   Reform BPJS provider payment mechanisms and tariff rates for MH services, as these
       are powerful levers to improve service content, effectiveness, and equity. BPJS should
       undertake a review of current provider payment mechanisms (PPMs) and tariff rates used to


                                                  2
       purchase maternal health services, to manage costs sustainably, improve the effectiveness of
       services, promote empanelment of private providers in viable underserved areas, and
       promote institutional deliveries especially in rural areas. An equal/level reimbursement
       scheme across all provider and geographical contexts is not equitable as average unit costs
       may differ, for example, average costs may be higher where population densities and
       utilization rates are low. Although there is some evidence that BPJS reimbursement fees are
       not attractive to many private providers, BPJS should not be expected to reimburse at the
       high rates paid out of pocket (OOP) by patients.

Ministry of Finance (MOF): Spend more, right, and better

   •   Spend more, right, and better. MH is a key human development investment opportunity for
       Indonesia, especially given the vast scope for improvement and the importance of locking in
       efficient and sustainable purchasing systems for the future, even if these require investments
       now. The current JKN deficit is acknowledged but MH services are a relatively small
       proportion of services covered by JKN and hence a feasible low hanging fruit.
   •   Invest to lever reforms. Policy implications for BPJS above may also have financial
       implications of note to MOF, but these investments should be made conditional on BPJS
       advancing its capabilities from passive claims administration to active strategic purchasing.

Ministry of Health (MOH): Clarify policies, and use financing levers and the private sector

   •   Clarify the basis of district selection and program content for deciding on national
       high-priority MH districts. The basis of selecting the 64 high-priority districts should be
       considered carefully as MMR for these 64 districts collectively is slightly lower than the
       national MMR and the survey finds minimal differences in service readiness between priority
       and non-priority districts, for both public and private providers. An alternative framework
       for reducing disparities and prioritizing areas for MMR-reducing interventions, which
       considers both MMR and absolute number of maternal deaths, is proposed in this paper.
   •   Clarify the role of polindes/poskesdes in providing MH services, as public providers
       are indispensable in remote rural areas. The study indicates that the service readiness of
       polindes/poskesdes is very weak, yet the public sector is indispensable as the business case
       for establishing a private MH provider in remote rural areas is not compelling. This is a
       fundamental problem in delivering services in sparsely populated remote areas with two
       paradigms: Invest substantially to bolster service readiness in poskesdes/polindes, even
       though many are underutilized; or limit (and strengthen) the use of polindes/poskesdes to
       antenatal care (including as a platform for outreach and community based activities to
       promote institutional deliveries) and other preventive non-emergency services, but
       recalibrate the role of polindes/poskesdes with regard to deliveries. Notably, the 2016
       Jampersal benefits package which includes funding for maternity waiting homes and
       referrals can be used to entrench the role polindes/poskesdes not as a location for
       institutional deliveries but organize, encourage, and facilitate the timely transfer of a
       pregnant women to the nearest puskesmas or, eventually, empaneled private MH facility for
       delivery.
   •   Use both supply-side (e.g., DAK) and demand-side (e.g., BPJS) financing levers to
       emphasize outcomes and reduce disparities. The central MOH has limited supply-side
       financing instruments to affect service delivery at the sub-national level, apart from
       prioritizing a limited part of the budgetary inputs over which the central MOH has


                                                 3
       responsibility. There are few hard levers to enforce normative standards on sub-national
       governments, apart from what is permissible by technical guidelines for utilizing DAK
       funding. This DAK financing should hence be monitored closely with greater emphasis on
       accountability and outcomes, but long-term reliance only on centralized vertical financing
       channels for specific programs down to the facility level on the supply side, is not ideal in
       terms of decentralization and fiscal reforms. Expanding financing on the demand-side in
       priority districts or sub-districts, by engaging with JKN through BPJS, is hence a synergistic
       channel which will require detailed information on MH utilization and outcomes to inform
       sub-national priority setting. This priority setting can inform the use of financial and non-
       financial levers to improve the coverage and effectiveness of MH providers.
   •   Explore further opportunities to engage the private sector, including both for-profit
       and non-profit organizations, through public-private partnerships (PPPs). PPPs should
       not only be confined to the provision of capital investments for health infrastructure but also
       for health services, including maternal health. Other PPP innovations can be considered, for
       example, training and deploying high quality human resources for health, supporting
       services, and appropriate mechanisms to invest in health infrastructure. These partnerships
       will require capacity to monitor and manage, to ensure it adds value to the system and
       minimizes unintended consequences.

Other policy implications

   •   Empower district heath offices (dinkes) with a stronger stewardship role over the
       private sector, in collaboration with BPJS. The dinkes already has an existing obligation to
       provide strong quality monitoring of and supervision to facilities, including private MH
       facilities. Instruments and guidelines for these supervision activities are already developed
       and available, but these processes should be strengthened and standardized, with clear
       linkages to the credentialing process, BPJS contract renewals, and practice licensing so that it
       will have real implications for private providers. The dinkes will need to be empowered with
       adequate resources and incentives to perform these tasks.
   •   Strengthen integrated care across the continuum of providers, through improved
       referral systems for both the private and public sector at the primary- and hospital-
       level. Although it would not be possible to solve the referral challenges in Indonesia
       overnight, several possible next steps can be considered. On the supply-side, service
       readiness, including both ‘hardware’ (e.g. transportation and communications) and
       ‘software’, referral plans, and formal or informal channels for referral can be strengthened.
       Risk stratification and individual delivery plans should be linked directly to the benefits
       provided by DAK Jampersal, which provides financing for maternity waiting homes and
       referrals. In addition, maldistribution of specialist obstetricians who can conduct caesarean
       sections could potentially be mitigated through task shifting and training local non-specialist
       doctors to be able to conduct emergency caesarean sections. PPMs should not perversely
       incentivize primary MH providers to hold on to high-risk cases until complications happen.
       Integrated care would need to be enabled by appropriate PPMs.
   •   Involve private MH providers fully in in-service training and strengthen pre-service
       training for all MH providers. Findings from this study indicate that there is weak public
       and private provider ability to deliver comprehensive antenatal care and to manage obstetric
       emergencies such as post-partum hemorrhage according to clinical guidelines. Unless dual-
       practicing, private midwives have less opportunities to participate in in-service training to
       maintain and update their clinical skills. This factor hence underlines the importance of pre-


                                                  4
    service training, by ensuring the adoption of competency-based education in midwife
    education, and that students get adequate clinical practice to develop their skills. The policy
    which requires practicing midwives to obtain training credit points to renew their five-yearly
    registration with the Indonesia Midwife Association (IBI) should be strengthened not only
    through tighter enforcement but also by expanding opportunities. Ensuring standardized
    quality and equal access to the training program across the country is essential for skills
    maintenance.
•   Promote higher quality standards through voluntary certification schemes, such as
    Bidan Delima, which complement the formal regulatory and accreditation processes.
    The Bidan Delima program is a franchise for certifying private midwives, managed by the
    Indonesia Midwife Association (IBI). The process to be certified as a Bidan Delima involves
    registration with IBI, support from a facilitator to improve specific skills and competencies
    as identified by a self-assessment instrument, an on-site visit, and reference materials on
    clinical standards. Although there are areas for improvement in this program, initiatives such
    as these can be a helpful complement to improving standards, especially if professional
    bodies such as IBI are involved.




                                              5
I.        Introduction
Despite progress in recent decades, Indonesia’s maternal mortality ratio (MMR) remains high. Joint
WHO-UNICEF-WB estimates indicate an MMR of 126 per 100,000 live births in 20152, down from
446 in 1990.3 Data from other sources such as the census indicate that the MMR may be even higher
than this estimate. About 6,400 maternal deaths among 5 million live births occurred in the country
in 2015: this amounts to roughly one maternal death every six hours. At current levels, Indonesia’s
MMR remains high relative to its income level and to peers such as ASEAN and BRICS countries.4
Indonesia’s MMR is high due to a combination of factors including poor access to emergency obstetric
services, poor supply-side service readiness and quality of health care, and a non-significant share of
non-institutional deliveries.

The MMR varies substantially within the country. In the eastern provinces of West Papua, Papua,
Central Kalimantan, Central Sulawesi, and Maluku, the MMR is above 200; but DKI Jakarta, Jambi,
West Java, Bali, and Lampung have MMRs that are less than 100. However, due to large populations,
the absolute numbers of maternal deaths are higher in these latter provinces despite relatively low
MMRs. The government has identified 64 high-priority districts across nine provinces for targeted
efforts at reducing the national MMR. These 64 districts in the provinces of North Sumatera, South
Sumatera, Lampung, DKI Jakarta, West Java, Banten, Central Java, East Java, and South Sulawesi are
home to 33% of Indonesia’s population and account for 30% of maternal deaths. These 64 districts
were selected on the basis of absolute numbers of maternal deaths, not district-level MMRs.

Indonesia’s high MMR contrasts starkly with its national commitment to attain universal health
coverage (UHC) by 2019. Landmark legislation in 2004 and 2011 have established a pathway to UHC
and social health insurance (SHI) coverage rates have increased significantly recently. In 2014, when
Indonesia merged its various SHI schemes under Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional (JKN), the country
formed one of the largest single-payer population coverage programs in the world, covering about
70% of the population, with a 2019 target to attain universal coverage for everyone in Indonesia. As
the country gears towards attaining UHC and prepares to gain upper middle-income status, its high
MMR remains notably anomalous, despite decent utilization of antenatal care (ANC) and skilled birth
attendance.

Improvements in maternal health (MH) are key for human development. The importance of MH was
recognized by its inclusion in the millennium development goals (MDGs) which called for a three-
fourths reduction in the MMR over 1990-2015 and continues with the sustainable development goals
(SDGs) which call for a reduction in the MMR to less than 70 per 100,000 live births by 2030. Unlike
the child health MDG, Indonesia did not attain the 2015 MDG target and progress on reducing the
MMR will need to be sustained in coming years for Indonesia to attain the 2030 SDG target. Many
studies have demonstrated that poor MH outcomes – early pregnancies, unintended pregnancies,
excess fertility, poorly managed obstetric complications – adversely affect the opportunities for poor
women and their families to escape poverty.5 Women’s full and equal participation in the


2 Note: The MMR accepted by the Government of Indonesia (Bappenas) is 305 per 100,000 live births (Source: SUPAS 2015)
3 Maternal Mortality in 1990-2015 WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, WB, United Nations Population Division Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-
Agency Group http://www.who.int/gho/maternal_health/countries/idn.pdf?ua=1
4 ASEAN is a regional organization comprising Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines,

Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam. BRICS refers to the association of five emerging countries Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
5 Greene, ME and TW Merrick (2005), Poverty Reduction: Does Reproductive Health Matter? HNP Discussion Paper Series, Washington,

DC: World Bank.


                                                                     6
development process is contingent on accessing essential MH services, including the ability to make
voluntary and informed decisions about fertility; untreated pregnancy and birth complications deter
the ability of women to support their families and communities. Access to maternal health and
related coverage indicators – include family planning, ANC, and skilled birth attendance – are
recommended by WHO-WB among the dashboard of tracers for assessing progress towards UHC.6

Various studies7 have already described the health financing, demand-side, and public-sector context
of MH in Indonesia and these findings will not be recapitulated here in detail, but a notable knowledge
gap is the private sector context. This gap is significant as most MH service utilization is at private
facilities. It is this gap or ‘missing link’ that this policy paper reveals by presenting fresh information
on private sector service readiness to deliver key MH services such as ANC and basic obstetric care
at the primary care level. This paper uses MH utilization data from the National Socioeconomic
Survey (SUSENAS) and the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS), combined with facility data collected
in the 2016 Indonesia Quantitative Service Delivery Survey (Indonesia QSDS 2016) , from a sample
of private MH providers in the 64 high-priority districts. The paper compares service readiness for
MH across these private providers with those in public providers in the sampled 64 high-priority
districts. Detailed sampling and analytical methodology is described in Annex A.

Although the Government of Indonesia has not articulated an overarching and formal vision for
private health provision in Indonesia, the government has been positive about the role of the private
sector: JKN, the government’s SHI initiative, purchases services from private providers consistent
with Indonesia’s National Medium Term Development Plan 2015-2019 (RPJMN 2015-2019). 8 This
plan highlights the role of public-private partnerships (PPPs), which are regulated by Perpres No.
38/2015 and Permen PPN No. 4/2015. Given the current realities of MH service provision in
Indonesia, where private provision is dominant yet overall utilization of institutional deliveries is
below target, an ideological divide on private vs public provision is unnecessary as both sectors are
needed to close the provision gap. Strategies to improve the quality and extend the coverage of both
sectors need to be informed by the common and distinct strengths and weaknesses of each sector.
For example, different strategies may be needed in West Papua, a remote and rural area where the
public sector will remain a critical provider, compared with the urban areas of Java, where the private
sector has a vital role. Policy relevant findings for the public sector including issues specific to health
financing have already been articulated in earlier studies and are not the focus of this policy paper,
which is the private sector. Together, these papers provide critical inputs to informing policy reforms
aimed at helping Indonesia reduce its MMR to levels that are, at the very least, commensurate with
its socioeconomic status and for attaining UHC.




6 World Health Organization and the World Bank. 2015. Tracking Universal Health Coverage: First Global Monitoring Report. WHO:
Geneva, Switzerland. Available: http://www.who.int/healthinfo/universal_health_coverage/report/2015/en/.
7 Health financing: Tandon, Ajay, Eko Pambudi, Pandu Harimurti, Emiko Masaki, Ali Subandoro, and Puti Marzoeki. 2016. “Indonesia

Health Financing System Assessment: Spend More, Right & Better.” World Bank.
Public sector MH context: World Bank. 2014. “Universal Maternal Health Coverage? : Assessing the Readiness of Public Health Facilities
to Provide Maternal Health Care in Indonesia.” 90510–ID. World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/875841468038945861/pdf/905100WP0P13340re0in0Indonesia02014.pdf.
Overall demand-side context: Koblinsky, Susan Stout, Puti Marzoeki, Pandu Harimurti, and others. 2017. “‘... And Then She Died’
Indonesia Maternal Health Assessment.” Accessed May 29.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/2837/533270ESW0Whit10Box345625B01PUBLIC1.txt.
Jampersal, a MH-specific health scheme: Achadi, Endang L., Anhari Achadi, Eko Pambudi, and Puti Marzoeki. 2014. “A Study on the
Implementation of JAMPERSAL Policy in Indonesia.” Washington, DC.: World Bank Group.
8 Bappenas. 2015. “National Medium Term Development Plan 2015-2019 (RPJMN 2015-2019).” Kementerian PPN/Bappenas.

http://www.bappenas.go.id/files/6514/6225/7153/Buku_I_RPJMN_SDALH.pdf.


                                                                  7
The remainder of the policy paper is structured as follows: The next section provides some
background on Indonesia, including general health-related outcomes and an overview of the
country’s health system and financing. Section III focuses on MH outcomes and context, including
comparisons with global peers, and provides an overview of provision, utilization, and financing of
MH services in the country, underscoring the importance of private providers. Section IV summarizes
the distributional context and service readiness of private MH providers across the 64 high-priority
districts, including a comparison with public providers for context. Section V concludes with a
summary of key findings and their policy implications.




                                                 8
II.       Background

          a. Socioeconomic Context
With a population of over 250 million, Indonesia is the fourth largest country in the world after China,
India, and the USA. Close to half of the population live in rural areas, where about 48 percent of
women of reproductive age (15 to 49) currently reside. The country is an archipelago, comprising
five major islands and almost 6,000 smaller but inhabited islands. The country has 34 provinces, 514
districts (including both rural districts [kabupaten] and urban districts [kota]), and some 72,000
villages. Indonesia is the largest economy among the 10-country Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), is a member of the G20 largest economies in the world, and is often compared with
BRICS countries.9 With a GNI per capita of US$ 3,440 in 2015, it is classified as a lower middle-income
country, ranking next to the Philippines and Egypt.

About 42% of its population lives on less than US$3.10 per day and 12% lives on less than US$1.90
per day; the national poverty rate stands at 11%. Economic growth rates have been robust and
consistent in recent years and are expected to continue to be in the 5-6% range for the coming five
years.10 The bottom 40% of Indonesia’s population, however, has not benefited as much from the
country’s economic growth in recent years. This resulted in rising income inequality and a
persistence in labor market informality. This rise in inequality is the second largest in the EAP region
next to China.11 The bottom 40% of the population remains highly vulnerable to shocks – including
health shocks – and tends to work in low-productivity, low-pay, non-tradable sectors. Persistence in
labor market informality has also accompanied this rise in inequality, with over 54% of national
employment continue to be classified as informal (non-salaried workers).12 Women comprised 38
percent of the labor force in 2014 and adult (above 15) female literacy rates were decent at 94
percent in 2015.13


          b. Health Sector Context
Indonesians have undoubtedly become healthier in recent decades. Life expectancy at birth has
increased to 69 years in 2015, steadily up from 63 years in 1990 and only 49 years in 1960. The
under-five mortality rate has declined from 222 per 1,000 live births in 1960 to 85 in 1990 and 27 in
2015; Indonesia met the child-health related MDG target of reaching an under-five mortality rate of
28 or less by 2015. Infant mortality has declined six-fold since 1960, down to 23 per 1,000 live births
in 2015. Both life expectancy and infant mortality rates are about average of what might be expected
for Indonesia’s income level.

Furthermore, Indonesia has made important strides towards attaining UHC: landmark legislations in
2004 and 2011 have helped realize a potential pathway to UHC via social health insurance. Coverage



9 G20 countries include Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Saudi
Arabia, South Africa, South Korea, Turkey, UK, USA, EU. For the countries that compose ASEAN and BRICS, see note 3.
10 International Monetary Fund. 2016. World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand: Symptom and Remedies. Washington. October.
11 World Bank. 2016. Indonesia's Rising Divide. World Bank, Jakarta. Available:

https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/24765.
12 Sakernas National Labor Statistics Survey 2015
13 World Development Indicators, 2016




                                                                     9
rates have increased significantly in recent years, from ~27% in 2004 and to ~70% in 2017.14 In
terms of population coverage, Indonesia now has one of the largest single-payer social health
insurance programs (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional, or JKN) in the world. By 2019, everyone in
Indonesia is supposed to have coverage under JKN.

Indonesia has mixed public-private provision of health services.15 The public sector generally takes
a dominant role in rural areas and secondary levels of care, but this is not necessarily the case across
all health services, as private providers play a dominant role in the provision of MH services. Private
provision has been increasing rapidly in recent years, especially for primary care. Dual practice is
allowed and many private providers also work in providing public health services. There are 2,228
hospitals in the country and more than half of them are now private, although in terms of beds, the
public sector is still dominant. Public provision is decentralized to the district level. As a large country
spanning several time zones and islands, geography poses a significant obstacle to service delivery.
Although the distribution of public primary care facilities is quite good throughout the country and
utilization is generally pro-poor, public hospital utilization tends to be skewed towards the upper
economic quintiles. Supply-side readiness of public primary care facilities is highly variable across
provinces. Despite having attained the minimum WHO norm for aggregate numbers of workers,
human resources for health remains a key challenge. Key issues include maldistribution, a shortage
of specialists, and poor skills and training. Furthermore, Indonesia has only 1.7 beds per 1,000
population, one of the lowest densities of beds in ASEAN. Quality of health care also varies
considerably across the country with richer, urban citizens often able to access much higher quality
services than poorer families in remote districts.


          c. Health Financing
Total health expenditure (THE) per capita in Indonesia was US$126 in 2014, or about 3.6% of the
country’s gross domestic product (GDP) per capita. Global and regional benchmarks indicate that
Indonesia’s health system remains significantly under-resourced (Table 1). Indonesia’s total health
expenditure levels are among the lowest in the world, and are particularly low when benchmarked
against other lower-middle-income countries and several comparators. Although Indonesia is
following a social health insurance model for attaining UHC in principle, in reality, the health system
is financed through a combination of sources and disparate flows. The four primary sources of health
financing in the country include out-of-pocket (OOP) spending by households, government
budgetary supply-side health spending, social health insurance (i.e., JKN) expenditures, and a small
amount of external financing.




14176,738,998 JKN enrollees as of May 1, 2017. Source: BPJS. https://www.bpjs-kesehatan.go.id/
15More information on health financing including at the district level and the physical resources of the Indonesian health system, both
public and private, please see: Ajay Tandon, Eko Pambudi, Pandu Harimurti, Emiko Masaki, Ali Subandoro, and Puti Marzoeki. 2016.
“Indonesia Health Financing System Assessment: Spend More, Right & Better.” World Bank.


                                                                   10
                             Table 1: Key health financing indicators for Indonesia and comparators
                                                                             Low        Lower middle   Upper middle
 Health financing indicators              Indonesia   ASEAN     BRICS
                                                                           income         income         income
 Total health expenditure per capita       US$126     US$502    US$581      US$41          US$141        US$494
 Total health expenditure (share of         3.6%       4.3%      6.9%       6.3%            5.9%          7.0%
 GDP)
 Public share of total health               40%        52%       46%        40%              54%           63%
 expenditure
 Social insurance share of total health     13%         8%       14%         2%               7%           18%
 expenditure
 OOP share of total health expenditure      46%        41%       34%        41%              38%           29%
 External share of total health              1%        8%        1%         33%              14%            4%
 expenditure
Source: WDI


OOP spending by households – a generally inefficient and inequitable financing modality – remains
the largest source of financing for health in Indonesia and an estimated 8% of all households (7
million households) are either impoverished or pushed deeper into poverty as a result of high OOP
spending every year. The OOP spending share of total health expenditure has remained in excess of
45% since 1995 (WHO recommends this share be less than 20%). OOP spending on health is unlikely
to decline unless there is significant expansion in JKN coverage, an improvement in supply-side
readiness at public facilities for health, and inclusion of branded pharmaceuticals in the benefits
package. Government budgetary supply-side spending is the second largest component of health
financing in Indonesia. Despite recent increases, the overall level of public financing remains one of
the lowest in the world. This is partly a result of low revenue generation capacity of the country and
the fact that health is accorded a generally low priority as reflected in its relatively small share of the
national budget.

JKN expenditures are the third largest source of health financing. Although JKN covers approximately
70% of the population, it accounts for only around 15% of total health expenditure. This is because
demand-side reimbursements from JKN are not the primary source of financing for public facilities.
Public facilities receive supply-side investments and operational financing in the form of equipment
and drugs from and determined by the local government (particular the district-level government).
Operational budgets (including salaries) are also provided by local governments (except for central
hospitals).16 Hence, accountability for supply-side readiness (especially for non-commodities such as
equipment and staffing) are, to a large extent within the responsibility of local governments. Almost
one-half of JKN expenditure is currently sourced from the central government in the form of premium
payments for the poor and near-poor, and significant co-financing from government budgetary
expenditure remains at public facilities. Importantly given the private sector of this paper, as JKN also
purchases services from private sector, it is an important instrument for engagement with the private
sector. However, a notable current weakness of JKN is contribution collection among non-poor
informal workers, which has resulted in limited JKN coverage for this population group.

External sources are the fourth largest source of financing. While it accounts for only 1% of total
health expenditure, it remains an important source of financing and technical assistance for some
specific programs including immunization, HIV, TB, and malaria. Indonesia disbursed approximately




16   Ibid


                                                               11
US$ 29 million in official development assistance (from all donors) for reproductive health care in
2015, a reduction from a peak of US$ 39 million in 2012.17




17Source: OECD - DAC ; http://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/development-finance-data/aid-at-a-glance.htm .
Accessed March 22, 2017.


                                                              12
III.         Maternal Health Outcomes and Context

             a. Internationally-Contextualized Maternal Health Outcomes and
                Trends in Indonesia
Despite notable progress in the health sector, several challenges remain especially with regard to
MH. By most estimates, Indonesia has made steady and significant progress in attaining reductions
in maternal mortality in the past few decades. Joint UN-WB data indicate that Indonesia’s MMR
declined by an average of 5.1% per year over the period 1990-2015 (Figure 1). Estimates from the
Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) model indicate an annual decline of 3.3% per year
over the same period. The Indonesia Demographic and Health Survey (IDHS) data indicate a decline
of 4.0% per year over 1994-2007 (albeit followed by an increase over the period 2007-2012). The
decline in maternal mortality was a result of improvements in general socioeconomic conditions as
well as government initiatives specifically targeting MH and improving skilled birth attendance. In
addition to improving financial access via the expansion of social health insurance coverage,
Indonesia have implemented several programs during the last three decades that include improving
access to family planning, overhauling of the national midwifery program in the eighties, and
earmarking funding for health services in disadvantaged areas.18 At 126 maternal deaths per 100,000
live births, however, Indonesia did not attain the MDG MMR target of 102 or lower by 2015.
Consequently, sustained progress will be needed in order to meet the 2030 SDG target of 70.

                                       Figure 1: Maternal Mortality Ratio in Indonesia, 1990-2015
                            600




                                                                                                  IDHS
                                                               IHME
                            400




                                                                                                      Census
                                      Baseline
                            200




                                                                                                                    WB-UN estimated
                            100




                                                                                        MGD target




                                                                                                                              SDG target<=70
                              50




                                   1990         1995          2000           2005          2010           2015                                 2030
                                                                                           Year
                                    Sources: Joint WB-UN estimates; Indonesian Census; Indonesia Demographic Health Survey (IDHS);
                                    Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME)




Maternal hemorrhage (both postpartum and antepartum) and hypertensive disorders during
pregnancy (including eclampsia and pre-eclampsia) were the two biggest causes of maternal deaths
in Indonesia. The overall burden from maternal hemorrhage has been decreasing slowly over the



18   Webster, P (2012), “Indonesia makes maternal health a national priority,” Lancet, 380: 1981-1982.


                                                                                       13
years, but remains the main cause of maternal mortality, although deaths from maternal
hypertensive disorders is rising (Figure 2). Adolescent pregnancies are a further concern as mothers
under the age of 18 are more likely to experience complications during pregnancy. According to
survey data, 10% of adolescent women (age 15–19 years) had begun childbearing. Unsurprisingly,
adolescent women from rural areas, with only primary education (or less), and those from lower
wealth quintiles are associated with early childbearing. A further 10% of women who gave birth were
in older high-risk age-group of over 39 years of age.

                                                  Figure 2: Causes of Maternal Mortality, 1990-2015


                                                                     Causes of Maternal Mortality
                                     1990                                2000                          2010                              2015




                              26%                                 26%                            26%                              26%
                                                                                                                41%                                  40%
                                               47%                                   45%
                            1%                                  1%                              2%                              2%

                               22%                                 24%                               28%                                        4%
                                                                           4%                              4%                        28%
                                       4%




                                        Maternal hemorrhage                                                   Maternal sepsis and other maternal infections

                                        Maternal hypertensive disorders                                       Maternal obstructed labor and uterine rupture

                                        Maternal abortion, miscarriage, and ectopic pregnancy

                       Source: Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation database




In terms of socio-economic factors, a mother’s education and wealth are found to be significantly and
negatively related to maternal mortality.19,20 First pregnancies are also found to have higher risks
compared to those with at least one child.21 While some papers determined that low socio-economic
factors, such as living in a rural area and poor hygiene have an influence on high maternal mortality,
newer research argued that the effects of household’s water, sanitation and living in an rural area
becomes insignificant once health facility availability and access are taken into account.22,23

It is notable that MH outcomes – especially a country’s MMR — are often deemed as some of the best
‘barometers’ of the performance of a country’s overall health system. Policies to strengthen MH
generally strengthen the entire health care system. For example, infrastructure investments to


19 Achadi, E., S. Scott, E.S. Pambudi, K. Makowiecka, T. Marshall, A. Adisasmita, P.E. Deviany, and C. Ronsmans. 2007. "Midwifery provision
and uptake of maternity care in Indonesia." Tropical Medicine and International Health 12(12):1490-7.
20 Cameron, L., D.C. Suarez, and K. Cornwell. 2016. “Understanding the determinants of maternal mortality in Indonesia.” Brown B ag

Lunch Discussion. MAMPU-Monash Univeristy. Available: http://www.mampu.or.id/en/news/brown-bag-lunch-understanding-
determinants-maternal-mortality-indonesia.
21 Cameron et al. (see note 14).
22 Taguchi, N., M. Kawabata, M. Maekawa, T. Maruo, Aditiawarman, and L. Dewata. 2003. "Influence of socio-economic background and

antenatal care programmes on maternal mortality in Surabaya, Indonesia." Tropical Medicine and International Health 8(9):847-52.
23 Cameron et al. (see note 14).




                                                                                           14
improve access to and quality of MH services can also improve access to prevention and treatment
of other health conditions. This positive spillover effect extends beyond the supply side and onto the
demand side. The health of the mother is critical to the development of her children, who depends on
her for the provision of food, care, and emotional support, among others.24 Thus improving MH also
involves continuity in the improvement of health care from pregnancy through childbirth, the
neonatal period, and early childhood and across the entire range of preventive, promotive, curative,
palliative, and rehabilitative health services, including emergency care. Some argue that increased
maternal survival is one of the two basic goals which reflect improvement in the overall population’s
other health problems (the other basic goal is increased overall life expectancy).25 This is because
indicators such as the MMR are highly dependent on the overall status of the health care system: if
pregnant mothers survive, they do so in an environment with “safe, clean, round-the-clock surgical
facilities”, well-trained medical staff, and a sufficient supply of sterile equipment and antibiotics.26

Indonesia underperforms with regard to its MMR attainment considering its economic status and
total health expenditure per capita. For example, Sri Lanka has a similar GNI per capita as Indonesia,
but has a substantially lower MMR of only 30 per 100,000 live births (Figure 3). Vietnam’s MMR is
far lower than Indonesia’s, despite Indonesia having a much higher GNI per capita. In addition,
progress over time in improvements in MMR have been relatively slow in Indonesia compared with
BRICS and ASEAN countries (Figure 4). In fact, it is startling that the pace of improvements in other
ASEAN countries is as quick as Indonesia, although ASEAN countries start from a lower (and hence
harder to improve) MMR baseline.

                                     Figure 3: Maternal Mortality Ratio and GNI per Capita, 2015
                        1500
                           500




                                                  Myanmar          Lao PDR
                                                Cambodia          India Indonesia
                                                                                          South Africa
                           100




                                                                                 Philippines


                                                           Vietnam
                                                                                       Malaysia Brazil
                                                                     Sri Lanka
                               25




                                                                                     China         Russia         Brunei
                                                                              Thailand


                                                                                                            Singapore


                                                                 LOWER                   UPPER
                                                                 MIDDLE                 MIDDLE
                                          LOW INCOME             INCOME                 INCOME               HIGH INCOME



                                    250      500       1000          2500           10000                   35000          100000
                                                                        GNI per capita
                                    Source: WDI; x-scale and y-scale logged




24 Filippi, Veronique, Carine Ronsmans, Oona M.R. Campbell, Wendy J. Graham Anne Mills, Jo Borghi, Marjorie Koblinsky, and David Osrin.
2006. "Maternal health in poor countries: the broather context and a call for action." The Lancet 368(9546):1535-41.
25 Garrett, L. 2007. “The challenge of global health.” Foreign Affairs 86(1):14 -38.
26 Garrett (see note 17).




                                                                              15
       Figure 4: Trends in Maternal Mortality Ratio, 1990-2015: Indonesia and comparator ASEAN and BRICS countries




                           600
                           400
                                                                                     Indonesia
                           200

                                           ASEAN (average)
                           100




                                                             BRICS (average)
                             50




                                  1990             1995              2000              2005      2010        2015
                                                                              Year
                                   Sources: Joint WB-UN estimates; y-axis logged




There are large disparities and a lack of concordance in the absolute number of maternal deaths and
in the MMR (also see Figure 16). Whereas the absolute number of maternal deaths was highest in
populous provinces of Java in 2014, MMR is highest in West Papua, Papua, Central Kalimantan,
Central Sulawesi, and Maluku. DKI Jakarta, Jambi, West Java, Bali, and Lampung by contrast have
MMRs below 100 (Figure 5). A previous assessment found a close inverse relationship between
institutional delivery rates and the MMR (and lower socioeconomic parameters) across provinces.27
Access to health care facilities are associated with improved maternal mortality, especially in rural
areas.28,29,30,31,32,33 Health care facility preparedness for emergency responses are also found to be
important factors.34 Home-based care is very limited and improvements in access to skilled delivery
care in health centers and emergency care in hospitals is a sustainable way to reduce Indonesia's
maternal deaths.35




27 World Bank and National Institute of Research and Development, MoH. 2014. Universal Maternal Health Coverage? Assessing the
Readiness of Public Health Facilities to Provide Maternal Health Care in Indonesia. World Bank, Jakarta.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/20404.
28 Achadi et al. (see note 11).
29 Taguchi et al. (see note 14).
30 Hatt, L., C. Stanton, K. Makowiecka, A. Adisasmita, E. Achadi, and C. Ronsmans. 2007. "Did the strategy of skilled attendane at birth

reach the poor in Indonesia?" Bulletin of the World Health Organization 85910):774-83.
31 Frankenberg, E. A. Buttenheim, B. Sikoki, W. Suriastini. 2009. "Do women increase their use of reproductive health care when it

becomes more available? Evidence from Indonesia." Studies in Family Planning 4(1):27-38.
32 D'Ambruoso, L., E. Martha, Y. Izati, A. Kiger, and A. Coates. 2013. "Maternal mortality and server morbidity in rural Indonesia, Part 1:

The community perspective." Social Medicine 7(2):47-67.
33 Cameron et al. (see note 12).
34 Belton, S. B. Myers, F.R. Ngana. 2014. "Maternal deaths in eastern Indonesia: 20 years and still walking: An ethnographic study." BMC

Pregnancy and Childbirth 14(39). Available: https://bmcpregnancychildbirth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2393-14-39.
35 Ronsmans, C., S. Scott, S.N. Qomariyah, E. Achadi, D. Braunholtz, T. Marshall, E. Pambudi, K.H. Witten, and W.J. Graham. 2009.

"Professional assistance during birth and maternal mortality in two Indonesian districts." Bulletin of the World Health Organization
87:416-23.


                                                                           16
                   Figure 5: Provincial-level Maternal Deaths and Maternal Mortality Ratio, 2014


                                                                  Maternal Mortality by Province, 2014
                             Papua Barat
                                   Papua
                      Kalimantan Tengah
                         Sulawesi Tengah
                                   Maluku
                             Maluku Utara
                           Sulawesi Barat
                                Gorontalo
                                   Banten
                      Kalimantan Selatan
                     Nusa Tenggara Timur
                                 Bengkulu
                                     Aceh
                          Kepulauan Riau
                           Sulawesi Utara
                        Kalimantan Timur
                       Sulawesi Tenggara
                        Kalimantan Barat
                          Sumatera Barat
                            Jawa Tengah
                                     Riau
                        Sumatera Selatan
                     Nusa Tenggara Barat
                          Bangka Belitung
                        Sulawesi Selatan
                              Jawa Timur
                            DI Yogyakarta
                          Sumatera Utara
                                      Bali
                                 Lampung
                               Jawa Barat
                                    Jambi
                              DKI Jakarta


                                             0                      200                  400                  600                     800
                                                                                        Province

                                                                Absolute Maternal Deaths                   Maternal Mortality Ratio

                                                 Source: MOH (Download from http://gizikia.depkes.go.id/data/(July 17,2016)
                                                 Maternal Mortality Ratio = Maternal Deaths per 100,000 Live Births




       b. Provision and Utilization of Maternal Health Services
Public MH providers include a network of over 10,000 primary health care centers (puskesmas) with
each serving a catchment area of 25,000-30,000 individuals, village delivery posts (polindes), and
village health posts (poskesdes), and public hospitals of various sizes and degrees of specialization.
Polindes and poskesdes, although both public rural providers, differ in that polindes are limited to
maternity care, whereas poskesdes provide promotive, preventive and curative services within the
authority of the health provider (midwife, nurse, etc.) placed in the poskesdes. Private MH providers
include private hospitals, multi-practitioner private maternity clinics (klinik bersalin), and single-
practitioner home-based or clinic-based private midwives.

Utilization of ANC and skilled birth attendance is relatively high in Indonesia. Data from IFLS 2015
indicate found more than 97% of women had at least one ANC visit during their pregnancy and 95%
reported more than 4+ ANC visits; furthermore, 87% reported ANC visits as per schedule (at least
one during the first trimester, at least one during the second, and at least two during the third).
Differences in ANC care between rural and urban areas and across regions was not substantive.
Recent data confirms the growing predominance of private primary care facilities for ANC care.
Nationally, over three-fourths of utilization of MH services occurred at private providers, up from
just over 60% in 1997. Only about 20% of ANC visits occurred in puskesmas; and less than 5% each
occurred at public hospitals, private hospitals, and polindes/poskesdes.

Skilled birth attendance rates were similarly high in the country, even for those in the bottom 40%
in terms of economic status; however, the composition of what comprised as “skilled” varied
significantly (Table 2). Over 99% of the top 20% and 86% of the bottom 40% reported skilled birth
attendance, with the majority of “skilled” providers being obstetricians and gynecologists for the top
20% versus the majority being midwives for the bottom 40%.



                                                                                17
                                   Table 2: Skilled Birth Attendance Rates in Indonesia, 2015
                                                        Any Skilled          Specialist        Primary Care
 Skilled Birth Attendance (SBA) Rate                                                                                  Midwife
                                                      Birth Attendant       Obstetrician          Doctor
 By economic status
 Bottom 40%                                                 86%                 14%                  2%                 70%
 Middle 40%                                                 94%                 26%                  2%                 66%
 Top 20%                                                    99%                 54%                  3%                 43%
 By insurance status
 Uninsured                                                  89%                 17%                  2%                 70%
 Insured                                                    92%                 28%                  2%                 61%
 By urban-rural
 Urban                                                      96%                 32%                  2%                 62%
 Rural                                                      85%                 15%                  2%                 68%
 National                                                   91%                 24%                  2%                 65%
Source: Susenas 2015




Although skilled birth attendance rates are high, there are concerns about pre-service and in-service
training of midwives and their adherence to protocols, suggesting inadequate quality in provision of
MH services. Access to emergency obstetric care in face of complications remains a challenge in some
parts of the country. In general, the number of obstetricians is low and availability is skewed, with
most of them practicing in the island of Java. Referral systems do not always function smoothly across
different levels of care and quality of care in primary and referral facilities is also an issue.
International experience indicates that between 11% and 17% of maternal deaths occur during
childbirth and between 50% and 71% occur during the postpartum period.36

Another major area of weakness is the institutional delivery rate. Nationally, only 76% of women
reported delivering at a public or private institution (Figure 6), a significant increase from 44% in
1997. Notably, private sector institutional deliveries increased faster than public sector institutional
deliveries between 1997 – 2007. A contributory factor in the increase in private provision is due to
low public salaries and allowance given for dual-practice at private facilities. This has encouraged a
blossoming of private practice by dual-practicing public midwives. Other commentators37 have also
noted the rapid growth of private health education institutions (both medicine and midwifery) which
contributed to a large increase in the number of graduates. These graduates could not be absorbed
into the public sector and many private providers immediately after graduation. In order to obtain a
practice license from the DHO, graduates working in the private sector can register with the
professional associations.




36World Health Organization, ed. 2005. Make Every Mother and Child Count. The World Health Report 2005. Geneva.
37Heywood, Peter F, and Nida P Harahap. 2009. “Human Resources for Health at the District Level in Indonesia: The Smoke and Mirrors
of Decentralization.” Human Resources for Health 7 (1). doi:10.1186/1478-4491-7-6.


                                                                18
           Figure 6: Trends in Institutional Delivery Rates at Public and Private Providers in Indonesia, 1997 - 2015




Nevertheless, institutional delivery rates remain relatively low especially among rural women. Only
65% reported institutional deliveries versus 90 % that did so in urban areas (Table 3). The numbers
were similar across both IFLS and SUSENAS surveys.



                                            Table 3: Location of Delivery in Indonesia, 2015
                                                                   Public                         Private
      Location of Delivery      Any institution                                                                 Non-institutional
                                                    Hospital     Puskesmas      Polindes      Hospital Clinic
       By region
            Sumatera                    62%            11%             4%           2%         10%      36%           37%
            Java-Bali                   83%            13%             6%           3%         17%      44%           16%
            Other                       48%            16%            13%           5%          4%      10%           50%
       By urban-rural
            Urban                       90%            15%             6%           1%         21%      46%            9%
            Rural                       65%            11%             6%           4%          9%      34%           35%
       IFLS- National                  76%             13%            6%            3%         14%      40%           24%
       Susenas-National                78%            28% *          12% #                              38%           22%
Source: IFLS 2015, Susenas
Note : * Hospital includes both public and private hospitals; # Puskesmas includes Polindes




                                                                     19
National numbers obscure large differences at the district level in Indonesia. Despite relatively high
national rates, almost 10% of the districts in the country have skilled birth attendance rates that are
below 50%; some of these and several others – mostly in the provinces of Papua, Maluku, and
Sumatera Utara, among others -- also have institutional delivery rates that are below 25% (Figure 7).

                 Figure 7: Districts with low skilled birth attendance and institutional delivery rates




Utilization of prenatal services (PNC) was also relatively high: 80% of mothers received PNC within
two days following delivery. PNC was provided mainly by nurses, midwives, or village midwives
(60%) and obstetricians (17%), while doctors (1%) and traditional birth attendants (2%) played a
smaller role in PNC. Almost all women who delivered at a health facility (96%) had a PNC checkup.
The lack of any PNC checkups was associated with greater parity, rural residence, lower educational
status, and lower wealth quintiles (IDHS 2012).




                                                          20
          c. Maternal Health-Related Financing Schemes
There are two important health financing schemes which provide coverage for MH services:

     •    Jampersal, the MH-specific financing scheme which pre-dates JKN and was discontinued in
          2014, but was reintroduced in 2016 in a revamped form; and
     •    JKN, the national flagship SHI scheme which was implemented in 2014.

Jampersal (2011 – 2013; Revamped 2016 – present)
Jampersal from 2011 to 2013 was a special financing scheme for MH services financed by the central
government, which provided a comprehensive MH benefits package. During that period, Indonesia
essentially had universal MH services coverage as anyone not covered by earlier social health
insurance programs (e.g., Jamkesmas and Askes, which have now been merged into JKN), regardless
of their socioeconomic status, had coverage via Jampersal.38

However, in 2014 when JKN was introduced, Jampersal was discontinued. This resulted in a loss of
coverage for MH services for those not covered through JKN and is an important lesson as coverage
lapses from policy changes such as this should be avoided in the future.

Jampersal was subsequently reintroduced and revamped in 2016, but with modifications to the
benefits and coverage. These changes were enabled by an adjustment by Indonesia’s Ministry of
Finance (MoF) of special purpose grants (Dana Alokasi Khusus or DAK) to cover non-infrastructure
expenditures (‘DAK non-fisik’) effective from 2015 onwards. MoH technical guidelines for DAK now
state that DAK non-fisik can finance operational assistance for health (Bantuan Operasional
Kesehatan or BOK), Jampersal, and accreditation of puskesmas and hospitals. The revamped
Jampersal makes use of this adjustment and includes as its benefits rent payments and the cost of
maternity waiting home (Rumah Tunggu Kelahiran) nearby a health facility, as a transit place for
pregnant women who are near term. Jampersal also covers referrals from home to health care facility,
delivery care, family planning services postpartum, neonatal care at puskesmas, and institutional
deliveries at third class wards for high-risk pregnant women, who are not covered under JKN, Kartu
Indonesia Sehat (KIS), or other health financing schemes.

Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional (2014 – present)
Although a broad-based national SHI program, the theoretical benefits package for MH services
under JKN is comprehensive. MH services can be purchased from public and private providers, with
the same tariff applying to sectors. The benefits package, provider payment mechanisms (PPMs), and
tariff rates are summarized in Table 4. Note that payments by capitation are only for primary health
care clinics, as MH services are paid using a separate PPM.




38Achadi, Endang L., Anhari Achadi, Eko Pambudi, and Puti Marzoeki. 2014. “A Study on the Implementation of JAMPERSAL Policy in
Indonesia.” Washington, DC.: World Bank Group.


                                                                21
                       Table 4: JKN benefits package and provider payment mechanisms for MH services39
 Benefits Package                                                        Provider Payment Mechanism and Tariff Rates

 At the primary level:40


 Four ANC visits, for early detection and management of risk factors     •     Rp 200,000 per package including a minimum of four
 for obstetric and newborn complications. ANC services to be                   ANC visits
 conducted according to clinical standards.                              •     If ANC services are provided in more than one facility,
                                                                               the fee is Rp. 50,000 per ANC visit.
 Delivery care services: normal vaginal delivery, management of          •     Normal vaginal delivery: Rp. 700,000/case (by midwife),
 post-abortion bleeding, vaginal delivery with basic emergency care,           Rp. 800,000/case (by physician).
 postpartum care (e.g. manual removal of the placenta), pre-referral     •     Management of post-abortion bleeding, vaginal delivery
 care in maternal and neonatal complications.                                  with basic emergency care: Rp. 950,000/case.
                                                                         •     Postpartum emergency care (e.g., manual placenta
 Newborn examination.                                                          removal): Rp. 175,000/case.
                                                                         •     Pre-referral care in maternal and neonatal
                                                                               complications: Rp. 125,000/case.
                                                                         •     The tariff is a package tariff including accommodation for
                                                                               the mother and the neonate, and for neonatal care. Co-
                                                                               payment is not allowed.
 Four postnatal care visits: general maternal and infant health,         •     Payment for first and second maternal and neonatal
 comprehensive screening for detection and treatment/referral of               postnatal visit, third neonatal postnatal visit and third
 complications, counselling.                                                   maternal postnatal visit during the postnatal period: Rp.
                                                                               25,000 per visit, paid to the first provider.
 Family planning services.                                               •     Implant/IUD insertion and/or extraction: Rp
                                                                               100,000/case.
                                                                         •     Injectable contraceptives: Rp. 15,000/case.
                                                                         •     Family planning complication: Rp 125,000/case.
                                                                         •     Vasectomy: Rp. 350,000/case.


 At the secondary level:

 Antenatal and postnatal care at a referral facility can be covered on
 medical indication and referral from a primary care facility only.
 Normal delivery at a referral facility can be covered on emergency      •     Payment is according to INA-CBG tariff regulated by the
 conditions only: bleeding, pregnancy with seizures, early rupture of          Ministry of Health
 membrane, fetal distress, or other mother life threatening
 conditions.


Private primary care providers (i.e., puskesmas, puskesmas PONED41, and private GP clinics,
although generally not private midwives) can empanel directly with the administrator for JKN, Badan
Penyelenggara Jaminan Social (BPJS), and receive reimbursements for JKN services provided
directly.42 The process of empanelment involves online registration and completion of a self-
assessment form, followed by formal credentialing and contracting.

Private midwives would be generally expected to participate in JKN indirectly, i.e., as part of the
network of a ‘parent’ facility (e.g., a private primary care provider) subcontracted to do so. This
‘parent’ facility would be responsible for ensuring that the service readiness of its subcontractor is
adequate, using the same criteria used for obtaining a practice license from the DHO. Subcontracted



39 Minister of Health regulation No 52/2016 on Health Services Standard Tariff under the National health Insurance Program (JKN), and
BPJS Practical Guidelines for Maternal and Neonatal Services.
40 Note: Obstetric and neonatal care, and family planning services performed by a physician or a midwife at a primary health care facility

is not included in the capitation (non-capitation) payment to the facility but paid based on fee for service.
41 PONED or Pelayanan Obstetrik dan Neonatal Emergensi Dasar/Basic Obstetric and Neonatal Emergency Care (BEONC)
42 Panduan Praktis BPJS untuk Pelayanan KIA, BPJS




                                                                   22
facilities would claim for payments through the ‘parent’ facility, but the ‘parent’ facility can withhold
up to 10 percent of the reimbursement fee. The exception to this general rule is where there are no
private primary care providers to act as a ‘parent’ facility for private midwives in a particular
geographic area, typically in a rural and remote area. In this situation, the district health officer43 can
make an exception whereby a village midwife/private midwife can be empaneled directly with BPJS
and receive payments directly from BPJS.44 Additional information on business registration and
licensing of private health providers in Indonesia has been described in earlier studies.45

From a payments perspective, PPMs are similar for Jampersal and JKN. However, under JKN a private
primary health care provider can empanel directly with and receive payments directly from BPJS as
a ‘parent’ of a provider network, whereas under the earlier regime, payments for MH services under
Jampersal (and Jamkesmas, another scheme which has been superseded by JKN) had to flow through
puskesmas.




43 SK Kepala Dinas Kesehatan Kabupaten/Kota
44 Section III-2, Panduan Praktis BPJS untuk Pelayanan KIA, BPJS
45 Chee, Grace, Michael Borowitz, and Andrew Barraclough. 2009. Private Sector Health Care in Indonesia. Abt associates.




                                                                   23
IV.    Private Primary Maternal Health Supply-Side Analysis
It goes without saying that coverage of critical MH services such as ANC and skilled birth attendance,
and even institutional deliveries, will not be effective in improving MH outcomes without the right
mix of inputs or ‘service readiness’, including trained, able, motivated, and present health workers,
infrastructure, equipment, medicines, and diagnostics, including at private MH providers, where the
largest share of utilization takes place. Hence, although JKN provides a comprehensive benefits
package which includes MH services in theory, the ‘effective’ depth (benefits package) of coverage -
not just on paper, but also in effect (available at an accessible, high quality, empaneled provider) –
especially in rural, remote regions of the country is critical. This section presents analysis on the
service readiness of primary MH services, based on the Indonesia QSDS 2016 survey, across the 64
high-priority districts (see Annex A), contrasted with public providers – i.e., puskesmas and
polindes/poskesdes – where relevant. Hospital-level MH services are also a critical part of the
continuum of the MH delivery system, but are not the focus of this policy paper due as Indonesia
QSDS 2016 focused on primary-level providers.

Key findings from this analysis are presented as a storyline with the following overall structure: (a)
the overall distribution, density, and coverage of private MH services; (b) at the facility level, the
‘hardware’ aspects of service readiness such as infrastructure, equipment, medicines, and
diagnostics; and (c) at the health worker level, the ‘software’ aspects of service readiness, such as
training, provider ability, and the content of care received by patients.



                     Figure 8: Distribution of the sample of 12 of the 64 High-Priority Districts




                                                         24
            a. Distribution, Density, and Coverage of Private Maternal Health
               Services
Storyline: The typical private primary MH provider is a multiple-practitioner
clinic- or home-based practice, in an urban setting in Java, which conducts about
four deliveries per month.
In the sampled priority districts, approximately half of primary MH providers were private, and
among these, 56 percent were multiple-practitioner providers, which include both home-based
practices and maternity clinics or ‘klinik bersalin’, and were staffed by a mean of 2.6 midwives (Table
5). The remaining 44 percent were single-practitioner providers, which include both home-based
private midwives (occasionally, there may be an ‘assistant’ midwife) and clinic -based private
midwives. Single-practitioner private MH providers conducted on average, 22 deliveries per year,
compared with 50 deliveries per year for multi-practitioner private MH providers.

These providers can be found in both urban and rural settings – but there was a slightly higher
proportion of multi-practitioner MH providers in urban areas (55 percent) than rural areas. Single-
practitioner MH providers were approximately evenly split among urban and rural areas. Private MH
providers were highly concentrated in the provinces on Java and Bali island, and North Sumatera and
Jambi province.

Public primary MH providers comprise multi-practitioner puskesmas and typically single-
practitioner MH providers, polindes/poskesdes, which are predominantly rural. Puskesmas served
a catchment population of approximately 38,000 and conducted approximately 131 deliveries per
year, with a typical (median) staffing of 2 general practitioner doctors, 4 midwives, and one nurse.
From the MH perspective, all puskesmas are expected to provide basic obstetric care46; and a
minimum of four puskesmas per district should be designated as providers of Basic Obstetric and
Neonatal Emergency Care (PONED). In this sample of puskesmas, 45 percent where specifically
designated as puskesmas PONED.

Two-thirds of puskesmas were located in urban settings and hence, in rural areas, apart from public
polindes/poskesdes, private MH providers plan a significant role. Public MH providers are
concentrated in the provinces in Kalimantan, Sulawasi, East Nusa Tenggara, West Nusa Tenggara,
Maluku, Papua and West Papua.




46   Ministry of Health (Permenkes) 75/2014 on Community Health Center (Puskesmas)


                                                                25
                                           Table 5: Types of Private Primary MH Providers
           Provider Type47                                                                      Percent of Private MH Providers
           Single-practitioner Private MH provider, including home-based midwives                             44%
           Multiple-practitioner MH provider, including maternity clinics (klinik bersalin)                   56%
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016



                Table 6: Basic Staffing and Other Indicators for Primary MH Providers in the Sampled Priority Districts
                                                           Public                                               Private
                                           Puskesmas           Polindes/Poskesdes             Single-practitioner     Multi-practitioner
                                                                                                Private Midwfe          Maternity Clinic
     Distribution of Facilities
     Percent of Primary MH Facilities           3%                        47%                        22%                    28%
     in sampled priority districts

     Percent of the facility type which        65%                        20%                        49%                    55%
     is urban
     Percent of the facility type which        35%                        80%                        51%                    45%
     is rural

     Human Resources of Health,
     Mean (Median)
     Doctor (Obstetrician)                     0 (0)                        -                        0 (0)                  0 (0)
     Doctor (General Practitioner)            2.4 (2)                       -                        0 (0)                  0 (0)
     Midwife                                  5.6 (4)                    0.5 (0)                    1.0 (1)                2.6 (2)
     Village Midwife                             -                       1.7 (2)                       -                      -
     Nurse                                     1 (1)                      0 (0)                      0 (0)                  0 (0)

     Utilization per Year48
     Maternal Health Visits                                               289                        320                     733
     Deliveries                                 131                        22                         22                     50

 Catchment Population49                       37,676                     2358                          -                      -
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




47 Private providers were randomly sampled from within the sampled priority districts
48 Average from 2013-2015
49 Average from 2013-2015




                                                                    26
Private MH providers complement public MH providers by extending out-of-
hours access to primary MH services, but …
Although public MH facilities were almost always open during normal office hours, for example, 100
percent of puskesmas and 93 percent of polindes/poskesdes were open on Monday mornings, very
much fewer puskesmas were open on a weekday evening (35 percent) or weekend daytime (35
percent). Private MH providers complemented these by extending access to primary MH services
beyond normal office hours: Two-thirds of private MH providers were open on a weekday evening
and 44 percent were open during weekend daytimes. Approximately one-third of both private and
public MH providers provided round-the-clock access.

                   Table 7: Temporal Accessibility of Primary MH Providers in the Sampled Priority Districts
         Proportion of facilities open at the indicated time   Puskesmas   Polindes/Poskesdes   Private MH Providers
         Monday 10:30                                            100%             93%                   43%
         Monday 20:30                                             35%             40%                   61%
         Sunday 10:30                                             35%             36%                   44%
         Open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week                       34%             32%                   35%
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                                                27
                                       … despite these complementarities, there remain supply side gaps in the
                                       numerical density of maternal health providers which are not filled by private
                                       providers opportunistically, …
                                       At a district-aggregated level, there is wide variation in the combined density of public and private
                                       primary maternal health providers (see Figure 9) per population, with no clear pattern of a ‘filling of
                                       gaps’, whereby private MH providers establish supply in areas where there is a lower density of
                                       public MH providers. Many districts with a low density of public MH providers, on the left of the
                                       diagram, also have a low density of private MH providers, as the distributions of private and public
                                       MH providers are not often complementary, leaving a substantial gap in supply not covered by either
                                       public or private MH providers, and a lack of choice for pregnant women.

                                       As approximately one-fifth of all live births in Indonesia, equivalent to approximately 17,600 births
                                       per year (or 730 births per hour) occur outside a health facility in Indonesia, this provides a crude
                                       metric of the gap in MH provision and demand nationally and the growth potential for MH providers,
                                       including especially private MH providers. In 2016, 40 percent of births in Indonesia were conducted
                                       by private primary MH providers and a further 20 percent of births occurred outside a facility50. Even
                                       if demand-side barriers were eliminated through targeted demand-side interventions and incentives,
                                       private MH providers would have a prominent role to play in Indonesia’s maternal health strategy.
                                       The scale is significant: For example, if all the current non-institutional births were shifted to private
                                       primary MH providers, this would be present a valuable market opportunity as it implies an increase
                                       in the current workload of private primary MH providers by about 50 percent. If these were shifted
                                       to puskesmas, where only 6 percent of deliveries are conducted, the equivalent increase in workload
                                       would be in the order of 350 percent.

                                                                    Figure 9: District-level Density of Public and Private Primary MH Providers
                                                                       20
Facility ratio per 10.000 population




                                                                       15
                                                                       10
                                                                         5
                                                                         0




                                                                                               Public facility       Private facility



                                       Source: MOH, 2015; Village Potential Census (PODES), 2011




                                       50   Indonesia Family Life Survey, 2015


                                                                                                          28
… and even where private MH providers are physically present, ‘coverage’ of
these private MH providers under JKN is inadequate, …
Although all sampled private MH providers reported providing ANC and basic obstetric services, only
one-third (37 percent) of private MH providers in the sampled priority districts were empaneled
under BPJS, the administrator of JKN. Reasons for non-empanelment are varied and, on a quantitative
basis (based on the Indonesia QSDS 2016 survey) are summarized in Table 8. The most common
reason, indicated by one-third of non-empaneled private primary MH providers, is that BPJS
requirements were not met. A further 11 percent were not aware of the JKN partnership mechanism.
These two reasons – which cover almost half of non-empaneled providers, suggest at possibilities
remedies to improve empanelment, i.e., increasing awareness of JKN among providers and
considering initiatives to help providers meet BPJS requirements.

Qualitatively, based on discussions with private MH providers in Kabupaten Bandung, in 2017,
reasons provided for the low rates of empanelment are: (i) the parent network can deduct up to 10%
of the fee for services provided by the network member, (ii) the paperwork involve in registering as
a provider and in claiming fees are considered burdensome, (iii) there is time lag between service
provision and fee payment from the parent network, (iv) JKN MH service fees are lower in general
than out of pocket fees, and (v) non-JKN member patients who seek care from the clinic are still
plentiful. Due to the similarities with the pre-2014 Jampersal program, providers who were
previously included under Jampersal found it easier to transition to JKN. These reasons, particularly
the claim that JKN fees are too low, are consistent with findings from other studies.51

                                              Table 8: Reasons for Not Empaneling with BPJS
     Reasons given for not empaneling with BPJS                       Percent of non-empaneled private primary MH providers
     BPJS requirements not met                                                                33%
     Not interested                                                                           24%

     Not aware of JKN partnership mechanism                                                       11%

     The capitation amount is too small                                                            8%
     Has proposed, but didn’t pass credentialing or evaluation step                                5%
     Non-capitation claim is too small                                                             3%

Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




… with implications on access to and …
The low proportion of empaneled private MH providers has implications both on demand and supply.
On the demand side, financial access barriers would compound existing demand-side barriers such
as educational or cultural barriers, as pregnant women utilizing private MH providers who are not
empaneled under BPJS would have to pay OOP. If there are geographical localities where there is an
inadequate supply of empaneled private or public MH providers, the effective coverage of JKN would
be diminished, although there may be private providers who are not empaneled and depend on OOP
payments. This is significant as overall institutional delivery rates are below the 85 percent target.



51Rajkotia, Y., J. Gergen, I. Djurovic, S. Koseki, M. Coe, et al. 2016. Re-envisioning Maternal and Newborn Health in Indonesia: How the
Private Sector and Civil Society Can Ignite Change. Washington, DC: Palladium, Health Policy Plus


                                                                      29
The inadequate ‘coverage’ of private providers into JKN is also mirrored by the limited breadth
population coverage of JKN, especially of the informal sector, whereby only 70 percent of the national
population is enrolled in this national scheme.



… the effectiveness of MH service provision.
On the supply side, the effectiveness of private MH provision could also be weakened as BPJS
empanelment was associated with better service readiness, particularly for multiple-practitioner
providers. In the sampled priority districts, among multiple-practitioner private MH providers,
empaneled providers had a higher (86 percent) mean general service readiness index compared with
non-empaneled (79 percent) providers (also see Table 9). In addition, the variation between the
service readiness indices of empaneled private MH providers is also smaller.



Furthermore, even where private supply exists, the additionality of private MH
providers to increase the overall supply of MH provision is blunted by the
prevalence of dual-practice.
As many as 55 percent of private MH midwives in the sampled priority districts reported dual-
practice in both the public and private sectors. A typical dual-practicing midwife works at a public
facility (such as a puskesmas or polindes) in the mornings and would then shift to her private practice
later in the day (also see Table 7). Hence, these dual practicing midwives are not an addition to the
supply of MH providers, apart from by extending opening hours, as they are one and the same
practitioner, but just operating under a different payment and institutional context, most plausibly
to supplement their income.

However, in urban areas, the prevalence of dual practice is lower, at 46 percent, and hence the
additionality of the private sector is slightly greater in urban settings (64 percent). For reference, the
prevalence of dual practice among health workers in public facilities is 34 percent.




                                                   30
       b. Service Readiness of Private Maternal Health Providers in
          Sampled Priority Districts
In addition to providing context on the geographic density and distribution of private MH providers,
and their coverage under JKN, this study also assessed the service readiness of MH providers as
service units, based on WHO’s SARA framework. For maternal health services, this framework
involves two service readiness domains: (i) general service readiness, and (ii) specific service
readiness for antenatal care and basic obstetric care. Comprehensive obstetric care is not covered by
this analysis due to the focus on private primary MH providers. In addition, these service readiness
indicators can be categorized into basic amenities, equipment, standard infection precautions,
diagnostics, and medicines.



The ‘hardware’ aspects of service readiness – e.g., infrastructure, equipment,
medicines, and diagnostics – of private MH providers are sub-par compared with
public puskesmas, …
Both multi-practitioner maternity clinics and single-practitioner private MH providers have lower
service readiness indicators for general service readiness, antenatal care, and basic obstetric care,
compared with puskesmas (Table 9). The weakness in private MH provider readiness is also noted
in some sub-categories of service readiness indicators – i.e., basic amenities, equipment, and standard
infection precautions – and is particularly stark for diagnostics and medicines, as discussed later. As
mentioned earlier, private providers empaneled with BPJS are associated with slightly stronger
service readiness.

Note that WHO SARA indicators do not specifically capture elements of responsiveness (or service
quality) which may be important to the user, such as comfortable surroundings, air conditioning,
provider choice, or waiting times. Private MH providers may perform better in terms of
responsiveness but these are not expected to affect MH outcomes, although access may be more
favorable in a more responsive environment.




                                                  31
 Table 9: Maternal Health Service Readiness Indices for Public and Private MH Providers in Sampled Priority Districts, 2016
     Service Readiness       Puskesmas          Polindes /        Private Multi-    Private Multi-         Private            Single-
     Index52                                    Poskesdes          Practitioner      Practitioner          Single-          practitioner
                                                                    Maternity         Maternity          practitioner       Private MH
                                                                      Clinic            Clinic           MH Provider         Provider
                                                                       (All)         (Empaneled             (All)           (Empaneled
                                                                                    with BPJS only)                          with BPJS
                                                                                                                               only)
     General Service            79%                 57%                71%                74%                68%               76%
     Readiness
     Basic Amenities            87%                 52%                79%                86%                71%                71%
     Equipment                  88%                 64%                77%                81%                76%                88%
     Standard infection         88%                 68%                85%                91%                82%                88%
     precautions
     Diagnostics                61%                 51%                60%                60%                62%                80%
     Medicines                  72%                 52%                52%                51%                48%                53%

 Antenatal Care                 87%                 64%                76%                78%                68%                79%
 Basic Obstetric Care           74%                 57%                67%                70%                60%                66%
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




… especially single-practitioner private MH providers, …
Understandably, multi-practitioner private maternity clinics have stronger service readiness than
single-practitioner private MH providers, as the larger providers can pool investments to strengthen
service delivery (Table 9). This pattern holds for general service readiness and specific service
readiness for ANC and basic obstetric care, and may have important implications for strategies to
improve the service readiness of private MH providers especially in urban areas.

Single practitioner private MH providers, however, are clearly much more service ready than public
polindes/poskesdes, even when only including those which purport to provide basic obstetric
services.



… with two important differences: (i) There are specific yet critical deficiencies
in medicines, especially emergency medicines; and …
There are stark deficiencies in the general availability of MH diagnostics and medicines among
private MH providers compared with public puskesmas. The service readiness index for medicines
is 72 percent at puskesmas, but only 52 percent at private multi-practitioner maternity clinics and
48 percent at private single-practitioner MH providers (Table 9). This large gap could be because
readiness indicators include many different medicine types but private MH providers could perhaps
be focusing on just a few commonly used drugs.

This limited repertoire of medicines is a concern as there is a specific lack of availability of emergency
obstetric medicines. For example, intravenous magnesium sulphate (IV MgSO4) is the drug of choice


52An index of 0 (or 0 percent) implies that all facilities had none of the service readiness indicators (unweighted) met; while an index of 1
(or 100 percent) implies that all facilities met all the service readiness.


                                                                    32
for the treatment of pre-eclampsia/eclampsia, which is the main cause of maternal mortality in
Indonesia apart from maternal hemorrhage, and is advised for use in national clinical guidelines. Only
55 percent of single-practitioner private MH providers had this medicine available, compared with
74 percent for puskesmas. The availability of IV MgSO4 at multi-practitioner private MH providers
was better than single-practitioner providers - 61 percent. Intravenous diazepam, an alternative but
inferior treatment for eclampsia, is not even permitted in private primary facilities as it is a controlled
drug.

Although the availability of oxytocin is comparable across public and private MH providers, and
available in approximately nine-tenths of facilities, injectable ergometrine which is used for some
causes of postpartum hemorrhage, the most common cause of maternal mortality, is much less
available in private MH providers (55 percent at single-practitioner and 64 percent at multi-
practitioner providers) compared with puskesmas (82 percent). A similar relative and absolute
deficiency is noted for intravenous calcium gluconate.

Emergency medicines such as IV MgSO4 are rarely used as the situations which warrant their use are
uncommon. Hence, from a business perspective, it may be unprofitable to obtain and maintain
(including replacing expired stock) these medicines. However, when needed, these medicines can be
lifesaving and alternative treatments far inferior. Institutional deliveries are hence not adequate if
the effectiveness of the institution is limited by non-availability of emergency medicines.



                  Figure 10: Availability of Emergency Obstetric Drugs in Sampled Priority Districts


                                                       Emergency Medicines by Type of Facility

                                                                   22
                                                                                             61
                   Private MH-Multiple provider                                                                     89
                                                                                              64
                                                                        30
                                                                                       55
                    Private MH-Single provider                                                                 85
                                                                                       55
                                                                                  43
                                                                                                       74
                                   Puskesmas                                                                        88
                                                                                                              82
                                                              16
                                                                                  44
                                      Polindes                                                                     88
                                                                                        57


                                                  0           20             40         60               80
                                                                             Percentage

                                                             Calcium Gluconate                    MgSO4
                                                             Oxytocin                             Inj Ergometrine
                                                  Source : Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                                               33
(ii) there is greater variability in service readiness among private MH providers,
compared with puskesmas, particularly for non-empaneled providers.
Not only are private MH providers sub-par compared to public MH providers, there is greater
variability among private MH providers, even if just single-practitioner private midwives are
analyzed separately from multi-practitioner private maternity clinics (Table 10). The standard
deviation of service readiness indices for puskesmas for antenatal care is 12 percentage points,
compared with 22 for single-practitioner private midwives. This means that there is a significant tail
of poorly performing private MH providers compared with puskesmas, which may not have been
appreciated by just a comparison of mean service readiness indices alone.

For example, more than half (52 percent) of single-practitioner private MH providers have an ANC
service readiness index of 75 percent and below, compared with less than one-sixth (16
percent) of puskesmas. In other words, five-sixths of puskesmas have a service readiness index above
75 percent. In fact, 31 percent of puskesmas meet all the ANC service readiness indicators compared
with just 4 percent for single-practitioner private MH providers. This tail of poor performance among
private MH providers is starker for basic obstetric care: 81 percent of single-practitioner private MH
providers have a service readiness index of 75 percent or less; but for puskesmas 63 percent have a
service readiness index above 75 percent.

Importantly from a policy perspective, both the variability and the ‘tail’ of poor performing private
MH providers is reduced very substantially for empaneled private MH providers. This provides very
strong justification for accreditation although the under-performing tail can still be much reduced.

                                    Table 10: Variability in Service Readiness Indices
 Percent of Facilities         Puskesmas           Single-              Single-             Multi-           Multi-
                                                 practitioner         practitioner       practitioner     practitioner
                                                 Private MH           Private MH         Private MH       Private MH
                                                  Provider             Provider           Provider         Provider
                                                    (All)           (Empaneled with         (All)       (Empaneled with
                                                                       BPJS only)                          BPJS only)
                                           Antenatal Care Service Readiness Index
 25% or less                      0%                   5%                 0%                 2%               2%
 50% or less                      1%                  18%                 2%                 9%               5%
 75% or less                     16%                  52%                24%                44%              39%
 Above 75%                       84%                  48%                76%                56%              61%
 100% (all indicators met)       31%                   4%                 7%                 9%              12%

 Mean                            87%              68%                 79%                   75%              78%
 Standard Deviation              12%              22%                 13%                   17%              17%
                                     Basic Obstetric Care Service Readiness Index
 25% or less                      0%               6%                  2%                    3%               1%
 50% or less                      3%              19%                  9%                    9%               7%
 75% or less                     37%              81%                 74%                   65%              55%
 Above 75%                       63%              19%                 26%                   35%              45%
 100% (all indicators met)        8%               0%                  0%                    0%               0%

 Mean                            74%                 60%                 66%                67%              70%
 Standard Deviation              14%                 19%                 15%                16%              14%
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                                            34
Both private and public MH providers share an overall weakness in service
readiness, in absolute terms, …
The indicators used in this analysis are normative indicators from WHO’s SARA framework and
national guidelines. With regard to the latter, MoH decree no. 43/2016 describes the Minimum
Service Standards for Health (SPM). The SPMs are the reference for sub-national governments in
ensuring the fulfillment of people’s right to the availability of minimum health services, and they are
meant for assessing sub-national government performance in health service delivery. The SPM for
health covers 12 area, and for the purposes of MH include: (i) all pregnant mothers receive ANC
services according to standards, and (ii) all mothers in delivery receive delivery services according
to standards. MoH ANC standard guidelines indicate that all pregnant women should have at least
four ANC visits: one during the first trimester, one during the second trimester, and two during the
third trimester. These guidelines also form the basis for what is included and reimbursed under JKN’s
benefits package for ANC. According to the guidelines, the content of ANC services should include:
weight measurement, mid-upper arm circumference measurement, blood pressure measurement,
uterus fundal height measurement, fetal heart beat monitoring, fetal position checking, blood tests,
urine test, iron tablets, tetanus toxoid vaccinations, and advice on pregnancy and delivery
complications.53 Additional details the selection and comparability of indicators for this analysis is
provided in the annex.

The large gaps in these tracer indicators are hence technically relevant and indicate a real deficiency
in service readiness shared by both private and public MH providers. Overall, private MH providers
which are the location for 40 percent of deliveries in Indonesia, have an implied ‘gap’ in basic
obstetric care service readiness of 33 percent and 40 percent for multi- and single-practitioner
private MH providers respectively. In other words, single-practitioner private MH providers are, on
average, missing 40 percent of tracer indicators required to provide basic obstetric care (Table 9).
Service readiness for antenatal care is generally stronger than for basic obstetric care, reflecting the
greater complexity and investments required to adequately provide this service, but there is still a
notable gap of between 24 to 32 percent for private MH providers. The opportunity to improve
service readiness is hence very large for both public and private MH providers.




53   Pedoman Pelayanan Terpadu (Integrated Antenatal Care Guidelines), 2010.


                                                                 35
… especially with regard to (i) capacity to manage emergency referrals; and
General Service Readiness at Private and Public MH Providers

General service readiness includes basic amenities such as water, electricity, sanitation, facilities, and
referral infrastructure. Although the availability of water, electricity, and sanitation are fairly high
(generally above 90 percent), there is notably weak capacity to conduct emergency referrals (Figure
11). Primary MH providers are at best only expected to be able to provide basic obstetric care, but
not comprehensive obstetric care (which includes caesarean sections). Some obstetric complications
can be predicted in advance – for example, placenta previa – but many may not be anticipated and
develop in an emergent manner. The timely conduct of an emergency referrals to such centers can
hence often be lifesaving, especially if initial emergency treatment has already been instituted.

Unfortunately, both public and private primary MH providers have weak referral capacity. Only 53
and 74 percent of single- and multi-practitioner private MH providers, which collectively are
responsible for 40 percent of all deliveries in in Indonesia, in rural (34 percentage points, of 65
percent institutional delivery rate) and urban (46 percentage points, of 90 percent institutional
deliver rate) areas, had emergency transportation available. With regard to public MH providers,
only 90 percent of puskesmas had emergency transportation available. Puskesmas in the sampled
priority districts comprise PONED (32 percent) and non-PONED (68 percent) puskesmas.
Polindes/poskesdes had extremely low availability (36 percent) of emergency transportation.

Apart from the deficiency in emergency transportation, there were also deficiencies in the following
WHO SARA general service readiness indicators (Table 11): (i) a room with auditory privacy,
required for consultations (only 51 percent of single-practitioner private MH providers); (ii) access
to computer with internet access: (only 12 percent of single-practitioner private MH providers); and
(iii) notably, only 11 percent of single-practitioner private MH providers in rural areas do not have a
water supply.




                                                   36
                    Figure 11: Communications and Emergency Transportation Service Readiness Indicators


                                                            Communication and Emergency Transportation
                                                                        by Type of Facility

                                                                                                           91
                      Private MH-Multiple provider
                                                                                                74

                                                                                                            93
                       Private MH-Single provider
                                                                                        53

                                                                                                     79
                                          Puskesmas
                                                                                                           90

                                                                          30
                                             Polindes
                                                                               36



                                                        0         20           40        60       80            100
                                                                                 Percentage

                                                                    Communication             Emergency
                                                                                              Transportation
                                                        Source : Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                       Table 11: General Service Availability (Basic Amenities)
 Type of Facility                        Electricity    Water      Consultation Room with     Sanitation         Access to Computer
                                                                      Auditory Privacy                           with Internet Access
 Puskesmas                                 100%             96%             50%                 100%                     95%
  Puskesmas-urban                          100%             99%              53%                100%                     98%
  Puskesmas-rural                          100%             90%              46%                100%                     89%
 Polindes                                   96%             65%             44%                  89%                      3%
 Private MH-Single provider                100%             91%             51%                  99%                     12%
  Private MH-Single provider-urban         100%             94%              53%                100%                     11%
  Private MH-Single provider-rural         100%             89%              49%                 97%                     13%
 Private MH-Multiple provider              100%             95%             71%                  99%                     24%
  Private MH-Multiple provider-urban       100%             98%              69%                100%                     17%
  Private MH-Multiple provider-rural       100%             92%              73%                 97%                     32%
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                                                    37
(ii) ‘commodities’ like medicines and diagnostics of particular relevance for
antenatal care services; and
Antenatal Care Services at Private and Public MH Providers

With regard to antenatal care, specific service readiness indicators for reusable equipment such as
blood pressure sets and weighing scales at private MH providers are fairly decent (Figure 12), but
there is a pattern of deficiencies related to diagnostics – hemoglobin (56 percent) and urine protein
(50 percent). During the antenatal period, these diagnostic tests should be used to identify potential
risks and complications related to two causes of maternal deaths, pre-eclampsia/eclampsia and post-
partum hemorrhage. The weak availability of tetanus toxoid vaccines is also a concern.

This deficiency in ‘commodities’, i.e., health products which get used-up and expire such as
diagnostics and medicines, is a pattern also noted, but to a lesser degree, among public MH providers
in this study and in other earlier studies of public sector readiness of health facilities in Indonesia54,
even though the financing mechanism for purchasing these commodities differ by sector. In the
public sector, commodities would typically be covered by operational rather than capital
expenditures. In the private sector, these can be purchased using fees paid OOP or health financing
scheme reimbursements or capitation payments.

                                             Figure 12: Specific Service Readiness for Antenatal Care


                                                                               Private MH                                    Puskesmas

                                                  Guideline                                             87                                                 97

                                 Training in the last 2 years                  34                                                                   86

                                          Hemoglobin Test                                56                                                78

                                      Urine dipstick-protein                        50                                                    73

                                            Weighing scale                                                    97                                           99

                                            Blood Pressure                                                   95                                           95

                                        Doppler Ultrasound                                               92                                          89

                                               Stethoscope                                    67                                                83

                                              Iron-Folic acid                                            90                                               94

                                   Tetanus Toxoid Vaccine                            55                                                        80

                               Antenatal Care Index (mean)                                     72                                                   87

                             Antenatal Care Index (all items        6.6                                                     31


                                                                0         20   40    60            80        100   0   20    40    60     80             100
                                                                               Percentage                                    Percentage

                          Source : Indonesia QSDS, 2016




54World Bank (2014). Universal maternal health coverage: assessing the readiness of public health facilities to provide maternal health care
in Indonesia.


                                                                                              38
(iii) the provision of basic obstetric care.
Basic Obstetric Care at Private and Public MH Providers

Specific service readiness indicators for basic obstetric care are also deficient for both public and
private MH providers. With regard to equipment, although manual vacuum extractors (for
instrumental deliveries) may not be needed by all facilities and indeed availability of this equipment
is very low (Figure 13), delivery packs, incubators, neonatal bag and masks, and resuscitation tables
are commonly needed but are worryingly deficient at both private and public MH providers. There is
decent availability of blood pressure apparatus, delivery beds, doppler ultrasound, and partographs.

As with antenatal care, service readiness indicators for commodities – in the case of basic obstetric
care, this pertains more to medicines than diagnostics – is also particularly deficient compared with
equipment for both public and private MH providers, but also relatively deficient for private MH
providers compared with public MH providers (Figure 14).

There may have been improvements: The availability of oxytocin at puskesmas was 36 percent, based
on the nationally-representative Rifaskes 2011 survey, but was 88 percent in this latest 2016 survey.
Oxytocin is commonly used – for example, for active management of the 3rd stage of labor – and hence
improvement in its availability is significant, but a notable contrast compared with emergency
obstetric drugs which, although lifesaving, are used much less frequently when serious complications
arise. An example of the latter is IV MgSO4 and IV calcium gluconate (as discussed earlier). From a
policy perspective, it is important that all relevant emergency obstetric drugs are available as per
national standards.

Although causation cannot be simplistically ascribed, it is notable that PPH, for which oxytocin is a
specific treatment and for which availability appears to have improved dramatically over time, is no
longer the main cause of maternal death. This has been replaced by pre-eclampsia/eclampsia, for
which IV MgSO4 is the treatment of choice, but is not widely available.




                                                 39
                               Figure 13: Basic Obstetric Care (Equipment)


                                                                 Private MH                                       Puskesmas

            Blood pressure apparatus                                                          95                                                     95
                         Delivery pack                              45                                                          68
                          Delivery bed                                                        94                                           85
                   Doppler ultrasound                                                     92                                                     91
                     Examination ligth                                         71                                                               90
              Disposable latex gloves                                                     90                                                    89
                             Incubator                      23                                                       44
                Infant weighting scale                                               82                                                              95
             Manual vacuum extractor            2.2                                                          22
              Neonatal bag and mask                                       58                                                   64
                           Partograph                                                84                                                   80
                   Resuscitation table                                    56                                              53
  Soap and running water OR alcoho                                                        92                                                          97
                             Sterilizer                                              82                                                          92
    Suction apparatus (mucus extract                   17                                                          39
            Emergency transportation                                44                                                                                    99
         Vacuum aspirator or D&C kit            2.4                                                     13


                                            0         20         40    60   80                100   0   20        40    60           80          100
                                                                 Percentage                                       Percentage

Source : Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                Figure 14: Basic Obstetric Care (Medicines)


                                                                 Private MH                                       Puskesmas

               Adrenalin (Injectable)                                                                                               69
                     Oral antibiotics                                           76                                                                   95
                    Oral analgesics                                                 80                                                           93
        Oral antihypertensive drugs                                            73                                                         81
      Calcium gluconate(Injectable)                        25                                                        43
      Dexamethasone (Injectables)                                    51                                                              72
             Diazepam(Inejectable)                                                                                             66
           Antibiotics Eye ointment                                                  85                                                         90
              Injectables antibiotics                                                                                43
            Ergometrine(Injectable)                                       60                                                               82
    Intravenous solution(normal) sal                                                          93                                                      98
   Magnesium sulphate Injectables                                         58                                                         74
             Metronidazole infusion                                                                                 42
                   Oral Ergometrine                                                                                                       82
                Oxytocin(injectable)                                                     87                                                     88
                   Skin disinfectant                                                      92                                                         94
                Vitamin K (injection)                                          75                                                                93


                                        0             20         40    60      80             100   0   20        40    60           80          100
                                                                 Percentage                                       Percentage

Source : Indonesia QSDS, 2016
Note: Medicine not applicable for private : Adrenalin (injection); Diazepam; injectable antibiotics; Metronidazole; oral ergometrine




                                                                               40
Although not the specific focus of this study, public polindes/poskesdes have
particularly weak service delivery.
                                 Box 1: Portends for the Poor Polindes and Poskesdes

Although not the focus of this study, comparative data was collected on polindes/poskesdes to
contextualize private MH providers. Polindes/poskesdes are public primary MH facilities which
serve rural communities. Among polindes/poskesdes in sampled priority districts, 22 percent were
polindes and 78 percent were poskesdes. In contrast to polindes which is limited to MH, poskesdes
provide promotive, preventive and curative services within the authority of the health provider
(midwife, nurse, etc.) placed in the poskesdes.

This study finds that, even among polindes/poskesdes which purport to provide such basic obstetric
care, the service readiness of polindes/poskesdes to provide this is so weak that a delivery at a typical
polindes/poskesdes cannot be meaningfully considered an institutional birth, in terms of the level of
complications which can be managed. One-third of polindes/poskesdes do not even have a water
supply and hence a birth at a polindes/poskesdes may not even be much different from a home birth
attended by a skilled birth attendant. Referral capacity is also very weak, with only 36 percent have
emergency transportation and 30 percent have communications systems (Figure 11).

However, polindes/poskesdes do attain a relatively decent number of specific service readiness
indicators for antenatal care, and hence still does have a MH role (Figure 15).



                            Figure 15: Service Readiness Indicators at Polindes/Poskesdes




                             Electricity                                                                    96


                            Sanitation                                                                 89


                                 Water                                                  65


                     Urine protein test                                       49


                      Hemoglobin test                                              54


                            Iron tablet                                                           83


                     Oxytocin injection                                                                88



                                           0           20            40            60        80             100
                                                                          Percentage
                                           Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                                                  41
Laudably, conditional on the presence of a facility, urban-rural disparities in
service readiness are small amongst either the private or public sector, with
most rural facilities more ‘ready’ to provide MH services than their urban
counterpart.
When an urban facility is compared with a rural facility of the same type, the service readiness index
for both are fairly comparable, and in fact the service readiness of rural facilities exceeds (on average)
the service readiness of its urban counterparts (Table 12). For example, and urban puskesmas have
a mean general service readiness index of 79 percent compared with 80 percent for rural. For private
MH facilities, this is also noted to be the case. The apparent strength in rural vs urban primary MH
facilities could be because these rural primary MH facilities are regularly used for actual deliveries,
whereas in urban areas, primary MH facilities may be less often needed actual institutional deliveries
are taken up by nearby or accessible hospitals.

This compares a present facility in the urban vs rural area – although the distribution and density of
facilities in urban vs rural areas are likely to be very different.



                          Table 12: Urban-Rural Differences in General Service Readiness
                                General Service Readiness Index    Urban   Rural
                                Single-practitioner Private MH      66%    70%
                                Multi-practitioner Private MH       71%    71%
                                Puskesmas                           79%    80%
                                 Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                                       42
However, there are only very minor differences in service readiness indicators in
the sampled priority districts and matched comparator districts, although these
priority districts are part of a national prioritization policy.
For the purposes of generating a comparable set of districts, the sampled MH priority districts were
matched opportunistically to sampled non-MH priority districts based on observable district-level
characteristics – population, area, GDP per capita, and HDI. As this nevertheless is cross-sectional
data, the comparisons are not intended to imply causality of the intervention of prioritizing the 64
districts. The survey finds that there only small differences in service readiness between sampled
priority districts and matched comparator non-priority districts for both private and public primary
MH providers (Table 13). For example, the general service index for puskesmas in both priority
districts their matched comparators are 79 and 78 percent respectively; for antenatal care, the
service readiness index is 87 percent for puskesmas in priority districts compared with 88 percent
for matched comparators; although for basic obstetric care, service readiness for puskesmas in
priority districts is better – 74 percent – compared with 67 percent for matched comparators.

Among private MH facilities, both single- and multi-practitioner private facilities, there is even less
difference. The service readiness indices for general services, antenatal care, and basic obstetric care,
differ by only one to two percentage points between priority districts and sampled districts. Although
the government does not directly control private facilities, it can play a stewardship role through
regulation and as of 2014, also has JKN as an instrument to use purchasing to influence private
provision.

Basic financing parameters were also collected as part of Indonesia QSDS 2016. Although the analysis
provided in Table 14 is not a comprehensive expenditure review of public expenditures, there are
important findings to note.55 Overall public health expenditures at a district level, flowing through
district health offices (dinkes), have generally increased on a per-capita basis from 2013 to 2015.
However, MCH-specific expenditures are small – less than half of one percent of overall public health
expenditures or approximately Rp 860 per capita (woman within the reproductive age and children).
Expenditures reaching puskesmas have increased from Rp 9,000 to Rp 37,000 during the same time
period.

As a national (but not necessarily sub-national) priority, the MoH has identified these 64 priority MH
districts for targeted efforts at reducing MMR. At the central level, this prioritization includes
ensuring that these districts are prioritized for centrally purchased items and to encourage
development partners to concentrate efforts on these districts. However, the fiscal decentralization
policy (i.e., reduction in the APBN deconcentration fund) has meant that MOH has less ability to
intervene directly on funding non-capital expenditures, such as activities to develop human resource
capacity. There is hence no specific interventions, programs, or funding tied to the 64 high-priority
MH districts and this hence remains policy just on paper with no apparent effects on financing at the
local level nor on service readiness.




55For more information on health financing flows, please refer to: Tandon, Ajay, Eko Pambudi, Pandu Harimurti, Emiko Masaki, Ali
Subandoro, and Puti Marzoeki. 2016. “Indonesia Health Financing System Assessment: Spend More, Right & Better.” World Bank.



                                                                 43
     Table 13: Mean Service Readiness Indicators for Sampled Priority Districts, Matched Comparator Districts, and Nationally-
                                                      Representative Districts
     Service Readiness Indicators      Sampled Priority Districts         Matched Comparator          Nationally-Representative
                                                                               Districts                       Districts
     General Service Readiness
     Single-practitioner Private MH                68%                             66%                            -
     Multi-practitioner Private MH                 71%                             70%                            -
     Puskesmas                                     79%                             78%                          77%
     Polindes                                      57%                             46%                            -

     Antenatal Care
     Single-practitioner Private MH                68%                             68%                            -
     Multi-practitioner Private MH                 75%                             77%                            -
     Puskesmas                                     87%                             88%                          88%
     Polindes                                      64%                             49%                            -

 Basic Obstetric Care
 Single-practitioner Private MH                    60%                             58%                            -
 Multi-practitioner Private MH                     67%                             68%                            -
 Puskesmas                                         74%                             67%                          72%
 Polindes                                          57%                             44%                            -
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016



                   Table 14: District Health Office (dinkes) Expenditures in Sampled Priority Districts (2013-2015)
                         Median for sampled priority districts                      2013      2014     2015
                         (available data only)
                         Total DHO Expenditure per Capita (IDR)                    59,486    92,977   143,137
                         DHO Expenditure on MCH Program per Capita56 (IDR)          330       598       860
                         DHO Expenditure on MCH Program (percent of total)          0.5%      0.4%      0.3%
                         DHO Expenditures on Puskesmas per Capita (IDR)            9,238     24,092    36,888
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




56   In this context, the per capita denominator is women within the reproductive age and children


                                                                    44
          c. Private Maternal Health Provider Training and Ability in
             Sampled Priority Districts
Critically, for both the private and public sector, although there are challenges
in the ‘hardware’ service readiness indicators, there are major weaknesses in the
‘software’ aspects of the supply side, with particular concerns over private MH
providers regarding (i) weaknesses in health worker training and the low
availability of clinical guidelines; and
Although 93 percent of puskesmas had any staff trained in basic obstetric care in the last 2 years,
only 42 percent of single-practitioner private MH providers and 71 percent of multi-practitioner
private maternity clinics had staff receiving such training (Table 15), noting also the earlier findings
that 55 percent of private MH providers are dual practicing in both sectors. For antenatal care, a
similar discrepancy emerges between public and private, as only 27 percent of single-practitioner
private MH providers receiving antenatal care training compared with 86 percent for puskesmas.

BPJS empanelment among private MH providers is associated with a greater likelihood of trained
staff, but urban-rural differences in availability of trained staff are surprisingly small. There were no
notable difference between urban and rural puskesmas with regard to training on basic obstetric
care, and only a 3 percentage point difference for urban and rural single-practitioner private MH
provider.

With regard to the availability of clinical guidelines, less than half of private MH providers had basic
obstetric care clinical guidelines available, compared with just over two-thirds for puskesmas.

Both training and clinical guidelines are increasingly important given the shift from skilled birth
attendance to institutional deliveries – as facilities are expected to be able to manage less common
but more serious life-threatening conditions. However, more critical than the availability of
guidelines and recent exposure to training, is actual provider ability, as described in the following
section.

                       Table 15: Clinical Guidelines and Health Worker Training (Basic Obstetric Care)
       Facility Type                                   Clinical Guidelines for Obstetrics   Training for basic obstetric care
                                                                                                   in the last 2 years
       Puskesmas                                                     65%                                   93%
        Puskesmas-urban                                              67%                                   93%
        Puskesmas-rural                                              63%                                   93%
       Polindes/Poskesdes                                            27%                                   61%
       Private MH-Single provider                                    41%                                   42%
        Private MH-Single provider-urban                             46%                                   39%
        Private MH-Single provider-rural                             35%                                   45%
       Private MH-Multiple provider                                  41%                                   71%
       Private MH facilities empaneled with BPJS                     44%                                   83%
       Private MH facilities not empaneled with BPJS                 38%                                   62%

        Sampled Priority Districts                                   37%                                  60%
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016




                                                                45
(ii) Similarly low levels of provider ability, among both private and public
providers, to provide comprehensive antenatal care visit assessments and …
Provider ability is a critical aspect of supply side readiness and availability. The survey included two
clinical vignettes were posed to health workers (i.e., doctors and midwives) in order to assess
provider ability. The first clinical vignette describes a routine ANC visit and reports on the clinical
questions (‘history taking’), examination, and investigations mentioned by the health worker. The
second clinical vignette describes an obstetric emergency – postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) - and
reports on the emergency management of such a patient as mentioned by the health worker. Both
clinical vignettes also include a few closed questions on specific aspects of maternal health clinical
knowledge. These clinical vignettes were presented as a clinical case read out by the enumerator.

During the routine ANC visit clinical vignette, private midwives (and public midwives and doctors)
frequently missed mentioning basic and routine questions on the past obstetric history of the
pregnant woman. For example, only 21 percent asked about the number of previous pregnancies, 19
percent asked about complications during previous labor, and only 55 percent asked about the mode
of delivery for the last child. Questions on past medical history – such as diabetes was also frequently
missed. Only 23 percent asked whether the pregnant woman had diabetes. Questions related to the
social circumstances of the pregnant woman were also infrequently asked – only 7 percent asked
about whom the pregnant woman lives with and only 15 percent asked about family circumstances
(Table 16).

Measuring blood pressure was very commonly mentioned by 83 percent of private midwives, but
only 61 mentioned measuring fundal height. Similarly, a hemoglobin test was mentioned by 88
percent of private midwives, but fewer or around 66 percent, mentioned testing urine for protein
routinely. Iron and folic acid supplements were mentioned by 80 percent of private midwives as
management steps for the pregnant woman, but only 18 percent mentioned they would provide
advice on danger signs during pregnancy. Importantly, given that eclampsia and pre-eclampsia are
significant contributors to maternal mortality, only 13 percent asked about hypertension during the
past pregnancy, and only 3 percent asked specifically about pre-eclampsia or eclampsia. However,
when posed with a specific question on the single most important test to order if faced with a
pregnant woman at 37 weeks of gestation with new onset of hypertension, 90 percent responded
correctly that they would check for protein in the urine (Table 16).

There were notably few differences between the provider ability of public and private MH providers
with regard to the ANC clinical vignette, which is perhaps unsurprising given the prevalence of dual-
practice.




                                                  46
                                Table 16: Vignette Tracer Indicator for Antenatal Care

                                                      Puskesmas       Puskesmas          Poskesdes    Private
           Question/action should do
                                                        Doctor         Midwife           Midwife      Midwife
ANC history taking
     How was the last child delivered?                         72%             59%              60%         55%
     Number of prior pregnancies                               21%             22%              14%         21%
     History of exclusive breastfeeding?                         0%              4%             1%              1%
     TT receieved in past pregnancies?                         12%               9%             16%             9%
     Medical history                                           41%             46%              37%         32%
     Any history of diabetes?                                  30%             26%              20%         23%
     Any hypertension in previous pregnancies?                 24%               7%             10%         13%
     History of pre-eclampsia/eclampsia                          0%              0%             2%              3%
     Social history                                              3%              9%             9%              5%
     Any question on family                                    18%             19%              22%         15%
     Who are you live with?                                    11%             16%              10%             7%
     Any complication previous labor                           22%             17%              18%         19%
ANC examination
     Blood pressure                                            73%             79%              86%         83%
     Abdomen examination                                         9%              8%             9%          10%
     Fundal height                                             72%             61%              68%         61%
     Leopold II                                                39%             44%              31%         28%
     Leopold III                                               33%             33%              19%         19%
     Leopold IV                                                33%             32%              19%         19%
ANC test
     Hemoglobin                                                78%             89%              91%         88%
     Urine dipstick for glucose                                11%             17%              10%             9%
     Urine dipstick for protein                                73%             47%              49%         66%
     HIV test                                                  28%             34%              21%         22%
ANC management
     Iron/folic acid supplements                               95%             86%              93%         80%
     Tetanus Toxoid                                              4%              6%             7%              6%
     Advice on danger signs during pregnancy                   23%             15%              12%         18%
     Advice on disease symptoms                                  0%              0%             0%              3%
     Suggest routine ANC                                       86%             71%              66%         57%
PIH scenario
     Will test urine protein                                   89%             89%              79%         90%
Source : Indonesia QSDS, 2016
Note : Preliminary sample weighted applied




                                                         47
… to manage life-threatening obstetric emergencies.
During the PPH clinical vignette, health workers were asked about their clinical management steps,
assuming they were in a fully-equipped and stocked primary maternal care facility one-hour away
from the nearest hospital, within the first 30 minutes after the onset of PPH, and separately, their
clinical management steps after the first 30 minutes. Within the first 30 minutes, only 29 percent of
private midwives would administer intravenous (IV) fluids and only 19 percent would administer it
rapidly. One of the simplest and effective forms of initial treatment, which does not require
equipment or drugs, is uterine massage, which was suggested by only 9 percent. Very few would
examine for specific sources of bleeding from the cervix or uterus. Within these first 30 mins, 44
percent of private midwives mentioned they would refer the patient to the hospital. After the initial
30 minutes after the onset of PPH, 74 percent of private midwives mentioned they would refer the
patient to the hospital, if the bleeding continued. The diagnosis of PPH was mentioned by 32 percent
of private midwives – with 38 percent specifying the cause as uterine atony and 59 percent specifying
the cause as a retained placenta. In addition to this PPH clinical vignette, private midwives were
asked a specific question on the contraindications (i.e., when the medication should not be given) of
ergometrine. Only 68 percent correctly mentioned hypertension, and very few (3 percent)
specifically mentioned pre-eclampsia or eclampsia (Table 17).

Similar clinical vignettes were also posed to public midwives and doctors. Generally, the performance
of public and private midwives on these clinical vignettes were similar – with a slight difference being
that public midwives were more likely (77 and 88 percent for puskesmas and polindes midwives
respectively) to suggest a referral to hospital if the pregnant women with PPH was still bleeding after
30 minutes, compared with private midwives (74 percent) (Table 17).

Compared with public doctors, midwives (both public and private) performed better in the
management of PPH. Public doctors were less likely to mention administering oxytocin (30 percent)
or ergometrine (16 percent) in the first 30 mins. Worryingly, only 47 percent of public doctors
mentioned hypertension as a contraindication for ergometrine. The differences in performance could
be related to a lack of experience as only 46 percent of responding public doctors had managed a
similar case before, compared with between 64 and 79 percent for midwives (Table 17).




                                                  48
Table 17: Vignette Tracer Indicator for Obstetric with Postpartum Hemorrhage Indication

                                                Puskesmas Puskesmas Poskesdes     Private
            Questions/action should do
                                                 Doctor     Midwife    Midwife    Midwife
   First 30 minutes
        Administer IV fluids                          36%        21%        23%        29%
        Rapid IV fluids                               13%        14%        18%        19%
        Check symptoms of shock                       10%         0%        0%          0%
        Check contractions                             2%         2%        5%          4%
        Oxytocin                                      30%        43%        42%        42%
        Ergometrine                                   16%        17%        19%        20%
        Uterine massage                               11%        11%        12%         9%
        Bimanual uterine compression                  12%        22%        12%        13%
        External aortic compression                    0%        14%        7%          5%
        Refers to hospital                            41%        47%        43%        44%
        Look for bleeding from cervix                  2%         3%        3%          3%
        Look for bleeding from uterus                  2%         2%        1%          3%
        Insert IV line                                64%        65%        66%        52%
   Next 30 minutes
        Administer IV fluids                           2%        20%        5%         11%
        Rapid IV fluids                                3%         4%        5%          6%
        Check symptoms of shock                        1%         0%        0%          0%
        Check contractions                             2%         2%        2%          2%
        Oxytocin                                       7%        15%        9%         10%
        Ergometrine                                    6%        10%        4%          5%
        Uterine massage                                9%         5%        7%          8%
        Apply bimanual uterine compression            12%        22%        18%        22%
        Apply external aortic compression              0%        12%        9%         10%
        Look for bleeding from cervix                  0%         0%        0%          0%
        Look for bleeding from uterus                  0%         0%        1%          0%
        Insert IV line                                19%        26%        24%        26%
        Refers to hospital                            80%        77%        88%        74%
   Diagnosis
        PPH                                           52%        56%        41%        32%
        Uterine atony                                 44%        25%        21%        38%
        Retained placenta                             64%        52%        67%        59%
   Contraindications of ergometrine
        Hypertension                                  47%        75%        61%        68%
        Pre-eclampsia                                  8%         4%        3%          3%
        Eclampsia                                      8%         4%        4%          1%
        Heart disease                                  7%        12%        5%          4%
        Allergic to ergometrine                        3%         3%        2%          3%
        Twin pregnancy                                 1%         4%        0%          0%
   Others
        Have you managed a similar case?              46%        79%        64%        66%
        Correct route to administer oxytocin          90%        93%        98%        98%
   Source : Indonesia QSDS, 2016
   Note : Preliminary sample weighted applied




                                                 49
There were also weaknesses in the content of ANC services provided by private
MH providers, particularly with blood and urine tests, although they were more
likely to counsel on the need for institutional deliveries, and …
Indonesia QSDS 2016 included a patient exit survey containing interviews of patients who received
health services at facilities in DKI Jakarta (not representative of the 64 high-priority districts). An exit
survey is valuable because it is an important factor in the assessment of health care
performance.57,58,59 For maternal health care, in particular, only patients who received ANC services
were interviewed. The exit survey was conducted only in DKI Jakarta (except in Kabupaten
Kepulauan Seribu district) and the health facilities included were puskesmas and private maternity
clinics/midwives. The process started with a health worker being interviewed in each facility. A list
of patients serviced by the health worker was then generated and from this list, the patients to be
interviewed for the exit survey were randomly selected. For puskesmas, 2 out of 4 randomly selected
patients were pregnant women who came for ANC. Two patients were selected for private maternity
clinics/midwives. Around one-third of the 503 interviewed pregnant women were from private
maternity clinics/midwives.

In general, both private MH providers and puskesmas performed very well in blood pressure
measurements, abdominal examination, actual provision of iron tablets, and estimating birth date,
and no less than 90 % of the pregnant women interviewed reported that they received these health
care services (Table 18). However, there were notable weaknesses among both public and private
MH providers with regard to counselling on pregnancy warning signs (only about one-third of
providers counselled on this), weight checks, urine tests, blood test, and tetanus toxoid vaccination.

Based on a simple unweighted mean of the content of ANC indicators, public MH providers generally
performed better than private MH providers. These differences between the sectors are particularly
large for antenatal tests: urine and blood tests, and enquiries about blood type. Private providers
performed better with regard to counselling on institutional deliveries but for both sectors, such
advice is rarely provided – 24 and 9 percent for private and public MH providers respectively.




57 Bleich, S.N., E. Ozaltin, and C.J.L. Murray. 2009. "How does satisfaction with the health-care system relate to patient experience?"
Bulletin of the World Health Organization (87):271-28. Available: http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/87/4/07-050401.pdf?ua=1.
58 Xesfingi, and A. Vozikis. 2016. "Patient satisfaction with the healthcare system: Assessing the impact of socio-economic and healthcare

provision factors." BMC Health Services Research 16(94). Available:
https://bmchealthservres.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12913-016-1327-4.
59 Black, C., and H.C. Kowal. 2016. "Patient satisfaction: A key factor in healthcare performance assessment." Health Policy Forum,

Altarum Institute. Available: http://altarum.org/health-policy-blog/patient-satisfaction-a-key-factor-in-healthcare-performance-
assessment.


                                                                   50
                                     Table 18: Exit Survey Results for MH Priority Districts
 Content of ANC services received by patient during current/previous visit                     Private MH   Puskesmas
 Weight taken                                                                                     33%          37%
 Blood pressure measured                                                                          99%          98%
 Blood pressure result informed                                                                   64%          64%
 Urine tested                                                                                     28%          50%
 Blood sample taken                                                                               25%          51%
 Counseling on institutional delivery provided                                                    24%           9%
 Abdominal examination                                                                            98%          96%
 Birth date estimate provided                                                                     90%          90%
 Uterus fundal height examined                                                                    63%          75%
 Blood type asked                                                                                 59%          82%
 Diet information provided                                                                        82%          78%
 Iron tablet received                                                                             92%          94%
 TT injection received                                                                            63%          57%
 Pregnancy warning signs informed                                                                 36%          32%

 Simple Mean                                                                                     53%          60%
 Samples, n                                                                                      173          204
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016; Unweighted




                                                              51
… patient satisfaction with private and public providers are comparable except
for indicators related to fees and patient discrimination.
Based on this same exit interview of ANC patients (deliveries were not included), overall quality (as
defined by the patient) of services provided was the same and high (97 percent satisfied) between
public and private, even though a simple mean index reveals that patients were more satisfied with
puskesmas compared with private MH providers (86 compared with 80 percent). These differences
were mainly accounted for due to greater dissatisfaction, among users of private MH services, with
user fees (registration, medications, and transportation) and transportation fees. Note that there is
dissatisfaction with fees (particularly lab fees) even for public puskesmas, although to a lesser degree
than private, but this nevertheless warrants further exploration as ANC services at puskesmas should
be covered under JKN.

Private MH providers performed slightly better in terms of consultation time. However, of concern,
there was a large difference in patients’ perception of the way private MH providers acted towards
all patients – less than half (47 percent) of patients using private MH providers thought that health
workers act the same way towards all patients, compared with 91 percent among patients using
puskesmas.

These findings raise the question as to why patients use private facilities predominantly given the
higher levels of satisfaction, quality, and financial access at public facilities. As a supply-side
instrument, this survey does not answer this question but it suggests that there remain access issues
with public providers – perhaps limited opening hours and/or few nearby facilities at a given locality.

                                 Table 19: Patient Satisfaction Indicators in MH Priority Districts
 Satisfaction component                                                                                  Private MH       Puskesmas
 It is convenient to travel from your house to the health facility.                                          99%             98%
 The health facility is clean.                                                                              100%             98%
 The health workers are courteous and respectful.                                                            99%             97%
 The health workers did a good job of explaining your condition.                                             98%             96%
 It is easy to get medicine that health workers prescribe.                                                   93%             96%
 This facility is sufficiently supplied with medical supplies and equipment.                                 95%             90%
 The registration fees of this visit to the health facility were reasonable.                                 13%             47%
 The lab fees of this visit to the health facility were reasonable.                                          4%              14%
 The medication fees of this visit to the health facility were reasonable.                                   31%             43%
 The transport fees for this visit to the health facility were reasonable.                                   21%             61%
 The amount of time you spent waiting to be seen by a health worker was reasonable.                          90%             86%
 You had enough privacy during your consultation.                                                            94%             95%
 The health worker spent a sufficient amount of time with you.                                               98%             97%
 The hours the facility is open are adequate to meet your needs.                                             97%             98%
 You feel that this facility would take your feedback seriously.                                             99%             97%
 You trust in the skills and abilities of the health workers of this facility.                               98%             97%
 The health workers in this facility are very friendly and approachable.                                     99%             97%
 The health workers in this facility care about your health just as much or more than you do.                99%             97%
 The health workers in this facility act differently toward rich people than toward poor people.             97%             97%
 The health workers in this facility treat female and male patients the same way.                            97%             99%
 The health workers in this facility act the same towards all patients.                                      47%             91%
 The overall quality of services provided was satisfactory.                                                  97%             97%

  Simple Mean                                                                                                80%               86%
  Samples, n                                                                                                  173              204
Source: Indonesia QSDS, 2016; Unweighted; Note Exit interviews were conducted only in DKI Jakarta (West Jakarta, East Jakarta and North
Jakarta); For this MH-related analysis, only patients who were attending for ANC services were included



                                                                   52
V.      Conclusion and Policy Implications

        a. What is already known about the maternal health context?
Although detailed information on the service readiness of public sector MH providers has been
available before, systematic and detailed information on the supply side context of private MH
providers has not been previously available although the use of private sector providers, in terms of
institutional deliveries, far eclipses that of public sector providers. This policy note summarizes this
new analysis of the Indonesia QSDS 2016 survey in order to shed light on the ‘missing link’ of MH
service delivery – i.e., the private sector.

Key messages reflecting the broader context, especially the demand-side perspective, which motivate
this analysis, described in Sections I – III are summarized in the Box 2 below.

                              Box 2: Critical Maternal Health Demand Side Context

•    There is one maternal death every six hours in Indonesia, reflecting an MMR which is very
     high compared to regional and economic peer countries, although there have been some
     improvements. Indonesia did not attain the 2015 MDG target for reducing the MMR and it is
     unclear if the 2030 SDG target would be met. Key causes of MMR, in order of importance, are (i)
     postpartum and antepartum hemorrhage and (ii) eclampsia/pre-eclampsia.

•    There are large variations in MH outcomes and public-sector MH provision across
     Indonesia, motivating a national program to prioritize 64 high-priority districts where large
     numbers of maternal deaths occur.

•    Institutional delivery rates (76 percent) are below target, especially in rural areas (65
     percent), although skilled birth attendance and antenatal care coverage rates have improved.
     However, the content and effectiveness of either is unclear.

•    Private sector MH providers are by far the dominant providers of institutional deliveries,
     especially in urban areas. Nationally, 54 percent of all deliveries occurred in the private sector,
     compared with 22 percent in the public sector.

•    JKN, the national flagship social health insurance scheme, includes a theoretically comprehensive
     benefits package for maternal health, covering both public and empaneled private providers, but
     critically, only 70 percent of the population is enrolled in JKN. A complementary scheme,
     Jampersal, was revamped in 2016 and now provides assistance on the demand side to encourage
     institutional deliveries in the form of waiting homes, referrals, and to cover payment for poor
     high-risk pregnant women who are not covered under JKN/KIS.




                                                     53
        b. What are the key messages arising from this analysis?
The analysis focuses on the service readiness and effectiveness of private primary MH providers in
sampled priority districts, while contextualizing these with public primary MH providers (puskesmas
and polindes/poskesdes) in the same districts, and comparing these with matched comparator ‘non-
priority’ districts. Service readiness was measured in terms of both ‘hardware’ – i.e., infrastructure,
equipment, medicines, diagnostics – and ‘software’ – i.e., training and provider ability, using facility,
health worker, and patient survey instruments. Key policy-relevant differences and similarities in the
characteristics and strengths of private and public primary MH providers are summarized in Table
20 below.

               Table 20: Key Characteristics and Strengths of Private and Public Primary MH Providers
             Private MH Providers                                      Public MH Providers

                                                Differences

 •   Mainly single-practitioner midwives                 •   Comprising both puskesmas and
     operating from homes, with a small                      polindes/poskesdes
     number of multi-practitioner maternity              •   Puskesmas are multi-practitioner
     clinics                                                 facilities, including both PONED and non-
 •   36 percent of private midwives are dual-                PONED puskesmas, with a median of 5
     practicing in the public sector                         midwives
                                                         •   Polindes, typically staffed by one village
                                                             midwife, focuses only on MCH whereas
                                                             poskesdes can also provide promotive,
                                                             preventive and curative services
                                                         •   The ratio of poskesdes to polindes is
                                                             84:16
 •   Generally distributed in urban areas, and           •   Relatively more rural presence due to
     in provinces of North Sumatra, Jambi, and               polindes/poskesdes network
     the provinces on Java and Bali islands
 •   No clear pattern of the filling of public
     provider distribution ‘gaps’
 •   Only one-third of private primary MH                •   Puskesmas are by default empaneled
     providers are BPJS empaneled, with                      with BPJS
     implications on access and effectiveness
 •   Reasons for non-empanelment are mainly
     financial and non-fulfillment of BPJS
     requirements
 •   Almost all private primary MH providers             •   Puskesmas, polindes/ poskesdes would
     cover both antenatal care and basic                     all typically cover antenatal care
     obstetric care                                      •   45 percent of puskesmas cover deliveries
                                                             but only 40 percent of polindes /
                                                             poskesdes cover basic obstetric care
 •   Lower service readiness than puskesmas,             •   Even among polindes/poskesdes which
     but much better than polindes/poskesdes                 purport to provide delivery services, the
                                                             service readiness of these facilities


                                                        54
•   Greater variation in service readiness               (including basic amenities such as water
    among private MH providers                           supply) is extremely weak and may not
                                                         meaningfully count as an institutional
                                                         delivery
•   Particular weaknesses in the average            •    Although still low, puskesmas have
    availability of emergency obstetric drugs            higher average availability of emergency
    used to treat pre-eclampsia/eclampsia,               obstetric drugs
    the second most common cause of
    maternal mortality
•   Relatively more likely to counsel               •    Relatively more likely to enquire about
    pregnant women on importance of                      pregnant woman’s blood type
    institutional delivery, but note that this is
    still infrequent
•   Particular weaknesses in the actual use of      •    Although still infrequent, puskesmas
    diagnostic tests for hemoglobin and urine            providers are more likely to actually test
    protein (to identify anemia and                      for hemoglobin and urine protein than
    pregnancy induced hypertension related               private MH providers, although the
    respectively to postpartum hemorrhage                average availability of tests is comparable
    and pre-eclampsia/eclampsia) during                  to private MH
    antenatal care visits, although average
    availability of these tests is comparable to
    puskesmas
•   Overall, lower patient satisfaction with        •    Higher patient satisfaction generally,
    private providers due to fees and                    except for time spent with the patient and
    discrimination                                       subjective perception of facility supplies
                                                         and equipment

                                         Commonalities

•   Service readiness of both public and private MH providers can be much improved,
    especially in the domains of medicines, diagnostics, and basic obstetric care
•   Provider ability can be much improved, especially the management of life-threatening
    obstetric emergencies
•   Emergency referral networks can be further strengthened
•   Public-private coordination, as part of the JKN-network, can be improved
•   Surprisingly, conditional on the presence of a facility, urban rural disparities at a facility
    level (comparing similar facility types in urban and rural areas) is remarkably similar with
    rural facilities often ‘readier’ than their urban counterparts
•   Despite the national prioritization of the 64 high-priority MH districts, there are minimal
    differences between these districts and matched comparator non-priority MH districts
•   Notably, as these districts represent 33 percent of the national population and a smaller
    share, 30 percent, of maternal deaths, these districts actually have lower MMR than the
    national ratio




                                                    55
             c. What are the policy implications of these key findings?
The overarching medium-term policy direction for addressing high MMR and reducing MMR
disparities in Indonesia should focus on:
        •    Minimizing non-institutional deliveries and covering all institutional deliveries,
             regardless of public or private provider, with the financial protection (and quality
             assurance) of a strategically purchasing social health insurer; and
        •    Improving the effectiveness of institutional deliveries at both public and private
             providers, in terms of service readiness, provider ability, and referral systems; although
        •    In urban and densely populated areas, there remains debate on whether larger multi-
             practitioner maternity facilities/centers or single-practitioner primary MH provider-
             centric institutional deliveries should be encouraged.
        •    Continued progress on both demand side interventions – for example, expanding the
             breadth of JKN coverage, health education, family planning, antenatal care, and preventive
             and public health measures – and supply side interventions – for example, registration
             and licensing of providers and accreditation of facilities - is imperative.

Given the Indonesia context, an archipelago with thousands of islands and extremes in population
densities, the specific policy direction undertaken by Indonesia would need to take into consideration
the urban-rural contexts, and to leverage the assets of both private and public MH providers,
including opportunities provided by the introduction of JKN in 2014, as a purchaser of health services
from both the public and private sector. As this policy paper is motivated by the availability of new
information about the private sector, policy implications described here are focused on improving
the supply side readiness of the private sector, although this does not imply that there are no policy
implications for public providers, nor can policies for either sector be undertaken in isolation. Hence,
specific crucial policy implications for public providers and the interface between private and public
are also proposed. Many policies which are relevant for private providers would also be relevant for
public providers, but given that institutional delivery rates are below target, this policy paper
encourages both public and private deliveries, and not a preferential view of either public or private.
These policy implications further recognize that heterogenous strategies are necessary, given the
Indonesian context, for high (‘urban’ areas, loosely speaking) and low (‘rural’ areas, loosely speaking)
population density areas. Importantly, policies to strengthen MH services should also be seen within
the broader context of primary health care strengthening, for which the eight ‘interlinked reform
levers’ proposed for China’s primary health care reforms may be helpful.60 With this broader context
in mind, private sector-focused MH-related policy implications arising from the key findings from
this analysis are presented below according to the key responsible stakeholder, noting that some
policy actions involve multiple stakeholders.




60   China Joint Study Partnership. 2016. “Deepening Health Reform in China.” World Bank Group.


                                                                   56
Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Social (BPJS)
Advance the strategic purchasing functions of BPJS beyond claims administration, given the
mandated role of BPJS as JKN’s strategic purchaser of health services enshrined in its vision to
provide ‘quality’ (berkualitas) and ‘sustainable’ (berkesinambungan) health insurance by 2019, and
its mission which includes improving the quality of services (meningkatkan kualitas layanan) and
ensuring sustainability through the use of appropriate health facility payment systems (system
pembayaran fasilitas kesehatan) in a transparent and accountable manner (transparan dan
akuntabel).61 As a strategic purchaser for JKN, BPJS is the key link to improving the quality and
coverage of private MH providers, hence many key policy implications are low-hanging opportunities
for BPJS to further strengthen its critical role in Indonesia’s health system through (i) strengthening
the empanelment/contract renewal process, (ii) provider payment mechanism and tariff rate
reforms, and (iii) increasing BPJS empanelment.

Strengthen BPJS empanelment and contract renewal of private providers progressively,
verifiably, and transparently. Although it is encouraging that BPJS empanelment, which includes
verification of a self-assessment checklist, is associated with higher mean service readiness indices,
the service readiness even of BPJS empaneled private (and public) providers can be substantially
improved. Four opportunistic actions can be undertaken by BPJS to do so. Firstly, service readiness
standards should be progressively leveled-up to fully attain the norms set by an appropriate national
and/or international technical authority, i.e., MOH or WHO. Specifically, these standards must also
include valid (i.e., non-expired) emergency obstetric drugs even if these are rarely used, diagnostics
required by national guidelines as part of antenatal care, and pre-planned arrangements for
emergency referrals. There are two options for progressive leveling-up of standards: (i)
empanelment requirements for all newly empaneled facilities can be raised over time, with the same
increased standards applied for contract renewals for existing empaneled facilities; or (ii) on an
interim basis, different ‘tiers’ of standards can be applied (with different reimbursement prices) for
different geographical contexts (e.g., with higher standards for wealthier urban areas in Java) so that
the requirements for empanelment for new entrants would not be too onerous for providers in more
rural areas. The lowest tier of standards should not be lower than the current status quo and the
standards of all tiers should increase and converge over time. Once empaneled, even under a lower
tier, providers have the discretion to spend BPJS reimbursement and should use these to make
investments to keep up with standards. These standards should be applied not only during the
empanelment process but also during the contract renewal stage. Renewals should not be automatic
or assumed but require an assessment against progressively increased standards.

Secondly, the relationship between volume and outcomes should be leveraged by encouraging the
consolidation of small (i.e., low volume) providers in densely populated urban areas. Heavy-handed
regulations would not be required as this would be a natural market response to progressive
leveling-up of standards, as the costs and rationale of doing so as numerous small-scale single-
practitioner private midwife practices may be less justifiable especially in a dense urban
environment. Small single-provider providers can merge and consolidate into multi-practitioner
maternity facilities/centers, such that service readiness investments can be pooled to meet
increasingly stringent criteria. In a study of five African countries, the quality of basic maternal care




61   “BPJS KESEHATAN.” 2017. Accessed May 29. https://www.bpjs-kesehatan.go.id/bpjs/index.php/pages/detail/2010/2.


                                                                57
functions in low delivery volume facilities, using an index of 12 indicators of care derived from health
system surveys, was ‘consistently associated with poor quality’.62

Thirdly, the assessment process should be made more robust and verifiable. This applies particularly to
network providers who are part of a ‘parent’ network, as responsibility for verifying service
readiness lies with the ‘parent’ facility. Furthermore, self-assessment tools for verifying compliance
with standards may not be appropriate given the evidence provided in this policy paper and BPJS
should adopt a more involved approach. In addition, BPJS can seek the help of other stakeholders
such as district health offices, professional bodies, and civil society to verify compliance with
standards using spot checks and/or on a random sampled basis.

Lastly, BPJS should increase the amount of published information on empaneled providers, both public
and private, so that patients can make informed choices of provider. Currently, the BPJS website
provides information on the type, name, and location of empaneled facilities, together with
information on opening hours and staffing. However, information which can be used to infer some
element of quality – verified service readiness, training and certifications, and utilization information
by types of health services – would be more useful to patients who need to decide on a provider.

As a note for the future, public facilities should not be automatic privileged with empanelment under
BPJS (even though this study indicates that service readiness is better in puskesmas than private MH
providers) but should eventually be subject to the same empanelment and contract renewal
standards as private facilities. Users should be confident that any provider participating in JKN –
public or private - can effectively and safely provide delivery services.

Increase the supply of BPJS-empaneled private MH providers in viable yet underserved areas,
by systematically identifying coverage gaps using geographic analysis and incentivizing
private investment. As only approximately one-third of private primary MH providers are
empaneled with BPJS, the potential coverage of JKN’s maternal health benefits package at a particular
locality could be limited. While this is understandable and arguably unavoidable in remote rural
areas, pockets of underserved areas in urban areas or areas with sufficient population densities need
to be identified and understood in greater detail. Identifying such coverage gaps would need more
detailed geographic analysis not only the locations of currently empaneled facilities, but importantly,
populated areas where there are no empaneled facilities in order to create a supply-side ‘masterplan’
to ensure effective depth of coverage throughout Indonesia. Obtaining high-quality and systematic
data on private providers was a significant challenge faced in during the data collection process for
this survey and this should be rectified as it will also affect the planning and implementing policies.

BPJS should then use an arsenal of financial and non-financial mechanisms to signal the need for and
its interest in including private providers specifically in viable underserved areas (e.g., where claims
for institutional deliveries from both public providers and empaneled private providers are below
an expected norm given the population catchment area). Financial mechanisms can range in
sophistication from simple sign-up incentives, loans (against future reimbursements), subsidies, or
grants for capital investments to equip and stock a new facility in order to avoid a catch-22 situation
whereby facilities with inadequate service readiness would not be able to empanel and receive



62Kruk, Margaret E., Hannah H. Leslie, Stéphane Verguet, Godfrey M. Mbaruku, Richard MK Adanu, and Ana Langer. 2016. “Quality of
Basic Maternal Care Functions in Health Facilities of Five African Countries: An Analysis of National Health System Surveys.” The Lancet
Global Health 4 (11): e845–e855.


                                                                   58
payments for services provided. Non-financial mechanism would include raising awareness by
publishing information on provider coverage gaps (at the very least), reducing the administrative
overhead of the empanelment process, and coordination with MOH and sub-national governments
on the deployment of human resources for health and the establishment of facilities. Reverse
incentives may also be considered in areas which are objectively overserved (not just relatively
overserved) by a surplus of private providers who are hence underutilized despite high coverage of
institutional deliveries, whereby new entrants in overserved areas face a sign-on fee unless they
move and establish themselves in underserved areas. These initiatives to increase the coverage of
BPJS-empaneled providers should be complemented with initiatives to increase the enrolment of JKN
from the population perspective. This arsenal of mechanisms can be further fine-tuned with further
detailed study of the diagnostics for empanelment, non-empanelment, and drop-outs after
empanelment, although action should not be delayed while awaiting fine-tuning. This survey only
included basic questions on BPJS empanelment and non-empanelment as it was not focused on this
study.

Reform BPJS provider payment mechanisms and tariff rates for MH services. Although recently
revised in 2016,63 BPJS should undertake a review of current provider payment mechanisms (PPMs)
and tariff rates used to purchase maternal health services, in order to manage costs sustainably (as
per BPJS’s own mission and mandate), improve the effectiveness of services, promote empanelment
of private providers in viable underserved areas, and promote institutional deliveries especially in
rural areas. An equal/level reimbursement scheme across all provider and geographical contexts is
not an ‘equitable’ reimbursement as average unit costs may differ, for example, average costs may be
higher where population densities and utilization rates are low. A higher reimbursement fee
multiplier should be considered in viable underserved areas, with regular dynamic adjustments to
this fee as empanelment and claims increase. In order to allow new facilities to fund initial
investments in viable underserved areas, this multiplier can be used synergistically for a time-limited
period, with the financing mechanisms mentioned earlier.

There is some evidence that BPJS reimbursement fees are not attractive to many private providers,
who indicate that they receive much higher fees when paid OOP and service volumes are already
adequate. Although purchasing power is different across countries, as a regional comparator,
PhilHealth in the Philippines (which has lower GDP per capita than Indonesia) provides a maternity
package to insured members for 8,000 PHP (approximately 2.1 million IDR), which is higher than
reimbursements under JKN.64 As a volume-purchaser, BPJS should not be expected to reimburse at
the high rates paid OOP by patients, but the basis of pricing reimbursements for private providers
may need to be revisited especially in the period where enrolment with BPJS nationally is not high
enough to ensure market power (as a purchaser) in many localities. PPMs for antenatal care services
may also need to be explored further, as although it is important to incentivize the provision of at
least 4 antenatal visits as per guidelines, delaying payment to the provider effectively for almost the
entire duration of pregnancy may discourage providers. The content of service provision – for
example diagnostic tests to be conducted during antenatal care visits and counselling on warning
signs during pregnancy – should also be specifically required for payment purposes.




63Permenkes 52/2016
64“PIA | Philhealth Offers New Benefit Package for Women about to Give Birth.” 2017. Accessed May 30.
http://news.pia.gov.ph/article/view/1091455068894/philhealth-offers-new-benefit-package-for-women-about-to-give-birth.


                                                              59
Further study at a later stage can inform refinements to the BPJS payments system including
understanding if and where delays in reporting and/or payments are occurring between BPJS and
providers, and between providers and their network, but action now on PPM reforms should not be
postponed while awaiting further study. PPM reforms are also an important to enable the integration
of the delivery system (across hospital and primary care; and across the public, private, and dual-
practicing providers) and in changing the mix appropriate MH services, by emphasizing more
preventive content and incentivizing caesarean sections except where clinically justified – and these
reforms should remain on the agenda even if not feasible in the immediate term.

Ministry of Finance (MOF)
Spend more, right, and better.65 As outlined in the introduction, improvements in MH are a key
human development investment opportunity, yet Indonesia’s MMR remains high relative to its
income level, thus stymying the full realization of the development potential of Indonesians. JKN,
through its strategic purchaser BPJS, establishes a demand-side financing channel for both the public
and private sector. This channel can be leveraged by demand-side investments outlined earlier under
the recommendations for BPJS, but have modest budgetary implications. The current JKN deficit is
acknowledged but MH services are a relatively small proportion of services covered by JKN and hence
is a feasible low hanging fruit especially in terms of the developmental outcome and as an ‘early win’
which catalyzes broader system-wide reforms to make Indonesia’s goal of UHC by 2019 meaningful.
These investments should be made conditional on BPJS advancing its capabilities from passive claims
administration to active strategic purchasing, as the latter is vital for carving out a sustainable health
financing path for Indonesia. It should be noted that to make efficiency gains, initial investments may
often be needed.

Ministry of Health (MOH)
Clarify the national prioritizing of 64 high-priority MH districts, in terms of the basis of district
selection and content of the program. This survey finds minimal differences in service readiness
overall between priority and non-priority districts, for both public and private providers – there is
no evidence that this program has improved MH service readiness of facilities in priority districts
above that of non-priority districts. In addition, the basis of selecting these districts may need to be
considered carefully as the MMR for these 64 districts collectively is slightly lower than the national
MMR – hence maternal health challenges may not be particularly acute in these areas, but these
districts have been included in the prioritization essentially due to their population size.




65Also see: Tandon, Ajay, Eko Pambudi, Pandu Harimurti, Emiko Masaki, Ali Subandoro, and Puti Marzoeki. 2016. “Indonesia Health
Financing System Assessment: Spend More, Right & Better.” World Bank.


                                                                60
Figure 16 provides an alternative framework for prioritizing areas for MMR-reducing interventions,
by separating out provinces66 into four quadrants. This framework allows targeted strategies which
recognize fundamental differences in districts, so that this program not only decreases national MMR
more efficiently, but also reduces disparities.

     •     Quadrant 2: These represent ‘true’ priority areas – which have both above average MMR and
           above average maternal deaths. As only two provinces – Banten and West Nusa Tenggara
           (NTB) fit in this quadrant, it adds much more specificity in the targeting of priorities. All
           relevant interventions should be considered in these areas.
     •     Quadrant 1: These represent areas for which MMR is high, even if absolute numbers of
           maternal deaths are low due as these are not very populous areas. These areas include West
           Papua, Papua, Central Kalimantan, and Central Sulawesi – which are relatively less developed
           and less populous than the rest of the country. These areas would not be well represented
           among the 64 high-priority MH districts which is an unsettling thought as MMR, even at the
           provincially-aggregated basis, can be six times that of some high-priority MH districts.
           Redirecting resources away from areas in this quadrant to quadrant 3 may be ethically and
           morally questionable. Strengthening the public system may be critical in these sparsely
           populated areas – through supply side investments and training, coupled with appropriate
           demand-side strategies to promote appropriate utilization of services. As MMR is high in
           these areas, they may represent ‘low hanging fruit’ as improvements could be easier
     •     Quadrant 4: These represent relatively better developed areas with below average MMR but
           are populous, such as Central, East, and West Java. Due to their sheer population sizes, they
           contribute substantially towards maternal deaths. Reducing MMR in these areas require
           different strategies compared with quadrant 1 areas. As these are more developed and
           densely populated areas, strategies which leverage the private sector – including on
           improving readiness and effectiveness, using regulatory and strategic purchasing
           mechanisms - may be more appropriate.
     •     Quadrant 3: These areas include Bali, DI Yogyakarta, DKI Jakarta, which are well developed
           and wealthier parts of the country, for which MH prioritization given limited resources may
           be unhelpful but these areas should continue making progress in maintaining and improving
           maternal and other health outcomes.




66Note that in practice, this exercise can be conducted at district level (especially since this is the basis unit of administrative autonomy)
rather than provincial level, but for the purposes of illustration in this policy note, provincial-level aggregation was used.


                                                                     61
         Figure 16: Quadrant Chart of MMR and Maternal Deaths (Absolute counts), Provincially-aggregated (2014)67




                                         1                                                               2




                                        3                                                                 4



Note: Red cross hairs represent the national mean MMR (horizontal) and maternal deaths per district (vertical).


Use both supply-side (e.g., DAK) and demand-side (e.g., BPJS) financing levers to emphasize
outcomes and reduce disparities. Although prioritizing 64 districts is a national initiative, the
central MOH has limited means to affect service delivery at the sub-national level given the
decentralization context, apart from prioritizing a limited part of the budgetary inputs over which
the central MOH has responsibility over. In addition, there are few hard levers to enforce normative
standards on sub-national governments, apart from what is permissible by technical guidelines for
utilizing DAK funding. Note that this technical guideline includes a list of items which can be
purchased, including MH service inputs and health commodities. This DAK financing should hence be
monitored closely with greater emphasis on accountability and outcomes. This includes monitoring the
use of capitation fees (i.e., at puskesmas in priority districts) to ensure prioritization of critical drugs
and equipment. However, long-term reliance only on centralized vertical financing channels for
specific programs down to the facility level on the supply side, is not ideal in terms of decentralization
and fiscal reforms.

A synergistic mechanism is to expand financing on the demand-side in priority districts or sub-districts,
by engaging with JKN through BPJS. This will firstly require detailed information on MH utilization
and outcomes to inform sub-national priority setting (to identify weak districts or sub-districts),
which can then be linked to the financial and non-financial levers recommended above to improve
the coverage and quality of MH providers. Progress on outcomes also act as some form of district-
level league table, to ‘name and shame’ underperformers while learning from the interventions
implemented by districts demonstrating improvements.




67 Note that this quadrant chart is generated using administrative data. Poorly performing areas with weak reporting systems may
appear to have lower mortality; and likewise, well performing areas with strong reporting structures may have their mortality relatively
‘inflated’.


                                                                    62
Explore further opportunities to engage the private sector, including both for-profit and non-
profit organizations, through public-private partnerships (PPPs). This is consistent with RPJMN
2015-2019 and is regulated by Perpres No. 38/2015 and Permen PPN No. 4/2015. PPPs should not
only be confined to the provision of investments for health infrastructure but also for maternal health
service delivery. BPJS, as a purchaser of health services, is an important arm of the strategy to
leverage the private sector, but further PPP innovations can also be considered, for example, training
and deploying high quality human resources for health, supporting services (such as diagnostics and
pharmaceuticals), and appropriate mechanisms to invest in health infrastructure. These
partnerships will require capacity to monitor and manage carefully, to ensure it adds value to the
system and minimizes unintended consequences.

Clarify the role of polindes and poskesdes in providing MH services, as public providers are
indispensable in remote rural areas. Given the Indonesian geographic context, there would be
rural areas for which the business case for establishing a private MH provider would simply not be
compelling, especially in remote rural areas, and hence it would be left to public providers to cover
health services in these areas. A key public provider of MH services are polindes and poskesdes.
However, given that the service readiness of such facilities is very weak, the role of
polindes/poskesdes needs to be clarified. In many cases, even where basic obstetric care is ostensibly
provided at that facility, the service readiness of many such facilities is so poor as to invite doubt as
the whether the effectiveness of a delivery at a polindes/poskesdes would be any better than a home
birth attended by a skilled attendant. This issue also relates to private provision due to dual practice.
Many village midwives who are also resident at the polindes/poskesdes would also use the facility
for private provision outside of hours and hence be exposed to similar service readiness (e.g.
availability of equipment, medicines, and diagnostics) issues at these facilities.

In order to remedy this fundamental issue, there are broadly two solutions: Firstly, the service
readiness of polindes/poskesdes can be leveled-up through substantial investments in service readiness,
but such investments would be considerable as there are many polindes/poskesdes and many are
underutilized. The recruitment and retention of human resources would also be a major challenge.
Furthermore, in such an environment of low utilization, the skills and expertise of even the most well-
trained midwife will grow rusty, even if supervision and monitoring is improved. As mentioned
earlier, international experience indicates that outcomes for low-volume providers are poor.
Alternatively, limit (and strengthen) the use of polindes/poskesdes to antenatal care (including as a
platform for outreach and community based activities to promote institutional deliveries) and other
preventive non-emergency services, but recalibrate the role of polindes/poskesdes with regard to
deliveries. The 2016 Jampersal benefits package which includes funding for maternity waiting homes
and referrals can be used to entrench the role polindes/poskesdes not as a location for institutional
deliveries but organize, encourage, and facilitate the timely transfer of a pregnant women to the
nearest puskesmas or, eventually, empaneled private MH facility for delivery.

District Health Office (Dinkes)
Empower dinkes with a stronger stewardship role over the private sector, in collaboration
with BPJS. Although BPJS is responsible for empanelment, cooperation at the local level in
strengthening the health service delivery system is also in the interest of the dinkes. As a start, the
capacity of the dinkes and/or puskesmas must be enhanced to effectively support the monitoring of
private providers. The dinkes already has an existing obligation to provide strong quality monitoring
of and supervision to facilities, including private MH facilities, although further study is needed to

                                                   63
understand the strengths and challenges faced by this existing monitoring system to ensure that it
can be effectively applied and/or adapted to private providers, and to learn lessons from the
monitoring of public providers. Instruments and guidelines for these supervision activities are
already developed and available, but these processes should be strengthened and standardized, with
clear linkages to the credentialing process, BPJS contract renewals, and practice licensing so that it
will have real implications for private providers. The dinkes will need to be empowered with
adequate resources and incentives to perform these tasks. Although not a stewardship role, the
government should also study the feasibility of allowing private providers to purchase supplies from
the government e-catalogue.

Health System-Wide
Strengthen integrated care across the continuum of providers, through improved referral
systems for both the private and public sector at the primary- and hospital-level. There are
weaknesses in the referral systems for both the public and private sector, particularly the availability
of transportation and communications. Although it would not be possible to solve the referral
challenges in Indonesia overnight, several possible next steps can be considered. On the supply-side,
the service readiness including both ‘hardware’ (e.g. transportation and communications) and
‘software’, in the form of referral plans and formal or informal channels for referral. Individual
pregnant women should be risk stratified for obstetric risks and high-risk pregnancies should have
an individualized delivery plan and be specifically encouraged to deliver at a more comprehensive
facility capable of managing serious obstetric complications. This risk stratification and individual
delivery plans should be linked directly to the benefits provided by Jampersal since 2016, which
provides financing for maternity waiting homes and referrals. As obstetric complications can arise
even in low-risk pregnancies, all frontline health workers at the primary MH level should be trained
to identify and provide initial treatment for obstetric and neonatal emergencies so that safe and
timely referrals can be conducted. In addition, at the hospital level, although not the specific focus of
this study, there is a maldistribution of specialist obstetricians who can conduct caesarean sections.
Potential mitigations could also include task shifting and training local non-specialist doctors to be
able to conduct emergency caesarean sections. PPMs should not also perversely incentivize primary
MH providers to hold on to high-risk cases until complications happen. Integrated care would need
to be enabled by appropriate PPMs, including the choice of ‘whom’ (i.e., what level of provider or
provider network) to purchase from.

Involve private MH providers fully in in-service training and strengthen pre-service training
for all MH providers. Findings from this study indicate that there is weak provider ability to deliver
antenatal care and to manage obstetric complications like PPH according to clinical guidelines,
although differences between public and private providers were minimal. Unless dual practicing,
private midwives have less opportunities to participate in in-service training to maintain and update
their clinical skills. This factor hence underlines the importance of pre-service training. Although
Indonesia requires midwifery students to pass the national midwifery competency examination to
standardize the quality of midwifery academy graduates, the graduation passing grade was still low
at approximately 40 percent. These training programs hence need to be strengthened, by ensuring
the adoption of competency-based education in midwife education, and that students get adequate
clinical practice to develop their skills. Regarding in-service training, the existing policy which
requires practicing midwives to obtain training credit points in order to renew their five-yearly
registration with the Indonesia Midwife Association (IBI) should be strengthened not only through
tighter enforcement but also by expanding opportunities. For example, IBI has designed and

                                                   64
organized a three-day midwifery training program covering antenatal and obstetric care, to provide
private midwives with access to training. Nevertheless, ensuring standardized quality and equal
access to the training program across the country, considering that in-service training is the
responsibility of the local government, as well as encouraging more frequent competency updates
than the current five yearly requirements is essential for skills maintenance. A further opportunity
for incentivizing in-service training among private providers is during renewal of empanelment,
which can be also made contingent on training credit points. Collaboration and cooperation between
the public and private sectors may also be helpful, and may be in the best interest of public providers
who receive incoming referrals for obstetric complications, such that training programs for public
providers are made available to private providers.

Civil Society
Complement formal regulatory and accreditation processes with voluntary certification
schemes, such as Bidan Delima, to promote higher quality standards. The Bidan Delima program
is a franchise for certifying private midwives, managed by the Indonesia Midwife Association (IBI)
since 2003 following an initial investment from USAID. The process to be certified as a Bidan Delima
involves registration with IBI, support from a facilitator to improve specific skills and competencies
as identified by a self-assessment instrument, an on-site visit, and reference materials on clinical
standards. Once certified, a Bidan Delima would receive clinic signage materials to brand the clinic
to signal quality and will also be routinely supervised by a facilitator. Although there are areas for
improvement in this program, particularly continued monitoring to ensure standards are maintained
at a higher level than uncertified peers, initiatives such as these can be a helpful complement to
improving standards, especially if professional bodies such as IBI are involved.

Concluding Remarks
As this policy note is grounded on an analysis of maternal health service provision at the primary
level, the above is not an exhaustive list of recommendations required to address maternal health in
Indonesia more broadly. Maternal health service provision in private and public hospitals will need
further study and attention. Demand-side interventions should also be continued and expanded.

The current maternal health challenges facing Indonesia are too large for either the public or private
sector to address in isolation of the other. Pregnant women have voted with their feet to and many
chose private providers, who are hence responsible for conducting most of the institutional
deliveries in Indonesia. Private providers should hence continue to play a significant role in the
provision. However, although there are many strengths as outlined above, there are also challenges
and opportunities for improvement. Although the government does not have direct control over
private providers, JKN provides an avenue for influencing both sectors as it covers both public and
private providers, and this avenue together with the stewardship responsibilities of MOH, should be
leveraged to strengthen both sectors in order to improve the level and equity of institutional delivery
rates and the effectiveness of institutional deliveries in terms of service readiness, provider ability,
and access to timely and appropriate emergency referrals.




                                                  65
VI.     Annexes

        a. Annex A: Indonesia QSDS 2016 Survey Sampling and Analytic
           Methodology

Background and Objectives
Indonesia comprises 34 provinces (propinsi) and special administrative areas, such as DKI Jakarta,
and 98 urban districts (kota) and 413 rural districts (kabupaten), in a vast archipelago of 250 million
people in 18,000 islands ranging from densely populated areas (including one of the largest
conurbations in the world – Jabotabek) to remote and isolated islands and jungle communities.

Due to reforms in decentralization, districts have greater autonomy and hence are an important of
unit of analysis. Furthermore, within the health sector, a major reform initiative – Jaminan Kesehatan
Nasional (JKN) was introduced effective from January 2014. Given this background context,
Indonesia QSDS 2016 was envisioned as a primary health care facility and services survey in
Indonesia, with specific ‘disease-focus’ on nutrition, maternal and child health, communicable
diseases (particularly, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria), and non-communicable diseases.
Thematically, the survey captured information based on WHO’s Service Readiness and Availability
Assessment (SARA) conceptual framework, adjusted according to national guidelines, but also
included modules on governance, health indicators, health financing (but not costing information),
provider ability, and patient satisfaction.

Instruments were developed to survey District Health Offices (dinkes), various primary health care
facilities (i.e., puskesmas, polindes/poskesdes, private MH providers, and private clinics), health
workers, and patient exit interviews in DKI Jakarta. As one of the key objectives of this survey is to
provide baseline indicators for JKN, facilities established in 2014 or later were excluded from the
survey. In addition, a small number of hospitals were also sampled while at the community-level; and
posyandu were also sampled especially for nutrition-related indicators. However, for the purposes
of this private MH policy note, only MH relevant instruments were used in the analysis.

Where possible baseline quantitative data, for example on financing and health-related indicators,
were collected for the period 2013 – 2015. This time period was selected so that the government
could assess changes in the financing of frontline service delivery as a result of the transition to JKN
in 2014 and to serve as a baseline for the implementation of JKN.

As the government indicated its concern for remote and rural areas, for sampling of districts and
facilities, methodologies which would oversample large and heavily populated districts or facilities
(e.g. sampling methodologies which were proportionate to district population) were judged to be
less appropriate for the intended objectives of this survey, especially given the large variations in the
population and sizes of districts in Indonesia. Sampling was not designed to be regionally
representative (e.g., regions like Java, NTT, Sumatra, etc.). Resource constraints were a further
important consideration and hence an efficient survey methodology was desired.




                                                   66
The primary objectives of and tradeoffs considered in the sampling methodology were to provide,
especially as a baseline for JKN:
        1. National estimates of facility-level indicators, for (i) public primary care (puskesmas), (ii)
            private primary care, and (iii) posyandu, stratified by urban (kota) and rural (kabupaten)
            districts;
        2. DKI Jakarta estimates of facility-level indicators, (i) public primary care (puskesmas), (ii)
            private primary care, and (iii) posyandu, not further stratified by urban or rural districts;
        3. Estimates for the 64 high-priority maternal health (MH) districts, for (i) public primary care
            (puskesmas), (ii) public maternity care (i.e., polindes, poskesdes, and bidan di desa), (iii)
            private maternity care (both single and multi-provider facilities), (iv) posyandu, stratified
            by kota and kabupaten;
        4. Estimates for an opportunistic sample of matched counterfactual districts to the 64 priority
            maternity districts, for the same facilities as for the priority maternal health districts,
            stratified by kota and kabupaten;
        5. Estimates for the 75 priority HIV/AIDS and TB districts, for (i) public hospitals, (ii) private
            hospitals, (iii) puskesmas, and (iv) private primary care,
        6. Estimates for an opportunistic sample of matched counterfactual districts to the 75 priority
            HIV/AIDS and TB districts, for the same facilities as for the 75 priority HIV/AIDS and TB
            districts;
        7. Estimates for the 132 priority malaria districts, for (i) puskesmas and (ii) private primary,
            not further stratified by urban or rural districts;
        8. For each of the sampled districts, an estimate at the level of that district for facility-level
            indicators68. This was intended to allow comparisons between district-level indicators and
            district characteristics;
        9. Estimates for health care worker-level indicators, including provider ability, for health
            workers at puskesmas, private primary care, public maternity care, and private maternity
            care; and
        10. In DKI Jakarta, where the supply readiness was not anticipated to be a critical constraint,
            estimates of patient user-level indicators through patient exit surveys.

Field work for this survey was conducted from May 30 to October 31, 2016.

Sampling Methodology Summary
Sampling of Districts

Due to resource constraints and the desire to produce district-level estimates for the sampled
districts, there are relatively few districts (level 1) sampled and a relatively larger number of facilities
per district (level 2) sampled in this two-level clustered random sampling.




68   With the exception of hospitals. Power calculations are anchored primarily at puskesmas-level.


                                                                     67
Hence, in order to reduce the likelihood of randomly selecting districts which were less typical of
sample frame of districts, cube sampling69 was used which balances the sampled districts with the
sample frame of districts, based on observable characteristics: (i) district population in 2013, (ii) GDP
per capita, (iii) Human Development Index (HDI), and (iv) district land area. This does not however
specifically address intra-class correlation issues between the two levels and hence between district
variation of facility-level indicators was traded off in order to strengthen estimates within a district.

For each sample frame of districts – i.e., DKI Jakarta districts, non-DKI Jakarta national districts, MH
priority districts, HIV/AIDS and TB priority districts, and malaria districts - sampling of districts was
conducted independently of each other. There was further stratification between urban districts
(kota) and rural districts (kabupaten) for non-DKI Jakarta national districts, MH priority districts,
and HIV/AIDS, TB priority districts, and counterfactuals for the latter three.

There is however overlap in the sampling frame of districts for each of these population of districts,
except for DKI Jakarta districts and non-DKI Jakarta districts which were mutually exclusive and
commonly exhaustive to represent Indonesia nationally when combined. Due to this overlap in
sample frames, there were also overlaps among sampled districts, which were sampled out of
different but overlapping sample frames. This chance overlap was exploited as, often, similar
instruments and facilities were involved for the different sample frames. All relevant survey
instruments and facilities were applied to satisfy the requirements of the different sample frames in
an overlap district, although overlaps reduced the resources required for this survey considerably.

Twelve districts were sampled from the 64 high-priority MH districts.

Sampling of Counterfactual Districts

For two populations of districts – i.e., (i) MH priority districts and (ii) HIV/AIDS and TB priority
districts, and for their urban districts (kota) and rural districts (kabupaten) independently -
‘counterfactual’ districts were opportunistically sampled from the overall sample of districts already
sampled (e.g. DKI Jakarta and non-DKI Jakarta). As these districts had already been sampled, albeit
for other purposes, there were fewer additional resources required to include these apart from
ensuring the relevant counterfactual survey instruments and facilities were included.

These counterfactual districts were matched70 from a counterfactual sample frame comprising
districts sampled for other purposes as long as they were not ‘intervention’ districts – i.e., in the case
of MH priority counterfactual districts, the counterfactual sample frame excluded all MH priority
districts. Matching was based on the same four observable characteristics: (i) district population in
2013, (ii) GDP per capita, (iii) Human Development Index (HDI), and (iv) district land area. Health
outcomes or health outputs were not considered appropriate parameters for balancing the sample
due to endogeneity. The output of the balanced sampling also allows pair-wise matching of a
intervention and a counterfactual and this could be exploited for analysis if required.




69 Grafström, A. (2014). BalancedSampling: Balanced and spatially balanced sampling. R package version 1.4.
http://www.antongrafstrom.se/balancedsampling
70 Hansen, B.B. and Klopfer, S.O. (2006), 'Optimal full matching and related designs via network flows', Journal of Computational and

Graphical Statistics, 15, 609-627. optmatch version 0.9-3


                                                                   68
Matching of counterfactual districts for malaria priority districts was attempted but due to the
systematic differences in the observable characteristics of malaria priority districts, this attempt was
discarded. As malaria is associated with the jungle, there were no appropriate counterfactual districts
to these.

Generating the Health Facility Sampling Frames and Sampling Health Facilities

District sample frames, health facility types included, and other instruments used are summarized in
Table 21 and Table 22 below.

                                   Table 21: District Sample Frames, Sampled Health Facility Types
 District        Sample      Puskesmas          Private       Public           Private           Posyandu        Private          Public
 Frame                                          Primary       Maternity        Maternity                         Hospitals        Hospitals
                                                Care          Care             Care
 A.    DKI Jakarta                 Yes             Yes                                                  Yes
 B.    National non-               Yes             Yes                                                  Yes
       DKI Jakarta
  C. Priority MH and               Yes                               Yes                Yes             Yes
       counterfactual
  D. Priority                      Yes             Yes                                                                 Yes, see       Yes, see
       HIV/AIDS/TB                                                                                                      note            note
       and
       counterfactual
  E. Priority Malaria              Yes             Yes
Note: Fewer than expected hospitals consented to be part of this survey and hence (i) representivity at the district level for hospitals may be
under-powered and (ii) additional opportunistic samples of hospitals were taken from HIV/AIDS and TB priority districts which were
included by chance into the overall sample of districts. District IDs for these districts are: 1871, 3171, 3174, 3175, 3204, 3578, and 9171. In
these added districts, there was no attempt to sample adequate hospitals to ensure representivity at the district level.




                        Table 22: Health Care Worker [HCW] interviews and patient exit [EXIT] interviews
 District Sample Frame                          Puskesmas        Private   Primary         Public   Maternity         Private    Maternity
                                                                 Care                      Care                       Care
 DKI Jakarta                                    HCW + EXIT           HCW + EXIT                HCW + EXIT                  HCW + EXIT
 National non-DKI Jakarta                         HCW                   HCW                       HCW                         HCW
 Priority MH and counterfactual                   HCW                   HCW                       HCW                         HCW
 Priority      HIV/AIDS/TB      and               HCW                   HCW                       HCW                         HCW
 counterfactual
 Priority Malaria                                  HCW                  HCW                       HCW                         HCW
 How many and which Health Care                   Two of:            One doctor                One midwife                 One midwife
 Worker type?                                    Doctors,           (generalist or
                                                 midwives,            specialist)
                                                  and/or
                                                  nurses


Within each district, health facilities were sampled by simple random sampling, with equal
probability of sampling, regardless of catchment population, utilization, or the ‘size’ of the health
facility (in terms of staff or financing).

Public Primary and Maternity Care Facilities: The sample frame for puskesmas was obtained from
the dinkes. Polindes and poskesdes were treated as essentially the same facility type for the purposes
of sampling and analysis. The sample frame for polindes/poskesdes was obtained from sampled
puskesmas as these facilities form part of a ‘network’ under the puskesmas.



                                                                      69
Private Primary and Maternity Facilities: Generating the sample frame for private facilities
(private MH and private primary care facilities, independently of each other) was challenging as up-
to-date, accurate, and complete information on private facilities was not consistently available at the
district-level. Although we attempted to use methods described an earlier study71, these were
insufficient to generate a reliable district-wide sample frame of private facilities. For this reason and
for field work expediencies, the sample frame of private facilities was generated from within the
catchment of sampled puskesmas, as puskesmas are responsible for the supervision of private
facilities and hence more reliable information on the existence of providers was obtainable at this
level. However, where there were inadequate samples, including due to rejection, private facilities
were sampled from a nearby unsampled puskesmas catchment area.

The MH provider sample included a total of 369 private MH providers, 294 puskesmas, and 406
public MH providers (i.e., polindes/poskesdes).

Sampling of Health Care Workers

Depending on the specific facility, doctors, midwives, or nurses were sampled from among health
workers who were present at the time of interview.

For private primary care, public maternity care, and private maternity care facilities, simple random
sampling with an equal probability of selection from among the desired health worker type present
at the facility was used.

For puskesmas, the sampling design intent was to sample two health care workers (doctors,
midwives, or nurses), with a slight bias in including doctors in the sample. In addition, to allow
multilevel analysis, a mechanism was established to ensure the possibility of sampling two doctors,
to create a third level, in order to analyze within and between facility variation in health care worker-
level indicators. This simple random sampling mechanism, with an equal probability of selection
from among the desired health worker type present at the facility.

Sampling for Patient Exit Interviews

Patient exit interviews were only conducted in the 5 DKI Jakarta districts (excluding Kepulauan
Seribu) and in three facilities types: Puskesmas, private primary care clinic and private maternity
clinic. Each facility has specific target number of respondents: for puskesmas, four respondents were
targeted for interviewed (two adult general outpatient patients, one antenatal care patient, and one
[parent of a] child patient). For private primary care clinics, two respondents were targeted (any
adult or [parent of a] child patient). For private maternity clinics, two antenatal care patients were
targeted.

Selection of respondents: There were two types of patient exit interviewees: (i) a ‘linked’ patient
seen by a sampled health care worker (interviewed with the Health Care Worker instrument as part
of the overall survey), and (ii) an ‘unlinked’ patient not seen by a sampled health care worker. All




71Heywood, Peter, and Nida P Harahap. 2009. “Health Facilities at the District Level in Indonesia.” Australia and New Zealand Health
Policy 6 (1): 13. doi:10.1186/1743-8462-6-13.


                                                                   70
patient exits in private general clinic and maternity facility should be linked. In puskesmas, two
selected patients would be linked and two would be unlinked.

Linked patient interviewees were randomly selected from the list of patients seen by the linked
health care worker; unlinked patient interviewees were randomly selected from the remaining list
of patients no seen by the linked health care worker. The interviews were conducted after the clinical
encounter, at the patient’s house or in the facility/place preferred by the patient.

Sample Size Calculations and Assumptions

The target number of facilities to be sampled within a sampled district was based on standard sample
size calculations and assumptions used by WHO SARA.72

Analytical Methods Summary
Supply-Side and Demand-Side Weights

As the survey design is a two-level cluster survey, weights are needed to correct for the differential
probability of a district and facility to be included in the sample from the overall sample frame.
Depending on the choice of perspective, different weights may be applied. Supply side weights
provide an estimate of facility-level indicators from the perspective of the supply. Hence if Indonesia
has, for example, 100 health facilities in total, a supply-side weight would allow the estimate of the
mean value for a specific indicator for facilities in Indonesia. However, some facilities may be remote
and serve a limited population and hardly be utilized, yet would be weighted in the same way as a
large and busy facility which serves a much larger population and is heavily utilized. In order to
construct such weights, the number of facilities in each district forms the basis of this weight. A
further option is financing indicators – such as the total income or expenditure of a health facility –
which can also be used to weight, depending on the intent of the desired indicator.

Alternatively, the perspective of the potential (i.e. proxied by the target population in the catchment
area) or actual user (i.e., proxied by utilization of the relevant health service) may be more important
in order to provide a picture of what would be the mean value for a specific facility-level indicator, as
experienced or potentially experienced from the demand-side. This would answer the question of
what would be the typical expected experience of a health facility by a user of the health facility.

For the purposes of this survey, information was collected to allow the use of either weights although
for the purposes of the analysis, supply-side weights were generally used.

Service Readiness Indicators

WHO’s SARA framework consists of multiple binary indicators (e.g. the availability of specific drugs
or equipment), which are organized in two-dimensions: (i) the ‘service’ being provided (e.g., general
or specific service readiness for specific health services), and (ii) domains for staff and guidelines,
equipment, diagnostics, and medicines and commodities. These indicators were contextualized with


72World Health Organization. 2013. “Service Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA): An Annual Monitoring System for Servi ce
Delivery Implementation Guide, Version 2.1.” World Health Organization.
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/systems/sara_implementation_guide/en/.


                                                                71
national guidelines as described in Annex B. Note these indicators are generally not comparable to
the licensing and BPJS self-assessment list.

In order to collapse these multiple binary indicators, a simple unweighted mean is used. This
methodology suggested by WHO73, is also used in earlier SARA-related reports on Indonesia,74 and
more broadly in the published literature for similar surveys such as the Demographic and Health
Survey – Service Provision Assessments.75 A mean of 100% or 1 would imply that all the binary
indicators are met.

This simple unweighted mean can apply to a single facility and a simple mean of facility means can
be used to compare groups of facilities (e.g. private vs public, across time, and across geographical
locations). A mean of means of 100% or 1 would imply that all facilities have met all the binary
indicators.

Health Care Worker Ability

In addition to modules which included health worker demographics, workload, compensation, and
training, the health worker survey instrument included 7 different clinical vignettes: (i) preventive
child health (growth monitoring and immunization), (ii) curative child health, (iii) antenatal care, (iv)
obstetrics (post-partum hemorrhage), (iv) HIV/AIDS, (v) malaria, (vi) tuberculosis, and (vii) a non-
communicable disease (hypertension). Not all cases were presented to all health workers. Given the
limitation of the survey whereby enumerators were not trained medical practitioners, clinical
vignettes were used to assess provider ability. These clinical vignettes present the health worker
with a written description of a clinical case, which is read out by the enumerator, and may include
data analysis (in the form of growth charts, blood test results, etc.). In order to standardize the clinical
context, the cases included an initial description of the facility and referral context including, where
relevant, the expected equipment, medicines, and referral times.

In order to validate the responses provided by health workers, a panel of Indonesian clinical
specialists in the relevant field, was convened and the same case and responses posed to them. Using
a modified Delphi technique in order to gain consensus, appropriate responses expected of a health
worker in a local Indonesian setting was elicited and used for the analysis. As this MH policy paper
was not intended as a detailed analysis of the health worker instrument, tracer question-response
indicators were presented in Table 16 and Table 17, disaggregated by the health worker type and
facility type. The percentages for each question-response represent the mean of the binary mark, for
the relevant health worker and facility type. Given the prevalence of dual-practice, with the same
health worker potentially working at both a public and private facility, health workers were analyzed
from the patient’s perspective, according to the current facility that the health worker was sampled
at. Hence, if a patient chose a private provider, what would be the provider ability expected from that



73 World Health Organization. 2013. “Service Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA): An Annual Monitoring System for Servi ce
Delivery Implementation Guide, Version 2.1.” World Health Organization.
http://www.who.int/healthinfo/systems/sara_implementation_guide/en/.
74 World Bank. 2014. “Universal Maternal Health Coverage? : Assessing the Readiness of Public Health Facilities to Provide Maternal

Health Care in Indonesia.” 90510–ID. World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/875841468038945861/pdf/905100WP0P13340re0in0Indonesia02014.pdf.
75 Kruk, Margaret E., Hannah H. Leslie, Stéphane Verguet, Godfrey M. Mbaruku, Richard MK Adanu, and Ana Langer. 2016. “Quality of

Basic Maternal Care Functions in Health Facilities of Five African Countries: An Analysis of National Health System Surveys.” The Lancet
Global Health 4 (11): e845–e855.


                                                                   72
encounter at that facility given that on occasion this may include a dual-practicing public provider;
and vice versa.

The analytical findings included in this MH policy paper are only a subset of the full health worker
instrument, and further analysis of this instrument is possible.

Patient Exits
The patient exit instrument included, inter alia, modules on the content of antenatal care services
received by the patient and patient satisfaction. The simple unweighted mean of each of the
responses for these modules are reported in Table 18 and Table 19, disaggregated according to the
relevant facility type.
Detailed analysis comparing various health worker types and formal analytic linkages with the exit
surveys were envisioned when the survey was designed and is being considered for later products.
For this specific piece on private sector service readiness, summary analysis of the health worker
and patient exit instruments were added to contextualize the facility-level supply-side indicators.




                                                 73
          b. Annex B: Service Readiness Indicator Selection
Service Readiness Indicators for this analysis were grounded on technical norms from WHO’s Service
Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA) and MoH Indonesia. Indicators used represent an
overlap of both these technical norms, as categorized based on WHO SARA.

Antenatal Care
Apart from Doppler ultrasound, blood typing, and weighing scales, national supply-side
requirements for ANC are the same as those in WHO SARA (Table 23). The rightmost column shows
which of the indicators were available for analysis in the Indonesia QSDS 2016 survey.


                                             Table 23: ANC service readiness indicators
               Component                      National ANC Guidelines   WHO SARA Guidelines      Indicators Used
                                              ANC guidelines            ANC guidelines           ANC guidelines
               Staff and guidelines           Staff trained in ANC      Staff trained in ANC     Staff trained in ANC
                                              Blood pressure            Blood pressure           Blood pressure
                                              Stethoscope               Stethoscope              Stethoscope
               Equipment                      Doppler ultrasound                                 Doppler ultrasound
                                              Weighing scale                                     Weighing scale
                                              Hemoglobin                Hemoglobin               Hemoglobin
               Diagnostics                    Blood typing              Urine dipstick-protein   Urine dipstick-protein
                                              Urine dipstick-protein
                                              Iron-folic acid           Iron-folic acid          Iron-folic acid
               Medicines and commodities      Tetanus toxoid            Tetanus toxoid           Tetanus toxoid


Basic Obstetric Care
Table 24 compares supply-side readiness indicators for basic obstetric care according to national
guidelines76 and WHO SARA framework. The national guidelines have more detailed equipment and
medicine list compared to SARA. The Indonesia QSDS 2016 survey instrument is based on the
national guidelines. The analysis compares the readiness for basic obstetric care between private
maternity clinics/midwives and puskesmas in the 64 MH priority districts.

                                      Table 24: Supply-side readiness for basic obstetric care
 Component                 National Guidelines77              WHO SARA Guidelines                      Indicators Used
                                                              IMPAC guidelines                         Pocket book on maternal
                                                              Staff trained in IMPAC                   health care in primary and
                                                                                                       referral facilities
                                                                                                       Training on assisted vaginal
                                                                                                       delivery
 Staff and guidelines                                                                                  Training on basic emergency
                                                                                                       obstetric and neonatal life
                                                                                                       saving skills
                                                                                                       Traning of management of
                                                                                                       asphyxia in neonates




 National guidelines refer to Minister of Health regulation 75/2014 on puskesmas and the facility supervision instrument designed by
76

MoH to assess the readiness of MH private providers (clinic/individual).




                                                                 74
                           Obstetric and Gynecology set          Emergency transport                        Emergency transport
                           (49 items)78                          Examination light                          Examination light
                           Infant resuscitation set (13          Delivery pack                              Delivery bed
                           items)79                              Suction apparatus                          Delivery pack
                                                                 Manual vacuum extractor                    Partograph
                                                                 Vacuum aspirator/dilatation/curettage      Doppler ultrasound
 Equipment                                                       kit                                        Manual vacuum extractor
                                                                 Neonatal bag and mask                      Vacuum aspirator or D&C
                                                                 Partograph                                 kit80
                                                                 Gloves                                     Neonatal bag and mask
                                                                                                            Resuscitation table
                                                                                                            Incubator
                                                                                                            Disposable latex gloves
                           Oral Ergometrin                       Antibiotic eye ointment for newborn        Antibiotic eye ointment for
                           Ergometrin (injectable)               Injectable uterotonic (oxytocin)           newborn
                           Oxytocin (injectable)                 Injectable antibiotic (broad spectrum,     Oral Ergometrin
                           Magnesium sulphate (injectable)       usually gentamycin or penicillin and       Ergometrin (injectable)
                           Calcium gluconate (injectable)        ampicillin)                                Oxytocin (injectable)
                           Diazepam (injectable)                 Magnesium sulphate (injectable)            Magnesium              sulphate
                           Oral antihypertensive drugs           Diazepam (injectable)                      (injectable)
                           (methyldopa, nifedipin)               Skin disinfectant                          Calcium               gluconate
                           Injectable        antihypertensive    Intravenous solution with infusion set     (injectable)
                           drugs (labetalol, hydralazine)        (normal saline or ringer’s lactate, and    Diazepam (injectable)
                           Injectable antibiotics (ampicillin,   dextrose 5%)                               Oral antihypertensive drugs
 Medicines          and    gentamycin)                                                                      (methyldopa, nifedipin)
 commodities               Metronidazole infusion                                                           Injectable antihypertensive
                           Oral antibiotics (amoxicillin)                                                   drugs (labetalol, hydralazine)
                           Oral analgesics (paracetamol,                                                    Injectable           antibiotics
                           mefenamic acid)                                                                  (ampicillin, gentamycin)
                           Adrenalin (injectable)                                                           Metronidazole infusion
                           Dexamethasone (injectable)                                                       Oral antibiotics (amoxicillin)
                           Intravenous solution (normal                                                     Oral analgesics (paracetamol,
                           saline, ringer’s lactate)                                                        mefenamic acid)
                                                                                                            Adrenalin (injectable)
                                                                                                            Dexamethasone (injectable)
                                                                                                            Intravenous solution (normal
                                                                                                            saline, ringer’s lactate)




78 Obstetrics and Gynecology set: instrument tray with cover (3 sizes), doppler, curved doyeri probe, adult endotracheal tubes (3 sizes),
scissors (5 types), forceps/clamps (7 types), halogen examination light, oxygen mask and adult nasal cannula, , instrument table, needle
holder, obstetric pelvimeter, tweezers (3 types), adult resuscitator, retractor, one half kocher forceps, scalpels (2 types), sims speculum
(3 sizes), grave speculum (3 sizes), iv stand, adult stethoscope, fetoscope, endotracheal tube stylet, oxygen tank plus regulator,
examination bed, delivery bed, adult sphygmomanometer, adult thermometer.
79 Infant resuscitation set: portable baby suction pump, endotracheal tubes (4 sizes), infant T piece resuscitator with PEEP, infant T piece

system, neonatal laryngoscope, resuscitation table with infant radiant warmer, oxygen concentrator, De Lee mucous suction, electric
mucous suction pump, neonatal duplex stethoscope.
80 Although D&C kits are included in the WHO SARA instrument, WHO no longer recommends the use of this sharp curettage routinely for

surgical abortion.


                                                                    75
                c. Annex C: General Service Readiness – Basic Amenities
                                                                                                        Basic Amenities
Representativ
 eness level



                                                                                                                                                 Basic Amenities Basic Amenities   Number of
                      Type of Facility                                Privacy                                   Computer with     Emergency
                                                Electricity   Water             Sanitation   Communication                                            Index           Index         Facilities
                                                                       room                                        internet     transportation
                                                                                                                                                     (mean)          (all met)

MH Priority Districts
      Puskesmas                                   100%        96%      50%        100%            79%                 95%           90%               87%             36%                 294
      Puskesmas-urban                             100%        99%      53%        100%            93%                 98%           85%               90%             42%                 228
      Puskesmas-rural                             100%        90%      46%        100%            53%                 89%           100%              83%             25%                  66
      Polindes                                    96%         65%      44%        89%             30%                  3%           36%               52%             1%                  406
      Polindes-urban                              96%         72%      43%        84%             32%                  3%           26%               51%             2%                  154
      Polindes-rural                              96%         63%      44%        90%             29%                  3%           38%               52%             1%                  252
      Private MH-Single provider                  100%        91%      51%        99%             93%                 12%           53%               71%             2%                  140
      Private MH-Single provider-urban            100%        94%      53%        100%            93%                 11%           56%               72%             2%                   82
      Private MH-Single provider-rural            100%        89%      49%        97%             92%                 13%           50%               70%             3%                   58
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS             100%        93%      61%        96%             84%                 15%           51%               71%             4%                   50
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS         100%        90%      47%        100%            97%                 10%           54%               71%             1%                   90
      Private MH-Multiple provider                100%        95%      71%        99%             91%                 24%           74%               79%             19%                 229
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban          100%        98%      69%        100%            93%                 17%           70%               78%             13%                 183
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural          100%        92%      73%        97%             89%                 32%           80%               80%             27%                  46
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS           100%        97%      82%        100%            98%                 40%           82%               86%             38%                  88
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS       100%        94%      63%        98%             86%                 12%           69%               75%             6%                  141
      MH priority districts all type facility     98%         80%      53%        94%             62%                 13%           52%               65%             7%                 1069
Comparator Districts
      Puskesmas                                   100%        96%      64%        97%             83%                 87%           87%               88%             47%                 193
      Puskesmas-urban                             100%        99%      67%        97%             93%                 92%           88%               91%             54%                 130
      Puskesmas-rural                             99%         85%      55%        97%             50%                 71%           82%               77%             22%                  63
      Polindes                                    87%         77%      38%        72%             21%                  1%           26%               46%             0%                  241
      Polindes-urban                              85%         86%      48%        77%             31%                  2%           27%               51%             0%                   94
      Polindes-rural                              87%         74%      35%        70%             17%                  0%           25%               44%             0%                  147
      Private MH-Single provider                  100%        95%      58%        94%             80%                  6%           64%               71%             5%                  152
      Private MH-Single provider-urban            100%        100%     62%        100%            92%                  7%           71%               76%             6%                   76
      Private MH-Single provider-rural            100%        90%      54%        88%             68%                  5%           57%               66%             5%                   76
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS             100%        95%      63%        98%             85%                 12%           76%               76%             11%                  43
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS         100%        95%      55%        91%             77%                  3%           57%               68%             3%                  109
      Private MH-Multiple provider                100%        99%      71%        100%            86%                 15%           66%               77%             10%                 134
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban          100%        99%      75%        100%            93%                 16%           64%               78%             11%                 108
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural          100%        97%      56%        100%            57%                 14%           73%               71%             6%                   26
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS           100%        97%      69%        100%            84%                 26%           65%               77%             16%                  51
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS       100%        100%     72%        100%            87%                  9%           67%               76%             6%                   83
      Comparator districts all type facility      95%         90%      54%        88%             60%                 11%           52%               64%             7%                  720
National
      National                                    99%         92%      52%        97%             65%                 80%           93%               83%             34%                 268
      Puskesmas-urban                             100%        95%      69%        99%             88%                 99%           98%               93%             56%                 158
      Puskesmas-rural                             99%         90%      40%        96%             49%                 66%           90%               76%             19%                 110




                                                                                             76
                     d. Annex D: General Service Readiness – Basic Equipment
                                                                                                   Basic Equipment
Representativeness



                                                                                                                                    Basic Equipment Basic Equipment Number of
       level



                            Type of Facility                              Infant                                  BP        Light
                                                Adult scale Child scale            Thermometer   Stethoscope                              Index           Index      Facilities
                                                                           scale                               apparatus   source
                                                                                                                                         (mean)         (all met)


MH Priority Districts
      Puskesmas                                    98%         87%         96%        89%           83%          95%        65%          88%              46%              294
      Puskesmas-urban                              98%         85%         96%        90%           83%          93%        58%          86%              39%              228
      Puskesmas-rural                              99%         90%         96%        88%           83%          98%        77%          90%              58%               66
      Polindes                                     90%         61%         65%        68%           69%          83%        13%          64%              7%               406
      Private MH-Single provider                   94%         58%         75%        73%           72%          94%        69%          76%              38%              140
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             95%         44%         68%        67%           63%          97%        77%          73%              34%               82
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             93%         72%         81%        79%           81%          91%        61%          79%              42%               58
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS             100%         75%         86%        83%           90%          98%        89%          88%              59%               50
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          91%         50%         69%        68%           64%          92%        59%          70%              27%               90
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 99%         48%         87%        77%           64%          96%        73%          77%              33%              229
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           99%         43%         83%        73%           63%          99%        76%          76%              32%              183
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           99%         55%         91%        81%           64%          92%        68%          79%              34%               46
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            98%         62%         90%        81%           63%          98%        78%          81%              46%               88
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        99%         39%         84%        74%           64%          94%        69%          75%              23%              141
      MH priority districts all type facility      94%         57%         74%        72%           69%          89%        44%          71%              22%             1069
Comparator Districts
      Puskesmas                                    96%         89%         94%        92%           89%           97%       41%          85%              30%               193
      Puskesmas-urban                              98%         94%         96%        96%           91%           98%       38%          87%              31%               130
      Puskesmas-rural                              89%         71%         86%        77%           80%           95%       51%          78%              25%                63
      Polindes                                     81%         62%         64%        55%           70%           76%       12%          60%              8%                241
      Private MH-Single provider                   96%         62%         75%        79%           78%           94%       66%          78%              40%               152
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             95%         58%         72%        69%           72%           94%       79%          77%              44%                76
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             97%         65%         78%        88%           83%           95%       54%          80%              36%                76
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              93%         74%         84%        81%           78%           89%       77%          82%              52%                43
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          97%         55%         71%        78%           77%           97%       60%          77%              34%               109
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 98%         66%         73%        73%           69%           98%       87%          81%              53%               134
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           97%         63%         71%        71%           69%           98%       93%          80%              54%               108
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural          100%         78%         80%        78%           71%          100%       64%          82%              45%                26
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            94%         74%         77%        80%           71%           96%       86%          82%              52%                51
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS       100%         61%         71%        68%           68%          100%       88%          79%              53%                83
      Comparator districts all type facility       91%         64%         72%        69%           73%           89%       51%          73%              31%               720
National
      National                                     95%         85%         93%        87%           86%          97%        59%          86%              39%               268
      Puskesmas-urban                              99%         91%         96%        96%           88%          98%        49%          88%              43%               158
      Puskesmas-rural                              93%         81%         92%        81%           85%          96%        67%          85%              37%               110




                                                                                        77
                     e. Annex E: General Service Readiness – Standard Precautions
                                                                                                              Standard Precaution
Representativeness



                                                                             Safe final
                                                                                                    Appropriate                                                       Standard     Standard
                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of
       level



                                                               Safe final     disposal Appropriate
                           Type of Facility                                                         storage for                   Standard                           Precaution   Precaution
                                                Sterillizer    disposal          for    storage for               Disinfectant                Handwashing   Gloves                            Facilities
                                                                                                     infection                   disposable                             Index        Index
                                                              for sharps    infectious sharps waste
                                                                                                       waste                                                           (mean)      (all met)
                                                                               wastes
MH Priority Districts
      Puskesmas                                    88%           94%          92%         90%          60%            86%           95%          96%         95%        88%          44%            294
      Puskesmas-urban                              88%           95%          96%         90%          67%            89%           94%          96%         95%        90%          51%            228
      Puskesmas-rural                              87%           91%          84%         90%          47%            81%           96%          96%         94%        85%          30%             66
      Polindes                                     53%           86%          80%         71%          16%            75%           89%          69%         77%        68%           7%            406
      Private MH-Single provider                   73%           93%          86%         72%          56%            86%           92%          83%         93%        82%          28%            140
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             79%           97%          92%         75%          55%            91%           92%          82%         95%        84%          35%             82
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             67%           88%          81%         69%          57%            82%           93%          83%         91%        79%          21%             58
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              76%          100%          86%         89%          70%            89%           91%          93%         98%        88%          38%             50
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          72%           89%          87%         63%          50%            85%           93%          78%         91%        79%          22%             90
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 87%           88%          84%         80%          49%            93%           95%          93%         95%        85%          32%            229
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           88%           92%          85%         79%          58%            92%           95%          93%         95%        86%          40%            183
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           85%           84%          83%         82%          37%            95%           95%          92%         95%        83%          21%             46
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            86%           98%          95%         96%          53%            95%           98%          97%         98%        91%          41%             88
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        87%           82%          77%         69%          46%            92%           93%          90%         93%        81%          25%            141
      MH priority districts all type facility      68%           88%          83%         74%          35%            83%           92%          80%         86%        77%          20%           1069
Comparator Districts
      Puskesmas                                    91%           90%          94%         97%          58%            91%           97%          96%         98%        90%          44%            193
      Puskesmas-urban                              96%           98%          97%         99%          63%            95%           98%          99%         99%        94%          53%            130
      Puskesmas-rural                              72%           63%          82%         88%          39%            76%           92%          86%         92%        77%           9%             63
      Polindes                                     36%           88%          85%         68%          14%            63%           84%          55%         67%        62%           4%            241
      Private MH-Single provider                   86%           83%          85%         80%          39%            88%           96%          90%         94%        82%          26%            152
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             90%          100%          83%         87%          48%            93%           96%          96%         95%        88%          39%             76
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             82%           67%          86%         73%          31%            83%           96%          85%         94%        77%          15%             76
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              92%           97%          89%         76%          55%            87%           91%          87%         91%        85%          39%             43
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          83%           76%          83%         81%          31%            88%           98%          92%         96%        81%          20%            109
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 90%           94%          84%         86%          68%            97%           97%          97%         97%        90%          47%            134
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           94%           98%          84%         94%          72%            99%           98%          98%         99%        93%          52%            108
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           73%           76%          86%         58%          48%            89%           92%          92%         92%        78%          25%             26
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            89%           95%          80%         86%          68%            96%           100%         97%        100%        90%          44%             51
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        91%           93%          87%         87%          67%            97%           94%          97%         96%        90%          49%             83
      Comparator districts all type facility       69%           88%          85%         78%          38%            81%           92%          80%         86%        77%          24%            720
National
      National                                     87%           78%          86%         89%          44%            85%           95%          90%         95%        83%          29%            268
      Puskesmas-urban                              94%           94%          88%         96%          56%            92%           96%          95%         98%        90%          47%            158
      Puskesmas-rural                              82%           67%          85%         83%          35%            80%           94%          86%         92%        78%          15%            110




                                                                                                    78
                     f. Annex F: General Service Readiness – Diagnostic Capacity
                                                                                                         Diagnostic Capacity
Representativeness




                                                                                                                HIV
                                                                                                                                                                                      Number of
       level



                                                                        Malaria       Urine        Urine                               Urine test     Diagnostic       Diagnostic
                           Type of Facility                   Blood                                          diagnostic    Syphilis
                                                Hemoglobin             diagnostic   dipstick-    disptick-                                for       Capacity Index   Capacity Index    Facilities
                                                             Glucose                                          capacity    rapid test
                                                                        capacity     protein     glucose                               pregnancy       (mean)           (all met)
                                                                                                              (RDT kit)

MH Priority Districts
      Puskesmas                                    78%        76%         44%         73%          81%          35%            24%        80%            61%               7%                294
      Puskesmas-urban                              73%        72%         27%         68%          77%          35%            22%        75%            56%               5%                228
      Puskesmas-rural                              87%        84%         77%         82%          89%          34%            26%        89%            71%              11%                 66
      Polindes                                     54%        30%         n.a         49%          51%          n.a            n.a        71%            51%              15%                406
      Private MH-Single provider                   56%        63%         n.a         48%          60%          n.a            n.a        83%            62%              27%                140
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             52%        47%         n.a         50%          60%          n.a            n.a        82%            58%              24%                 82
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             59%        78%         n.a         45%          61%          n.a            n.a        83%            65%              30%                 58
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              86%        71%         n.a         74%          81%          n.a            n.a        91%            80%              48%                 50
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          41%        59%         n.a         35%          50%          n.a            n.a        79%            53%              16%                 90
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 57%        58%         n.a         52%          56%          n.a            n.a        79%            60%              26%                229
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           57%        56%         n.a         56%          55%          n.a            n.a        73%            59%              23%                183
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           57%        61%         n.a         47%          57%          n.a            n.a        86%            61%              31%                 46
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            56%        60%         n.a         51%          58%          n.a            n.a        77%            60%              33%                 88
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        57%        57%         n.a         53%          54%          n.a            n.a        80%            60%              22%                141
      MH priority districts all type facility      56%        47%         44%         50%          55%          35%            24%        76%            56%              21%               1069
Comparator Districts
      Puskesmas                                    78%        75%         40%         68%          77%          45%            19%        81%            60%               6%                193
      Puskesmas-urban                              79%        79%         30%         71%          80%          52%            20%        82%            62%               6%                130
      Puskesmas-rural                              76%        58%         77%         55%          68%          22%            14%        78%            56%               5%                 63
      Polindes                                     22%        26%         n.a         7%           12%          n.a            n.a        36%            21%               2%                241
      Private MH-Single provider                   54%        47%         n.a         29%          37%          n.a            n.a        86%            50%              13%                152
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             48%        36%         n.a         25%          30%          n.a            n.a        82%            44%              11%                 76
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             59%        56%         n.a         33%          44%          n.a            n.a        88%            56%              16%                 76
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              52%        47%         n.a         21%          33%          n.a            n.a        84%            47%              11%                 43
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          55%        47%         n.a         33%          39%          n.a            n.a        86%            52%              14%                109
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 67%        59%         n.a         46%          50%          n.a            n.a        89%            62%              28%                134
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           70%        58%         n.a         51%          50%          n.a            n.a        89%            64%              29%                108
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           55%        64%         n.a         27%          48%          n.a            n.a        89%            57%              20%                 26
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            72%        61%         n.a         44%          43%          n.a            n.a        89%            61%              28%                 51
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        63%        58%         n.a         48%          55%          n.a            n.a        89%            63%              27%                 83
      Comparator districts all type facility       47%        44%         40%         27%          34%          45%            19%        69%            43%              12%                720
National
      National                                     82%        80%         74%         74%          79%          38%            20%        83%            66%              10%                268
      Puskesmas-urban                              95%        89%         64%         91%          91%          56%            31%        90%            76%              16%                158
      Puskesmas-rural                              74%        74%         82%         62%          69%          25%            12%        77%            59%               6%                110




                                                                                            79
                     g. Annex G: General Service Readiness – Essential Medicines
                                                                                                                            Essential Medicines
Representativeness




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Essential Essential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of
       level




                                                                                      Ampicillin
                         Type of Facility       Amlodipine   Amoxicillin   Amoxillin              Aspirin    Beta     Ceftriaxone Diazepam    Enalapril    MgSO4      Metformin Simvastatin     Zinc     Medicines Medicines
                                                                                     Powder for                                                                                                                               Facilities
                                                  Tablet       Syrup        Tablet               Cap/Tab    Blocker    Injection  Injection    Tablet     Injection    Tablet      Tablet     Sulphate     Index     Index
                                                                                      Injection
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (mean)   (all met)

MH Priority Districts
      Puskesmas                                    88%          95%          95%        23%        51%       53%         19%        80%           96%       79%          88%        89%         85%        72%         2%            294
      Puskesmas-urban                              91%          95%          95%        17%        56%       54%         13%        79%           95%       75%          88%        90%         89%        72%         2%            228
      Puskesmas-rural                              83%          96%          96%        35%        41%       51%         32%        83%           98%       84%          89%        88%         78%        73%         3%             66
      Polindes                                     n.a          85%          85%        11%        n.a       n.a         n.a        16%           n.a       47%          n.a        n.a         67%        52%         1%            406
      Private MH-Single provider                   n.a          75%          75%        13%        n.a       n.a         n.a        17%           n.a       57%          n.a        n.a         47%        48%         3%            140
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             n.a          61%          61%        11%        n.a       n.a         n.a        16%           n.a       55%          n.a        n.a         36%        40%         2%             82
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             n.a          89%          89%        15%        n.a       n.a         n.a        18%           n.a       60%          n.a        n.a         58%        55%         3%             58
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              n.a          81%          81%        9%         n.a       n.a         n.a        20%           n.a       69%          n.a        n.a         57%        53%         0%             50
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          n.a          73%          73%        15%        n.a       n.a         n.a        16%           n.a       51%          n.a        n.a         43%        45%         4%             90
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 n.a          78%          78%        19%        n.a       n.a         n.a        17%           n.a       62%          n.a        n.a         56%        52%         7%            229
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           n.a          80%          80%        20%        n.a       n.a         n.a        21%           n.a       62%          n.a        n.a         53%        53%         6%            183
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           n.a          75%          75%        18%        n.a       n.a         n.a        12%           n.a       62%          n.a        n.a         60%        50%         9%             46
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            n.a          81%          81%        18%        n.a       n.a         n.a        12%           n.a       57%          n.a        n.a         57%        51%         5%             88
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        n.a          75%          75%        20%        n.a       n.a         n.a        21%           n.a       66%          n.a        n.a         56%        52%         8%            141
      MH priority districts all type facility      88%          81%          81%        14%        51%       53%         19%        19%           96%       57%          88%        89%         60%        51%         3%           1069
Comparator Districts
      Puskesmas                                    89%          97%          97%        15%        37%       46%         13%        56%           96%       46%          87%        82%         88%        66%         1%            193
      Puskesmas-urban                              95%          98%          98%        13%        41%       49%          8%        52%           99%       47%          90%        89%         90%        68%         1%            130
      Puskesmas-rural                              68%          93%          93%        22%        19%       37%         30%        70%           88%       44%          76%        56%         82%        60%         0%             63
      Polindes                                     n.a          77%          77%        12%        n.a       n.a         n.a        7%            n.a       9%           n.a        n.a         52%        41%         1%            241
      Private MH-Single provider                   n.a          83%          83%        19%        n.a       n.a         n.a        23%           n.a       39%          n.a        n.a         44%        49%         2%            152
      Private MH-Single provider-urban             n.a          76%          76%        15%        n.a       n.a         n.a        21%           n.a       45%          n.a        n.a         40%        45%         3%             76
      Private MH-Single provider-rural             n.a          90%          90%        22%        n.a       n.a         n.a        26%           n.a       35%          n.a        n.a         49%        52%         2%             76
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              n.a          87%          87%        12%        n.a       n.a         n.a        27%           n.a       58%          n.a        n.a         48%        53%         4%             43
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          n.a          81%          81%        22%        n.a       n.a         n.a        22%           n.a       30%          n.a        n.a         43%        47%         2%            109
      Private MH-Multiple provider                 n.a          68%          68%        8%         n.a       n.a         n.a        17%           n.a       45%          n.a        n.a         40%        41%         1%            134
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           n.a          65%          65%        5%         n.a       n.a         n.a        18%           n.a       53%          n.a        n.a         40%        41%         1%            108
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           n.a          80%          80%        19%        n.a       n.a         n.a        14%           n.a       12%          n.a        n.a         39%        41%         4%             26
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            n.a          69%          69%        10%        n.a       n.a         n.a        20%           n.a       37%          n.a        n.a         37%        40%         0%             51
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        n.a          67%          67%        7%         n.a       n.a         n.a        16%           n.a       51%          n.a        n.a         41%        41%         2%             83
      Comparator districts all type facility       89%          78%          78%        13%        37%       46%         13%        18%           96%       34%          87%        82%         48%        45%         1%            720
National
      National                                     86%          97%          97%        33%        42%       43%         34%        79%           94%       70%          85%        82%         88%        71%         2%            268
      Puskesmas-urban                              91%          97%          97%        26%        60%       46%         20%        76%           99%       76%          89%        93%         88%        74%         3%            158
      Puskesmas-rural                              82%          96%          96%        38%        28%       41%         43%        81%           90%       68%          81%        75%         88%        70%         1%            110




                                                                                                                   80
                     h. Annex H: General Service Readiness - Overall Index
                                                Basic Amenities     Basic Equipment    Standard Precaution   Diagnostic Capacity   Essential Medicines   General Services
Representativeness




                                                                                                                                                                             Number of
       level



                           Type of Facility
                                                Mean      All met   Mean     All met   Mean        All met   Mean        All met   Mean       All met    Mean      All met    Facilities



MH Priority Districts
      Puskesmas                                 87%        36%      88%        46%      88%         44%       61%         7%        72%          2%      79%         0%             294
      Puskesmas-urban                           90%        42%      86%        39%      90%         51%       56%         5%        72%          2%      79%         0%             228
      Puskesmas-rural                           83%        25%      90%        58%      85%         30%       71%         11%       73%          3%      80%         0%              66
      Polindes                                  52%        1%       64%        7%       68%          7%       51%         15%       52%          1%      57%         0%             406
      Private MH-Single provider                71%        2%       76%        38%      82%         28%       62%         27%       48%          3%      68%         0%             140
      Private MH-Single provider-urban          72%        2%       73%        34%      84%         35%       58%         24%       40%          2%      66%         0%              82
      Private MH-Single provider-rural          70%        3%       79%        42%      79%         21%       65%         30%       55%          3%      70%         0%              58
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS           71%        4%       88%        59%      88%         38%       80%         48%       53%          0%      76%         0%              50
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS       71%        1%       70%        27%      79%         22%       53%         16%       45%          4%      64%         0%              90
      Private MH-Multiple provider              79%        19%      77%        33%      85%         32%       60%         26%       52%          7%      71%         0%             229
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban        78%        13%      76%        32%      86%         40%       59%         23%       53%          6%      71%         0%             183
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural        80%        27%      79%        34%      83%         21%       61%         31%       50%          9%      71%         0%              46
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS         86%        38%      81%        46%      91%         41%       60%         33%       51%          5%      74%         0%              88
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS     75%        6%       75%        23%      81%         25%       60%         22%       52%          8%      69%         0%             141
      MH priority districts all type facility   65%        7%       71%        22%      77%         20%       56%         21%       51%          3%      64%         0%            1069
Comparator Districts
      Puskesmas                                 88%        47%      85%        30%      90%         44%       60%         6%        66%          1%      78%         0%             193
      Puskesmas-urban                           91%        54%      87%        31%      94%         53%       62%         6%        68%          1%      80%         0%             130
      Puskesmas-rural                           77%        22%      78%        25%      77%          9%       56%         5%        60%          0%      70%         0%              63
      Polindes                                  46%        0%       60%        8%       62%          4%       21%         2%        41%          1%      46%         0%             241
      Private MH-Single provider                71%        5%       78%        40%      82%         26%       50%         13%       49%          2%      66%         0%             152
      Private MH-Single provider-urban          76%        6%       77%        44%      88%         39%       44%         11%       45%          3%      66%         0%              76
      Private MH-Single provider-rural          66%        5%       80%        36%      77%         15%       56%         16%       52%          2%      66%         0%              76
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS           76%        11%      82%        52%      85%         39%       47%         11%       53%          4%      69%         0%              43
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS       68%        3%       77%        34%      81%         20%       52%         14%       47%          2%      65%         0%             109
      Private MH-Multiple provider              77%        10%      81%        53%      90%         47%       62%         28%       41%          1%      70%         0%             134
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban        78%        11%      80%        54%      93%         52%       64%         29%       41%          1%      71%         0%             108
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural        71%        6%       82%        45%      78%         25%       57%         20%       41%          4%      66%         0%              26
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS         77%        16%      82%        52%      90%         44%       61%         28%       40%          0%      70%         0%              51
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS     76%        6%       79%        53%      90%         49%       63%         27%       41%          2%      70%         0%              83
      Comparator districts all type facility    64%        7%       73%        31%      77%         24%       43%         12%       45%          1%      61%         0%             720
National
      National                                  83%        34%      86%        39%      83%         29%       66%         10%       71%          2%      78%         0%             268
      Puskesmas-urban                           93%        56%      88%        43%      90%         47%       76%         16%       74%          3%      84%         0%             158
      Puskesmas-rural                           76%        19%      85%        37%      78%         15%       59%         6%        70%          1%      74%         0%             110




                                                                                        81
                     i. Annex I: Specific Service Readiness - Antenatal Care - Overall Index
                                                   Guideline & Training                           Equipment                                      Diagnostic                                    Medicines
Representativeness




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Antenatal Care   Antenatal Care
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of
       level




                         Facility Type                         Training in the                     Doppler                                                       Urine dipstick-                     Tetanus Toxoid       Index              Index
                                                Guideline                        Weighing scale                Stethoscope    Blood Pressure   Hemoglobin Test                     Iron-Folic acid                                                        Facilities
                                                                 last 2 years                     Ultrasound                                                         protein                            Vaccine          (mean)        (all items met)



MH Priority Districts
      Puskesmas                                   97%               86%              98%            89%           83%              95%              78%               73%               94%                80%             87%              31%                  294
      Puskesmas-urban                             96%               85%              98%            92%           83%              93%              73%               68%               97%                79%             86%              29%                  228
      Puskesmas-rural                             100%              88%              99%            82%           83%              98%              87%               82%               88%                83%             89%              33%                   66
      Polindes                                    90%               36%              90%            52%           70%              83%              54%               49%               83%                33%             64%               1%                  405
      Private MH-Single provider                  83%               27%              94%            88%           72%              94%              56%               48%               86%                36%             68%               4%                  140
      Private MH-Single provider-urban            88%               23%              95%            92%           63%              97%              52%               50%               90%                46%             70%               5%                   82
      Private MH-Single provider-rural            78%               31%              93%            83%           81%              91%              59%               45%               83%                26%             67%               3%                   58
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS             95%               20%              100%           100%          90%              98%              86%               74%               93%                35%             79%               7%                   50
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS         77%               30%              91%            82%           64%              92%              41%               35%               83%                36%             63%               3%                   90
      Private MH-Multiple provider                90%               39%              99%            95%           64%              96%              57%               52%               94%                70%             75%               9%                  229
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban          86%               37%              99%            96%           63%              99%              57%               56%               93%                69%             75%               9%                  183
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural          95%               42%              99%            94%           64%              92%              57%               47%               95%                71%             76%               8%                   46
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS           95%               45%              98%            95%           63%              98%              56%               51%               95%                80%             78%              12%                   88
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS       87%               35%              99%            95%           64%              94%              57%               53%               92%                63%             74%               6%                  141
      MH priority districts all type facility     89%               36%              94%            73%           69%              89%              56%               50%               87%                45%             69%               5%                 1068
Comparator Districts
      Puskesmas                                   96%               90%              96%             90%          89%             97%               78%               68%               93%                82%             88%              35%                  193
      Puskesmas-urban                             96%               90%              98%             93%          91%             98%               79%               71%               94%                87%             90%              39%                  130
      Puskesmas-rural                             94%               89%              89%             77%          80%             95%               76%               55%               90%                66%             81%              18%                   63
      Polindes                                    77%               25%              82%             46%          70%             77%               22%                7%               69%                15%             49%               0%                  237
      Private MH-Single provider                  88%               24%              96%             88%          78%             94%               54%               29%               92%                37%             68%               5%                  152
      Private MH-Single provider-urban            90%               26%              95%             92%          72%             94%               48%               25%               97%                52%             69%               5%                   76
      Private MH-Single provider-rural            87%               22%              97%             85%          83%             95%               59%               33%               89%                23%             67%               5%                   76
      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS             89%               12%              93%             89%          78%             89%               52%               21%               93%                33%             65%               3%                   43
      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS         87%               30%              97%             88%          77%             97%               55%               33%               92%                39%             70%               6%                  109
      Private MH-Multiple provider                93%               32%              99%             96%          69%             98%               66%               47%               94%                73%             77%               7%                  133
      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban          94%               33%              99%             98%          68%             98%               69%               52%               95%                83%             79%               8%                  107
      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural          90%               27%              100%            87%          71%             100%              55%               27%               92%                32%             68%               4%                   26
      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS           95%               41%              98%             98%          70%             96%               71%               46%               94%                66%             77%              11%                   50
      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS       92%               26%              100%            94%          68%             100%              63%               48%               94%                77%             76%               5%                   83
      Comparator districts all type facility      86%               30%              92%             75%          73%             89%               47%               28%               85%                40%             64%               5%                  715
National
      Puskesmas                                   97%               88%              96%             83%          86%              97%              82%               74%               93%                86%             88%              36%                  267
      Puskesmas-urban                             99%               88%              100%            92%          88%              98%              94%               91%               95%                89%             93%              51%                  157
      Puskesmas-rural                             96%               88%              93%             76%          85%              96%              74%               62%               91%                84%             84%              25%                  110




                                                                                                                         82
       j. Annex J: Specific Service Readiness - Basic Obstetric Care - Guidelines and Training
  Representativeness                                            Staff Items (Guideline & Training) Items


                                                                                                                      Number of
         level
                          Type of Facility
                                                     Guideline book                                        Training    Facilities



MH Priority Districts
           Puskesmas                                      65%                                               93%                     151
           Puskesmas-urban                                67%                                               93%                      91
           Puskesmas-rural                                63%                                               93%                      60
           Polindes                                       27%                                               61%                     156
           Private MH-Single provider                     41%                                               42%                     139
           Private MH-Single provider-urban               46%                                               39%                      82
           Private MH-Single provider-rural               35%                                               45%                      57
           Private MH-Single provider-BPJS                53%                                               37%                      50
           Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS            35%                                               44%                      89
           Private MH-Multiple provider                   41%                                               71%                     228
           Private MH-Multiple provider-urban             37%                                               62%                     183
           Private MH-Multiple provider-rural             45%                                               82%                      45
           Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS              44%                                               83%                      88
           Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS          38%                                               62%                     140
           MH priority districts all type facility        37%                                               60%                     674
Comparator Districts
           Puskesmas                                      67%                                               78%                     110
           Puskesmas-urban                                78%                                               75%                      59
           Puskesmas-rural                                45%                                               85%                      51
           Polindes                                       24%                                               44%                     132
           Private MH-Single provider                     37%                                               30%                     152
           Private MH-Single provider-urban               36%                                               35%                      76
           Private MH-Single provider-rural               38%                                               25%                      76
           Private MH-Single provider-BPJS                27%                                               38%                      43
           Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS            42%                                               26%                     109
           Private MH-Multiple provider                   47%                                               57%                     133
           Private MH-Multiple provider-urban             45%                                               60%                     108
           Private MH-Multiple provider-rural             54%                                               44%                      25
           Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS              53%                                               62%                      51
           Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS          43%                                               53%                      82
           Comparator districts all type facility         38%                                               43%                     527
National
           Puskesmas                                      59%                                               82%                     181
           Puskesmas-urban                                69%                                               98%                      86
           Puskesmas-rural                                56%                                               76%                      95




                                                                83
                               k. Annex K: Specific Service Readiness - Basic Obstetric Care – Equipment
    Representativeness level

                                                                                                                                                                      Equipment Items




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Suction apparatus
                                                                                                                                                                           Vacuum aspirator




                                                                                                                                                                                              Neonatal bag and




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (mucus extractor)
                                                                         Examination light




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Infant weighting
                                                                                                                                                      Manual vacuum




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Blood pressure
                                                        transportation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Resuscitation
                                                                                                            Delivery pack
                                                                                             Delivery bed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Number of




                                                                                                                            Partograph
                                                          Emergency




                                                                                                                                         ultrasound




                                                                                                                                                                              or D&C kit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   apparatus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Incubator
                                                                                                                                                        extractor
                                     Type of Facility




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sterilizer
                                                                                                                                          Doppler




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Table
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Facilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                   mask




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    scale
MH Priority Districts
           Puskesmas                                    99%              90%                 85%            68%             80%          91%           22%                  13%                64%                53%            44%         92%           39%                 95%                95%                     151
           Puskesmas-urban                              99%              94%                 79%            68%             78%          95%           21%                  12%                61%                51%            50%         90%           39%                 94%                92%                      91
           Puskesmas-rural                              100%             85%                 92%            68%             82%          87%           22%                  13%                67%                56%            37%         95%           40%                 97%                98%                      60
           Polindes                                     45%              28%                 88%            22%             77%          61%            3%                   1%                28%                19%             6%         73%            3%                 75%                94%                     156
           Private MH-Single provider                   25%              69%                 89%            26%             80%          88%            1%                   2%                54%                49%            21%         75%           16%                 75%                94%                     139
           Private MH-Single provider-urban             29%              77%                 92%            38%             86%          92%            0%                   3%                46%                45%            22%         82%           15%                 68%                97%                      82
           Private MH-Single provider-rural             22%              62%                 86%            15%             74%          83%            1%                   0%                62%                53%            20%         68%           16%                 82%                91%                      57
           Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              18%              89%                 98%            24%             94%          100%           2%                   0%                68%                74%            33%         76%           20%                 86%                98%                      50
           Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          29%              60%                 85%            28%             73%          81%            0%                   2%                47%                37%            15%         75%           14%                 70%                92%                      89
           Private MH-Multiple provider                 59%              73%                 97%            59%             86%          95%            3%                   3%                61%                61%            25%         88%           18%                 87%                96%                     228
           Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           63%              76%                 98%            62%             83%          96%            6%                   3%                70%                66%            27%         89%           18%                 83%                99%                     183
           Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           55%              69%                 97%            56%             90%          95%            0%                   3%                50%                54%            22%         87%           18%                 91%                92%                      45
           Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            79%              78%                 98%            81%             97%          95%            3%                   1%                68%                70%            29%         87%           21%                 90%                98%                      88
           Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        46%              70%                 97%            45%             79%          95%            4%                   4%                56%                54%            22%         89%           16%                 84%                94%                     140
           MH priority districts all type facility      46%              58%                 92%            38%             81%          82%            3%                   2%                49%                44%            18%         80%           13%                 80%                95%                     674
Comparator Districts
           Puskesmas                                     91%             80%                 73%            70%             85%           86%          18%                  10%                54%                41%            33%         91%           28%                 92%               97%                      110
           Puskesmas-urban                               95%             88%                 70%            85%             90%           91%          16%                  10%                59%                44%            35%         95%           22%                 95%               97%                       59
           Puskesmas-rural                               82%             64%                 79%            42%             76%           76%          21%                   9%                45%                37%            30%         84%           42%                 87%               96%                       51
           Polindes                                      21%             22%                 67%            20%             67%           65%           2%                   0%                26%                 5%             3%         58%            4%                 66%               80%                      132
           Private MH-Single provider                    25%             66%                 79%            30%             85%           88%           2%                   1%                43%                44%            17%         87%           10%                 75%               94%                      152
           Private MH-Single provider-urban              38%             79%                 90%            46%             86%           92%           4%                   2%                44%                50%            17%         92%           15%                 72%               94%                       76
           Private MH-Single provider-rural              12%             54%                 70%            17%             84%           85%           0%                   0%                43%                38%            17%         82%            6%                 78%               95%                       76
           Private MH-Single provider-BPJS               36%             77%                 91%            37%             93%           89%           5%                   1%                50%                57%            25%         92%           12%                 84%               89%                       43
           Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS           19%             60%                 74%            27%             82%           88%           0%                   1%                40%                37%            14%         84%            9%                 71%               97%                      109
           Private MH-Multiple provider                  55%             88%                 95%            66%             93%           94%           4%                   4%                63%                75%            32%         92%           34%                 73%               98%                      133
           Private MH-Multiple provider-urban            55%             93%                 97%            72%             97%           96%           5%                   5%                66%                85%            36%         95%           35%                 71%               98%                      108
           Private MH-Multiple provider-rural            54%             66%                 88%            43%             77%           86%           0%                   0%                51%                36%            15%         80%           30%                 79%               100%                      25
           Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS             54%             86%                 92%            58%             92%           94%           2%                   3%                64%                77%            33%         91%           31%                 77%               96%                       51
           Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS         55%             89%                 97%            72%             94%           94%           6%                   5%                63%                74%            31%         93%           36%                 70%               100%                      82
           Comparator districts all type facility        35%             62%                 81%            40%             83%           84%           3%                   2%                46%                44%            19%         82%           17%                 73%               92%                      527
National
           Puskesmas                                     90%             79%                 91%            63%             85%           78%          15%                    4%               62%                43%            54%         90%           87%                 37%                93%                     181
           Puskesmas-urban                               96%             84%                 91%            69%             97%           87%          13%                    2%               65%                56%            71%         97%           93%                 43%                96%                      86
           Puskesmas-rural                               88%             77%                 91%            60%             80%           75%          15%                    5%               61%                38%            48%         87%           86%                 35%                91%                      95




                                                                                                                                                 84
                               l. Annex L: Specific Service Readiness – Basic Obstetric Care – Medicines and Commodities
                                                                                                                                                                                          Medicines & Commodities Items
    Representativeness level




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Antibiotics Eye ointment
                                                                  Soap and running water




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        solution(normal) saline
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Metronidazole infusion
                                                                  OR alcohol based hand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Injectables antibiotics
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oral Antihypertensive




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Adrenalin (Injectable)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vitamin K (Injectable)
                                                                                                                                                      Calcium gluconate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Skin disinfectant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dexamethasone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oral antibiotics



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oral analgesics
                                                                                                                                                                          (Inejectable)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Injectables)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Intravenous
                                                                                           Ergometrine



                                                                                                         Ergometrine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Number of




                                                                                                         (Injectable)



                                                                                                                        (Injectable)



                                                                                                                                       (Injectable)



                                                                                                                                                         (Injectable)

                                                                                                                                                                            Diazepam
                                                                                                                          Oxytocin
                                     Type of Facility




                                                                                                                                          MgSO4
                                                         Gloves




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Drugs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Facilities




                                                                                              (oral)
                                                                            rub
MH Priority Districts
           Puskesmas                                    89%            97%                  82%           82%            88%            74%            43%                 66%                 81%                   43%                       42%                      95%                 93%               69%                       72%               98%                     92%                      94%                  90%                                      151
           Puskesmas-urban                              87%            97%                  81%           84%            90%            69%            48%                 68%                 85%                   40%                       40%                      94%                 94%               76%                       71%               97%                     93%                      95%                  91%                                       91
           Puskesmas-rural                              91%            97%                  83%           81%            86%            81%            38%                 63%                 76%                   47%                       45%                      95%                 92%               60%                       73%               99%                     92%                      92%                  89%                                       60
           Polindes                                     87%            85%                  n.a           57%            88%            44%            16%                 n.a                 68%                   n.a                       n.a                      91%                 93%               n.a                       78%               90%                     73%                      96%                  90%                                      156
           Private MH-Single provider                   86%            88%                  n.a           55%            85%            55%            30%                 n.a                 64%                   n.a                       n.a                      75%                 78%               n.a                       56%               91%                     73%                      92%                  87%                                      139
           Private MH-Single provider-urban             89%            87%                  n.a           50%            90%            52%            30%                 n.a                 60%                   n.a                       n.a                      61%                 67%               n.a                       45%               92%                     75%                      91%                  86%                                       82
           Private MH-Single provider-rural             83%            90%                  n.a           60%            80%            57%            29%                 n.a                 69%                   n.a                       n.a                      89%                 89%               n.a                       67%               90%                     71%                      92%                  88%                                       57
           Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              94%            93%                  n.a           52%            89%            69%            36%                 n.a                 60%                   n.a                       n.a                      81%                 85%               n.a                       59%               93%                     73%                      95%                  88%                                       50
           Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          82%            86%                  n.a           56%            83%            48%            26%                 n.a                 67%                   n.a                       n.a                      72%                 74%               n.a                       55%               90%                     73%                      90%                  86%                                       89
           Private MH-Multiple provider                 94%            95%                  n.a           64%            89%            61%            22%                 n.a                 79%                   n.a                       n.a                      77%                 82%               n.a                       47%               95%                     77%                      92%                  82%                                      228
           Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           93%            95%                  n.a           60%            85%            60%            23%                 n.a                 79%                   n.a                       n.a                      80%                 81%               n.a                       48%               94%                     84%                      90%                  82%                                      183
           Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           95%            95%                  n.a           69%            92%            62%            21%                 n.a                 80%                   n.a                       n.a                      75%                 84%               n.a                       47%               95%                     67%                      95%                  82%                                       45
           Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            98%            98%                  n.a           60%            90%            56%            21%                 n.a                 77%                   n.a                       n.a                      81%                 84%               n.a                       42%               91%                     74%                      90%                  89%                                       88
           Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        91%            93%                  n.a           66%            87%            64%            23%                 n.a                 81%                   n.a                       n.a                      75%                 80%               n.a                       51%               97%                     78%                      93%                  78%                                      140
           MH priority districts all type facility      89%            90%                  82%           60%            87%            54%            23%                 66%                 72%                   43%                       42%                      81%                 85%               69%                       60%               92%                     75%                      93%                  86%                                      674
Comparator Districts
           Puskesmas                                    90%          95%                    60%           77%            70%            35%            22%                 56%                 77%                   28%                       31%                      94%                 95%               59%                       59%             96%                       75%                      96%                  89%                                      110
           Puskesmas-urban                              94%          99%                    53%           74%            61%            38%            24%                 53%                 85%                   21%                       25%                      95%                 96%               64%                       50%             95%                       73%                      94%                  90%                                       59
           Puskesmas-rural                              83%          86%                    73%           83%            86%            29%            19%                 63%                 61%                   40%                       42%                      94%                 94%               49%                       75%             100%                      79%                      100%                 87%                                       51
           Polindes                                     75%          65%                    n.a           39%            61%             6%             4%                 n.a                 43%                   n.a                       n.a                      81%                 88%               n.a                       42%             74%                       46%                      84%                  73%                                      132
           Private MH-Single provider                   90%          93%                    n.a           60%            90%            35%             7%                 n.a                 70%                   n.a                       n.a                      83%                 81%               n.a                       50%             95%                       69%                      95%                  81%                                      152
           Private MH-Single provider-urban             89%          96%                    n.a           56%            92%            41%            10%                 n.a                 78%                   n.a                       n.a                      76%                 74%               n.a                       44%             96%                       72%                      95%                  79%                                       76
           Private MH-Single provider-rural             90%          89%                    n.a           63%            88%            30%             5%                 n.a                 62%                   n.a                       n.a                      90%                 88%               n.a                       56%             95%                       66%                      95%                  83%                                       76
           Private MH-Single provider-BPJS              85%          87%                    n.a           60%            93%            47%             5%                 n.a                 70%                   n.a                       n.a                      87%                 84%               n.a                       59%             98%                       64%                      95%                  85%                                       43
           Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS          92%          95%                    n.a           59%            88%            30%             9%                 n.a                 70%                   n.a                       n.a                      81%                 80%               n.a                       45%             94%                       71%                      95%                  79%                                      109
           Private MH-Multiple provider                 96%          99%                    n.a           52%            92%            44%            14%                 n.a                 78%                   n.a                       n.a                      68%                 70%               n.a                       49%             94%                       86%                      97%                  93%                                      133
           Private MH-Multiple provider-urban           97%          98%                    n.a           56%            94%            51%            16%                 n.a                 81%                   n.a                       n.a                      65%                 67%               n.a                       51%             96%                       92%                      98%                  94%                                      108
           Private MH-Multiple provider-rural           91%          100%                   n.a           38%            86%            12%             7%                 n.a                 62%                   n.a                       n.a                      79%                 80%               n.a                       41%             86%                       61%                      91%                  86%                                       25
           Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS            98%          100%                   n.a           57%            93%            35%             7%                 n.a                 84%                   n.a                       n.a                      69%                 78%               n.a                       61%             92%                       81%                      98%                  96%                                       51
           Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS        94%          98%                    n.a           49%            91%            50%            19%                 n.a                 73%                   n.a                       n.a                      66%                 65%               n.a                       41%             95%                       89%                      96%                  91%                                       82
           Comparator districts all type facility       88%          88%                    60%           53%            83%            31%             9%                 56%                 66%                   28%                       31%                      78%                 80%               59%                       48%             90%                       69%                      93%                  83%                                      527
National
           Puskesmas                                    97%            90%                  75%           82%            82%            63%            28%                 70%                 83%                   53%                       36%                      97%                 96%               66%                       86%             100%                      92%                      98%                  94%                                      181
           Puskesmas-urban                              100%           94%                  74%           83%            76%            75%            51%                 68%                 82%                   49%                       41%                      100%                96%               87%                       88%             100%                      88%                      100%                 92%                                       86
           Puskesmas-rural                              96%            89%                  76%           81%            85%            58%            19%                 71%                 83%                   55%                       34%                      96%                 96%               58%                       85%             100%                      94%                      98%                  94%                                       95




                                                                                                                                                                            85
m. Annex M: Specific Service Readiness – Basic Obstetric Care - Overall Index




             Representativen
                ess level
                                                                Obstetric Care Readiness Index   Obstetric Care Readiness Index   Number of
                                     Type of Facility
                                                                            (mean)                          (met all)              Facilities


           MH Priority Districts
                      Puskesmas                                             74%                               8%                                151
                      Puskesmas-urban                                       74%                               8%                                 91
                      Puskesmas-rural                                       74%                               8%                                 60
                      Polindes                                              57%                               0%                                156
                      Private MH-Single provider                            60%                               0%                                139
                      Private MH-Single provider-urban                      60%                               0%                                 82
                      Private MH-Single provider-rural                      60%                               0%                                 57
                      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS                       66%                               0%                                 50
                      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS                   57%                               0%                                 89
                      Private MH-Multiple provider                          67%                               0%                                228
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban                    67%                               0%                                183
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural                    67%                               0%                                 45
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS                     70%                               0%                                 88
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS                 65%                               0%                                140
                      MH priority districts all type facility               62%                               0%                                674
           Comparator Districts
                      Puskesmas                                             67%                               1%                                110
                      Puskesmas-urban                                       67%                               1%                                 59
                      Puskesmas-rural                                       65%                               1%                                 51
                      Polindes                                              44%                               0%                                132
                      Private MH-Single provider                            58%                               0%                                152
                      Private MH-Single provider-urban                      61%                               0%                                 76
                      Private MH-Single provider-rural                      56%                               0%                                 76
                      Private MH-Single provider-BPJS                       62%                               0%                                 43
                      Private MH-Single provider-Non BPJS                   57%                               0%                                109
                      Private MH-Multiple provider                          68%                               0%                                133
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-urban                    70%                               0%                                108
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-rural                    59%                               0%                                 25
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-BPJS                     68%                               0%                                 51
                      Private MH-Multiple provider-Non BPJS                 67%                               0%                                 82
                      Comparator districts all type facility                58%                               0%                                527
           National
                      Puskesmas                                             72%                               0%                                181
                      Puskesmas-urban                                       77%                               0%                                 86
                      Puskesmas-rural                                       70%                               0%                                 95




                                                                           86
