                                                                REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


     COLOMBIA COUNTRY ENGAGEMENT - AGRICULTURE (P161247)
               ANALYTICS AND ADVISORY SERVICES (ASA)


Activity Summary
The Second Rural Productive Partnerships Support Project (Programa de Apoyo
a las Alianzas Productivas II - PAAP II) closed in June 2015, leaving the World
Bank Group without an active IBRD-funded lending operation in the agricultural
sector in Colombia for the first time in more than two decades. With agricultural
and rural development having been identified as a priority both in the
government’s national development strategy as well as in the World Bank
Group’s Country Partnership Framework 2016-21, there is interest from both
parties in continuing collaboration in the sector.
The purpose of the activity is to: (1) support the ongoing dialogue with the
National Planning Department (Departamento de Planeación Nacional - DNP),
the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (Ministerio de Agricultura y
Desarrollo Rural – MADR) and other key actors responsible for agriculture and
rural development; (2) allow the World Bank Group to make available knowledge,
data, and tools that can be used by the Government to inform the design and
implementation of its new agricultural and rural development strategy; and (3)
explore areas for potential future collaboration.
There is broad consensus that the World Bank Group could play a valuable role
in supporting the Government's institutional transformation agenda by supporting
the consolidation of the Agency for Rural Development (Agencia de Desarrollo
Rural - ADR) as well as the concurrent reorganization of MADR. The World Bank
Group has extensive experience in the area of institutional reform / institutional
strengthening and could mobilize national and global expertise to support the
effort that has been launched in Colombia. Support could come in Support could
come in the form of technical assistance funded through a reimbursable services
(RAS) agreement or in the form of investment project financing.
Development Objective
To explore with the Colombian Government opportunities for the World Bank
Group to provide analytical services, technical assistance, and/or financing in
support of the Government's agriculture and rural development policies and
strategies.


COLOMBIA COUNTRY ENGAGEMENT - AGRICULTURE (P161247)
Activities supported under the ANALYTICS AND ADVISORY SERVICES
(ASA)
During FY17, the ASA supported four main sets of activities, as described below.
                                                                REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


 1. Dialogue surrounding Productive Alliances / Rural Development
    agenda

A mission in support of the Productive Alliances / Rural Development agenda
was carried out from July 6-8, 2017. The mission was led by Michael Morris,
Lead Agricultural Economist and Task Team Leader for the Second Rural
Productive Partnerships Project (PAAP).
Productive Alliances Workshop: The objective of the workshop was to discuss
an eventual third phase of PAAP, which would have followed the two successful
earlier phases (implemented from 2002 to 2007 and from 2008 to 2015). The
prospect of a third phase was of great interest, as peace talks were ongoing
between the Government of Colombia and the FARC rebel group, and a
successful conclusion of the talks was anticipated by the end of the year. PAAP
was seen as an instrument that could potentially be used to tackle the roots of a
conflict that had been nourished by rural poverty and inequality, by supporting
small- and medium-sized producers in increasing their incomes, with the
objective of reducing income disparities between urban and rural populations.
The Minister of Agriculture, the Vice Minister for Rural Development, and the
President of ADR attended the workshop. Additional workshop participants
included representatives from many PAAP stakeholders and partners, including
producer organizations, commercial partners, and local and regional
governments. Present as well were representatives from many government
agencies that are active in rural development, including the Office of the High
Commissioner for Post-Conflict; the National Agency of the Presidency for
Cooperation; the Directorate of the Fight Against Drugs; the Ministry of
Commerce, Industry and Tourism; and the newly created ADR that as a result of
the ongoing institutional changes will be the entity responsible for implementing
productive projects such as PAAP. In addition, academia was represented by the
Universidad Externado.
Making reference to his earlier meeting in January 2016 with the President of the
World Bank, the Minister of Agriculture stressed the important role that the World
Bank Group could play in ensuring the continuity and extending the reach of
PAAP, which was expecting to face increased demand following the anticipated
signing of the Havana Peace Agreement (Chapter 1 of the Peace Agreement
lays out an ambitious agenda for an Integrated Rural Reform Program).
Meetings were also held in parallel to the workshop with key actors responsible
for the future of PAAP. A particularly important meeting was held with the
President of the ADR, during which the World Bank Group team gained a better
understanding of the President’s vision for the Agency’s future role and learned
how the arrangements under which responsibility for implementing PAAP would
be transitioned from MADR to ADR.
Meeting with the Vice Minister for Agriculture Affairs: The mission held
discussions with the Vice Minister to discuss topics of mutual interest. Colombia
Siembra and the Incentive for Rural Capitalization were discussed in some detail.
                                                                  REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


In addition, the Vice Minister expressed interest in receiving support for a study
to assess the potential for agriculture in Colombia’s Caribbean Region. He
indicated that the study would have to be financed through a Trust Fund,
because the Ministry was not in a position to finance a Reimbursable Advisory
Services (RAS) activity. The discussions on Colombia Siembra focused on
potential funding arrangements for subsidy mechanisms, such as the Incentive
for Rural Capitalization (Incentivo para Capitalización Rural - ICR). Through ICR,
the Ministry covers part of the investment of private investors, with the
percentage of co-financing varying depending on the type of investor: 20% in the
case of large-scale producers, 30% in the case of medium-sized investors, and
40% in the case of small-scale investors. The mission indicated that it would
likely be difficult for the World Bank Group to support the ICR program, because
global experience suggests that subsidies of this type are difficult to target
effectively.
Meeting with the Director of the Office for Integral Action Against Drugs:
Illegal crops are of major concern to the Government of Colombia, as it is clear
that they have helped fuel a significant part of the civil unrest that the country
faced during the long period of conflict and that some parts of the country
continue to face today. The Director recognized that PAAP has demonstrated its
effectiveness as an instrument for introducing rural households away from the
cultivation of illegal crops and into alternative, agriculture-based livelihoods, and
he expressed hope that the Government’s rural development strategy during the
post-conflict period would include mainstreaming of the productive alliances
approach. Note: The Office for Integral Action Against Drugs was created during
the peace talks, but it no longer operates as an independent agency, as its
functions have been taken over by the Office for the High Commissioner for Post-
conflict. Meanwhile, some rural development activities in the territories that were
most affected by the conflict are being led by the Agency for the Renewal of the
Territories (ART) and the National Agency for Land (ANT).
Meeting with the Directorate for Rural Development, DNP: During this
meeting, the DNP representative clearly articulated the vision of DNP concerning
the newly created sectoral institutions, and he described the role that each one is
expected to play in during the post-conflict period. He discussed as well the
technical and financial support that the World Bank Group could potentially
provide in helping to consolidate and strengthen the new institutions, noting the
potential contribution of PAAP. He noted that DNP is open to a potential new
lending operation, but only if there is a clear path to transition responsibility for
implementation from MADR to the new sectoral institutions.

 2. Meetings with representatives from the Agency for Territorial Renewal
    (Agencia de Renovación Territorial – ART)

The Agency for Territorial Renewal (ART) was created to focus on the territories
most affected by the conflict. Initially under the management of MADR, the plan
originally was to transfer it to the Office of the High Commissioner for Post-
                                                                  REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


conflict. The Constitutional Court of Colombia did not approve the transfer,
however, which leaves unclear what will be the source for the funds needed to
strengthen its technical and financial capacities. The Director of ART therefore
approached the World Bank Group and expressed interest in discussing potential
support on these matters.
During the last mission led by Laurent Msellati (Practice Manager, Agriculture
Global Practice, World Bank Group), a meeting was scheduled to explore
opportunities for collaboration, but in the end the meeting did not take place.

 3. Discussions regarding the National Plan for Irrigation and Drainage
    (NPID)

In early 2016, sectoral institutions initially led by the Rural Agriculture Planning
Unit (UPRA) and supported by the MADR expressed interest in having the World
Bank Group support the development of the National Plan for Irrigation and
Drainage (NPID). UPRA is responsible for the preparation of NPID, and MADR is
responsible for sectoral policy. Between June and November 2016, a series of
video conferences were organized involving representatives from these
institutions and from the World Bank. Later ADR joined the discussions as the
entity responsible for implementation of the PNID.
During the peace talks, irrigation development was included as part of the post-
conflict development strategy. Accordingly, the Peace Agreement negotiated in
Havana includes NPID as part of the Integrated Rural Reform Program laid out in
Chapter 1. The objective of the Program is to contribute to the improvement of
the living conditions of the rural population and their local economy through the
implementation of projects for land development to achieve the consolidation of
competitive and sustainable production in post-conflict areas.
The emphasis of the current plan in its initial phases is to create a rapid response
mechanism for the post-conflict, with a special focus on family agriculture and
rural economy. Specific objectives include:
      Strengthen land development in post-conflict areas
      Promote the implementation of new land development projects
      Support agriculture processing activities
One of the medium term objectives of the Integrated Rural Reform Program is
modification of Law 41-1993, which establishes the framework for land
development activities, for the purpose of achieving greater integration with the
new sectoral challenges.
Several possible avenues have been identified by UPRA through which the
World Bank Group could provide support in this area:
      Adjustment of policies, laws, and regulations relating to land development
      Promotion of public-private partnerships (PPPs) to accelerate irrigation
       development
                                                                   REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


      Development of a financing plan for NPID


The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the
World Bank Group have considerable experience supporting the above activities
in other countries. Within the Latin America region, work done in Argentina and
Peru provides useful models for structuring successful PPPs, especially with
respect to the design of the legal and institutional frameworks needed to attract
private sector investment. Experiences from other countries can also be useful
by highlighting what to avid, such as the PPP initiative in Brazil which failed, due
to the fact that it focused narrowly on the technical aspects of the irrigation, while
neglecting to assist producers with their commercialization activities.
A mission was carried out in November 2916 to support the design of NPID.
During the mission, staff from the World Bank Group and FAO met with
government officials to plan a RAS. The set of topics was identified that would be
included in the RAS, and institutions were considered that could potentially lead
the RAS. It was agreed that MADR would assume the leadership role. In January
2017, the Vice Minister for Rural Development sent a letter to the World Bank
Group formally requesting a RAS, to cover the following topics:
      Development of a methodology for prioritizing the irrigation districts to be
       targeted, from among the 731 irrigation districts spread throughout the
       national territory (the methodology will have to take into account a range
       of economic, social, and political considerations).
      Development of a model for Public Private Partnerships (PPP) applied to
       irrigation districts. The model initially will be directed to medium and large
       irrigation districts. In each of the country’s three main irrigation districts
       (Ranchería, Tesalia-Paicol, and Triangulo del Tolima), it is estimated that
       infrastructure construction alone will require investments in excess of US
       $200 million, and similar or higher levels of financing could be needed to
       make the irrigation systems fully operable. The sectoral institutions
       acknowledge that they have neither the resources nor the administrative
       capability in order to fill the financing gaps in those districts. The PPP
       model should be sufficiently flexible that it can be used not only with large
       irrigation districts, but also with medium-sized irrigation districts.
      Development of a methodology for collecting and processing of the
       information that will allow the decision making on technical aspects.


In March 2017, a proposal for a Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) activity
was sent to ARD, which is serving as the government’s lead agency during this
initial stage because it is responsible for the design of NPID. ADR is currently
attempting to resolve a number of legal issues that have come up. The ADR
General Secretariat considers that it is not possible under Colombian law for a
public agency to enter into what would essentially be a single source (non-
competitive) contract with the World Bank Group. By contrast, the General
                                                                    REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


Secretariat of the MADR considers the proposed RAS contracting arrangement
to be acceptable. Representatives of the two agencies are planning to meet in
the hope of coming to a mutually agreeable interpretation of the relevant law.

 4. Miscellaneous activities

World Economic Forum New Vision for Agriculture (NVA): The World Bank
has been participating in the discussions led by the Vice Minister for Agricultural
Affairs and representatives from the World Economic Forum (WEF), the objective
of which is to promote a more sustainable approach for agricultural and rural
development in Colombia. These discussions have noted the World Bank
Group’s experience with the Rural Productive Partnerships Support Projects, the
Sustainable Cattle Ranching Project, and the Biocarbon Fund. In the wake of
plenaries held at the MADR, follow-up meetings are being planned to address
sustainability issues within different subsectors (livestock, horticulture, oilseeds,
etc.). It is hoped that participation in these meetings will lead to the identification
of current and future needs for the financing of agricultural and rural development
projects, along with associated technical assistance.
The NVA discussions have led to the formation of roundtables to discuss the
agricultural activities that have been prioritized. The WB is participating in three
of these roundtables: (1) Sustainable Cattle Ranching, (2) Hass avocado, and
(3) Cocoa. MADR staff and WEF representatives have participated in these
roundtables, along with representatives from the private sector. Each roundtable
has met once. Principal outcomes are summarized below.

(a) Sustainable Cattle Ranching
The roundtable on Sustainable Cattle Ranching is being coordinated by MADR
and the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA) and
supported by the Sustainable Cattle Ranching Project.
The roundtable has focused mainly on productivity and profitability issues.
With respect to productivity, the area in pasture land is increasing every year, but
the total number of cattle has not changed, and as a result the average number
of cattle per hectare is decreasing (to around 0.6 animals / hectare today). One
reason for the low productivity may be that quite a bit of ranching activity is
actually a front for land speculation. Clearing of land for use as pasture is
sometimes done by land speculators whose ultimate objective is not really to
engage in ranching. Land is cleared and used as pasture so that the owner can
claim it is being used productively, which is required for claiming a formal tile;
once the title has been obtained, the land is sold.
With respect to profitability, variability ion income is recognized as a widespread
problem, particularly in the dairy sub-sector. Milk production fluctuates
considerably throughout the year, and dairy producers express concern over the
surplus that accumulates during some periods. Production costs in Colombia are
                                                                  REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


generally higher than prices on the international market, which not only
discourages exporting but also depresses prices in the domestic market.
In terms of environmental impacts, cattle ranching has a negative image, often
being blamed for contributing to deforestation. The negative image is unfair,
however, because the general public and even many government officials tend
not to understand that most deforestation results from illegal logging activities
and clearing of land to plant illicit crops. Only afterwards is the cleared land used
as pasture land.

(b) Hass avocado
The roundtable on Hass avocado is being coordinated by the National Council for
the Avocado, which looks after avocado varieties.
Among the several avocado varieties produced in Colombia, the Hass avocado
has attracted the greatest amount of interest due the heavy demand in
international markets. Other avocado varieties produced in Colombia are not
suitable for export, due their size and short ripening period, which precludes use
of low-cost maritime transport to reach overseas markets.
An important feature of Hass avocado produced in Colombia is that most of the
crop comes onto the market during periods when Hass avocados produced in
Peru are in short supply; this represents a big advantage for Colombia
producers, as they are able to cover markets normally served by Peruvian
producers.
A major constraint facing many Colombian Hass avocado producers is lack of
knowledge needed to identify and reach international markets. Many producers
are unaware of the standards required for export and do not have access to the
technical assistance needed to improve their production and handling practices
to meet those standards.
The Government of Colombia, working in partnership with industry associations,
has been working to gain access to North American and European markets. It is
expected that these efforts will be expanded in future to include also Asian
markets, mainly China, Japan and Korea.
Efforts are needed as well to strengthen collaboration among and between
producers. Participants in the Hass avocado roundtable have recognized the
experience of the World Bank in promoting collective action, through the
Productive Rural Partnerships projects in Colombia and through many other
similar projects in other countries. They expressed the interest in organizing a
session during a future meeting of the National Council for the Avocado during
which World Bank experts could share experiences from around the world.
(c) Cocoa
The cocoa roundtable operates in close coordination with the National Council for
Cocoa, led by the MADR, to avoid duplication of effort.
                                                                  REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


Colombia is close to self-sufficiency in cocoa production, so continued growth in
the cocoa sector will be possible only if external markets can be identified to
absorb additional production. If Colombian producers are to compete effectively
in international markets, however, they will have to increase productivity.
Average cocoa yields in Colombia are currently below 1 MT/ha, and it is
estimated that they will have to reach 1.5 - 2 MT/ha in order for Colombian cocoa
to be competitive in international markets. Achieving yield increases of this
magnitude will likely require investment in irrigation systems, because many
cocoa producing areas of Colombia are subject to long periods of severe
drought.
Cocoa production can potentially deliver large environmental benefits. Studies
have shown that when pasture land is planted to coca, emissions of Green
House Gases (GHG) are significantly reduced, and biodiversity increases.
Publicizing these potential impacts could provide an important impetus to cocoa
in the country.
The National Chocolate Company, the most important buyer of cocoa in
Colombia, has highlighted the need to increase the support provided to
smallholder producers through initiatives such as the Rural Productive
Partnerships Program. Nestlé, which controls a significant share of the
Colombian chocolate market, has recognized the importance of collective action
in the cocoa sector. Nestlé representatives frequently point to the successful
experience of Ecuador, where Nestlé sources and processes most of the
chocolate it sells in Colombia. In Ecuador, producer cooperatives are extremely
powerful, and they provide many benefits for their members in terms of
production and marketing support.
The World Bank Group has shared with roundtable participants its interest in
working with cocoa producers in the Orinoquia region, considered as one of the
last remaining untapped agricultural frontiers in the country. The Orinoquia region
has been largely bypassed by agriculture, due to its remoteness and lack of
connectivity, the generally poor spoils, and the high level of insecurity during the
armed conflict. Support to cocoa producers could potentially be provided under
the Biocarbon Fund Program, whose objective is to promote sustainable
production in the Orinoquia region.

Agency for Rural Development / Vice-presidency for Productive Integration
Discussions have taken place involving World Bank Group representatives and
the National Director for Technical Assistance for Agriculture. As part of the
recent institutional reforms in the rural sector, responsibility for implementing
agricultural development projects and programs has been transferred from
MADR to ARD. As a newly formed agency, ARD has two main concerns:
      Lack of budget: During 2017, only $43,000 million COP (about US$ 14.7
       million) was allocated to ARD. For 2018, the amount proposed is only
       $48,000 million (about US$ 16.5 million). These amounts are far from
       adequate to deal with the enormous demand for rural and agricultural
                                                                  REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


       development services, including the commitments made as part of the
       Peace Agreement between the Government and the FARC.
      Lack of capacity: As a brand new agency with a very small staff and no
       institutional experience, ADR lacks capacity in many areas. Management
       is interested in exploring the possibility of receiving technical assistance
       through the World Bank Group and would be interested in hearing how
       such support has been organized in other countries. One proposal under
       discussion is to organize a virtual meeting so that World Bank staff based
       in Washington and/or other countries could share experiences.



Next Steps
Activities to be supported in the coming year under the next phase of the
Colombia Agriculture Engagement ASA are likely to include the following:

1. Dialogue around the Productive Alliances / Rural Development Agenda
During the last conversation (May the 24th 2017) with the VM for Rural
Development, Juan Pablo Diaz Granados, has confirmed the difficulties and
instructions from the Ministry of the Treasury for operations that involves national
debt. A meeting with the VM could be requested, but before it, would be
important to determine Our willingness on a potential IPF for a III phase on
PAAP.

2. Dialogue with representatives from the Agency for Territorial Renewal
   (Agencia de Renovación Territorial – ART).
This Agency was originally created along with the Agency for Rural Development
– ADR and the National Agency of the Land – ANT (Acronyms in Spanish) after
the liquidation of the Colombian Institute for Rural Development – INCODER.
Once the Peace Process ended, the Government would transfer the ART from
the MADR to the High Council for Post-Conflict. The Constitutional Court did not
approve it under the Peace Agreement special power to the President, therefore
it is not yet clear how it will operate.

3. Discussions regarding the National Plan for Irrigation and Drainage
   (NPID)
The Government and the WBG have been discussing a RAS that would cover
different needs of ADR and UPRA, under a contract that would be signed ADR.
Since it is not clear whether the ADR will proceed, UPRA is proposing to divide
the RAS into two. One RAS, led by UPRA, would cover the planning stage and a
second RAS, led by ADR, would cover the implementation stage
                                                                  REVISED FINAL - 7 June 2017


4. Miscellaneous Activities
      MADR / World Economic Forum - New Vision for Agriculture: Specific
       interest on WB activities linked with the BioCF program, the Sustainable
       Cattle Ranching Project and PAAP has been expressed. Activities like
       VCs for the articulation with public / private activities on regions where the
       WB is implementing its projects, can be an opportunity for leveraging on
       initiatives of common interest.
      Agency for Rural Development / Vice- presidency for Productive
       Integration: A VC with the National Director for Technical Assistance,
       could lead to a future RAS with the Agency, since the possibilities for an
       IPF are not clear, either from the Government side nor from the WB.
