                                                      WPS8195


Policy Research Working Paper                        8195




          Short-Term Impact of Brexit
   on the United Kingdom’s Export of Goods
                                  Hiau Looi Kee
                                 Alessandro Nicita




Development Research Group
Trade and International Integration Team
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8195


  Abstract
 The short-term impact of Brexit on goods exports is                                Union to decrease by 2 percent, and the prospect of a major
 assessed using the Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index of                          trade collapse post-Brexit is unlikely. This is because the
 the United Kingdom’s major trading partners. The analysis                          European Union’s Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariffs
 shows that in the short run, leaving the European Union                            are higher on products that are less responsive to tariffs,
 may cause the United Kingdom’s exports to the European                             and lower on products that are more responsive to tariffs.




  This paper is a product of the Trade and International Integration Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at hlkee@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                                 s
Short-Term Impact of Brexit on the United Kingdom’
                                    Export of Goods

                         Hiau Looi Keey               Alessandro Nicitaz
                          World Bank                       UNCTAD




          Key Words: Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index, Brexit
          JEL Classi…cation Numbers: F10, F14




     The preliminary …nding of this paper was …rst presented at the World Bank’s Policy Research Talk on
Sep 27, 2016, titled “Trade, FDI and Global Value Chains.” We thank Chad Bown, Aaditya Mattoo and
participants in World Bank’ s Policy Research Talk for feedback and comments. The results and opinions
present in this paper are our own, and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank and
UNCTAD, their Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
   y
     Development Research Group, The World Bank, Washington, DC 20433, USA; Tel.: (202) 473-4155;
Fax: (202)522-1159; e-mail: hlkee@worldbank.org.
   z
     UNCTAD. Email: Alessandro.Nicita@unctad.org.
1         Introduction

On June 23, 2016, UK voters stunned the world by deciding to leave the EU. The news sent

the British pound to a 30 year low, stock markets plummeted as much as 8 percent around

the world, and David Cameron resigned as the Prime Minister. The vote result went against

the advice of many experts. In fact, most economists thought that Brexit was a bad idea

(see Baldwin, 2016). Some actually predicted a big short-term drop in trade and income per

capita post-Brexit (see Dhingra, Ottaviano, Sampson and Van Reenen, 2016). More than

a year has passed, contrary to these experts’advise, the exports of UK to the EU have in

fact increased by 2 percent since July 2016.1 While the full impact of Brexit is yet to show,

particularly because the UK has not yet o¢ cially left the EU and thus currently still enjoys

the tari¤ free access to the EU market, there are reasons to be optimistic even after the

divorce is …nalized.

        This paper analyzes the short-term fallout of trade in goods from Brexit, through poten-

tial changes in the trade policies of its main trading partners. We construct the Overall Trade

                                      s major trading partners.2 Our analysis shows that
Restrictiveness Index (OTRI) of the UK’

in the absence of any trade agreement between the UK and the EU post-Brexit, facing the

  s Most Favored Nation (MFN) tari¤s could cause the UK’
EU’                                                    s export of goods to the EU

to drop by 2 percent. The impact is not larger because the higher tari¤s are placed on the

less elastic products that the UK exports, while the lower tari¤s are placed on the more

elastic products that the UK exports. The negative relationship between the MFN tari¤s

                                                              s exports of goods to the EU,
and demand elasticity softens the potential collapse in the UK’

in the event the UK and the EU fail to strike any trade agreement post-Brexit. We assume
    1
    Data source: Eurostat.
    2
    The OTRI was developed in Kee, Nicita, Olarreaga (2008 and 2009) based on the theoretical foundation
of a series of seminal work by Anderson and Neary (1992, 1994, 1996, 2003 and 2007). More recently, Kee,
Neagu and Nicita (2013) has used the OTRI framework to quantify the minimal impact of trade policies in
causing the global collapse in trade in the aftermath of the …nancial crisis in 2008.


                                                   1
that there are no further compliance costs associated with the existing NTMs facing UK

…rms should the UK leave the EU.

        It should be noted that this paper will not talk about services trade, “passporting” and

the role of London as a …nancial center post-Brexit, or immigration and the social aspect of

Brexit.3 It also will not speculate about the optimal timing to invoke Article 50 and “soft

Brexit”. Finally the long-run impact of Brexit could depend on whether the UK can continue

                                                                               s exports for
to retain and attract foreign direct investment, which surely will shape the UK’

years to come, which is beyond the scope of the current paper. Recent …rm survey evidence

from Bloom and Mizen (2017) suggests that while most …rms expect a negative impact of

Brexit on sales, investment and costs, only larger …rms and those that are more exposed to

international markets are likely to think that they might move part of their business abroad.

Thus, there are reasons to be optimistic post-Brexit.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 brie‡y describes the theoretical framework

underpinning OTRI. Section 3 provides a data description for the paper. Section 4 presents

                  s major trading partners, while Section 5 concludes the paper.
the OTRI of the UK’



2         Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index

The Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index (OTRI) summarizes the trade policies stance of a

country. For a country, c; OTRI takes into account the trade responsiveness of all product

n; "n;c , with respect to its trade policy, Tn;c ; weighted by its total import, mn;c :

                                                 P
                                                  n mn;c "n;c Tn;c
                                         OT RIc = P                :                                    (1)
                                                    n mn;c "n;c
    3
        For the impact of Brexit on services trade, please refer to Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2016).




                                                        2
Trade policy includes both tari¤s and the ad valorem equivalent (AVE) of non-tari¤ measures

(NTM).4 The OTRI was …rst developed in Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (hereafter, KNO,

                              s (1995) partial equilibrium simpli…cation of the theoretical
2008, 2009), based on Feenstra’

framework of Anderson and Neary (1992, 1994, 1996, 2003 and 2007).5 It measures the

uniform ad valorem equivalent tari¤ that could replace the current tari¤ and NTM structure,

while keeping the trade volume of a country constant. KNO (2008, 2009) further include

the AVE of NTMs in trade policy. Hence, the basic ingredients for the calculation of OTRI

are import value, trade elasticities, tari¤ and AVE of NTMs at Harmonized System (HS) 6

digit-level.

       HS 6 import demand elasticities were …rst estimated in KNO (2008), while the AVE of

NTMs were estimated in KNO (2009). Based on these estimates, KNO (2009) constructed

the OTRI of a wide range of countries and showed that NTMs contribute signi…cantly to the

level of trade restrictiveness, and developing countries tend to have higher trade barriers than

developed countries. In a more recent paper, Kee, Neagu and Nicita (2013) used the OTRI

framework to assess the role played by trade policy in the collapse of world trade between

2008 and 2009. They concluded that, while the rise in tari¤s and antidumping duties may

have jointly caused global trade to drop by US$43 billion, it explained less than 2 percent of

the collapse in world trade during the crisis period.

       For our current application, we will construct the OTRI for the major trading partners

of the UK, namely, the EU, US and China. Given the bilateral nature of the exercise, we

expand the OTRI framework to allow for bilateral di¤erences in trade policies and trade

responsiveness. Speci…cally, the OTRI of a country, c; with respect to the imports from a
   4
     NTMs consist of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, such as requirements on labeling, hygiene, max-
imum pesticide residue limits and testing; as well as Technical Barriers to Trade, such as requirements on
labeling, product quality, packaging, and certi…cations, as well as other measures.
   5
     Anderson and Neary’                                                                    s simpli…cation
                          s work focuses on general equilibrium feedback of tari¤s, Feenstra’
focuses on partial equilibrium and ignores the substitution or income e¤ects of import demands when the
tari¤ changes.


                                                    3
partner country, p; is the weighted average of its bilateral trade policy, Tn;c;p on all imported

products, n; with their weights re‡ect the size of their imports, mn;c;p ; as well as their

respective bilateral import demand elasticity, "n;c;p :

                                            P
                                             n mn;c;p "n;c;p Tn;c;p
                                OT RIc;p   = P                      :                         (2)
                                               n mn;c;p "n;c;p



     For the relevant bilateral import demand elasticity, "n;c;p ; we will utilize the most recent

estimates facing UK exports in these markets from Kee and Nicita (2017). These bilateral

import demand elasticities are estimated from product level quantity-based gravity regres-

sions, jointly with bilateral AVE of NTMs. The econometric model also takes into account

the large presence of zero in the bilateral trade statistics, and at the same time uses in-

strumental variables to address the endogeneity issues of tari¤s and NTMs. Based on these

estimates, we assess short-term trade impacts based on the potential changes in tari¤s and

NTMs in these markets post-Brexit according to the …rst di¤erence of Eq (2):

                                              P
                                                 mn;c;p "n;c;p 4Tn;c;p
                                                nP
                              4OT RIc;p =                                 ;
                                                      n   mn;c;p "n;c;p


where bilateral imports will be kept at the current, pre-Brexit level to isolate the trade policy

impacts on trade ‡ows. The total impact of trade due to potential trade policy changes will

be

                                   4mc;p = mc;p "c;p 4OT RIc;p ;                              (3)


with mc;p and "c;p measure the aggregate imports and import weighted trade elasticity of

country c with respect to imports from partner p: We will use data on 2016 to calculate

trade impact according to Eq (3) :




                                                  4
3    Data

Data used in this study come from UN-Comtrade for HS 6 digit-level import and export data,

and UNCTAD TRAINS for tari¤ and NTM data. Most of the NTM data were collected

around 2015/2016, so that determines the year coverage of the sample used in the analysis.

                                                s exports by destination country from
Figure 1 presents the time series plot of the UK’

2000 to 2015. The EU is by far the top destination market for the UK exports, even

though its importance has steadily declined over time, from about 60 percent in 2000 to 44

                                                               s exports throughout
percent in 2015. The US has absorbed about 15 percent of the UK’

this period, while China is gaining from 2 percent to close to 10 percent. Figure 2 presents

the export pro…le of the UK by sector. Machinery, Chemical Products and Transportation

                                              s export in 2015. Table 1 presents the some
jointly accounted for more than half of the UK’

                                                            s main partners. With the
summary statistics that capture the trade policies of the UK’

exception of the EU, both the US and China do not currently give tari¤ preferences to the

  s exports. Products from the UK enter the US and China facing the Most Favored
UK’

Nations (MFN) tari¤ with no preferences. The EU on the other hand gives full preference to

      s exports under the EU Single Market arrangement, so products from the UK enter
the UK’

the EU with no tari¤s.



4                                             s Main
     Overall Trade Restrictiveness Index of UK’

     Partners

                                   s main trading partners, based on trade elasticity and
Table 2 presents the OTRI of the UK’

AVE estimates from Bown, Kee and Nicita (2016). For details about the estimations of trade

elasticity and AVEs, please refer to that paper. For the EU, the import-weighted average



                                             5
MFN tari¤ is 3 percent, while the import weighted AVE of NTMs is 3.4 percent. However,

given that the UK currently is part of the EU Single Market, the OTRI in the EU facing UK

exports is 0. Both the US and China impose MFN tari¤s on UK exports. For the US, the

import-weighted average MFN tari¤ is 1.2 percent, while for China, it is 5 percent. When

factoring in import demand elasticity and AVE of NTMs, the OTRI of US and China facing

UK exports is 0.5 percent and 2.4 percent respectively.

      Table 3 presents the potential trade impact of Brexit in the short run, according to Eq

(3). Here we assume that no new trade agreements will be signed between the UK and

                       s exports will face MFN treatment in all markets. For the US and
its partners, so the UK’

China, nothing will change in terms of tari¤s and NTMs, so the potential trade impact is

zero. For the EU, moving from no tari¤ to MFN tari¤ will lead to the OTRI to increase to

0.93 percent, which may cause trade to decrease by almost 2 percent, which is equivalent to

a loss of USD$3.14 billion. The short-term disruption in trade due to trade policy is likely to

be small: the OTRI of the main partners are low, even after factoring in possible compliance

costs of NTMs facing the UK exporters in these markets.6 The bottom line is that, without

any new trade deals, UK exports to the EU may drop by less than 2 percent, while UK

exports to the US and China may not be a¤ected by Brexit in the short term, before any

relocation adjustment of FDI.

      It may be surprising that the short-run trade impact of Brexit is not larger. This is

because OTRI can be decomposed into the sum of the import-weighted tari¤ (and AVEs)

and the covariance between tari¤ (and AVEs) and import demand elasticity.7 For the EU, the

covariance between tari¤ and trade elasticity is negative, meaning higher tari¤s are placed
  6
     It should be noted that NTMs consist of many di¤erent areas, including standards conformity and
assessment, certi…cation requirements and more. Currently UK …rms exporting to the EU satisfy all their
NTMs requirements. We assume that there are no further compliance costs associated with the existing
NTMs should the UK leave the EU.
   7
     Please see Kee (2007), which shows that OTRI equals import weighted average tari¤ and the import
weighted covariance between tari¤ and trade elasticity.


                                                  6
on less elastic products (such as Transport Equipment, Plastics, Foods and Apparels), while

lower tari¤s are on the more elastic products (such as Pulp and Paper, Scienti…c Instruments,

Precious Stones). This negative relationship between tari¤ and trade elasticity causes the

  s OTRI to be lower than its import-weighted average tari¤, which leads to a smaller
EU’

trade impact in the short run.



5    Concluding Remarks

                                                                     s goods exports in its
This note constructed the overall trade restrictiveness facing the UK’

major markets. Based on new estimates on trade elasticity and the ad valorem equivalent

                                                                  s goods trade due to
of NTMs, we show that the overall short-run trade impact on the UK’

Brexit is less than 2 percent. This result assumes that the UK will not have any preferential

access to the EU market and all its products will enter the EU, the US and China on the

Most Favored Nations (MFN) basis. This result also assumes that in the short-run, …rms

and investments are not free to move across borders. The long-run consequences of Brexit

most likely depend on whether the UK can continue to attract and retain its foreign direct

investment.



References

                                        Trade reforms with quotas, partial rent retention
 [1] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (1992). ‘

              , Econometrica, vol. 60(1), pp. 57-76.
    and tari¤s’


                                        Measuring the restrictiveness of trade policy’
 [2] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (1994). ‘                                            , World

    Bank Economic Review, vol. 8(2) (May), pp. 151-169.




                                             7
                                        A new approach to evaluating trade policy’
 [3] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (1996). ‘                                        , Review

    of Economic Studies, vol. 63(1) (January), pp. 107-125.


                                        The Mercantilist index of trade policy’
 [4] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (2003). ‘                                     , International

    Economic Review, vol. 44(2) (May), pp. 627-649.


                                        Welfare versus market access: the implications
 [5] Anderson, J. and Neary, P. (2007). ‘

                                       , Journal of International Economics, vol. 71 (2)
    of tari¤ structure for tari¤ reform’

    (March), pp. 627-649.


                         Brexit Beckons:
 [6] Baldwin, R. (2016). ‘                       Thinking ahead by leading economists,’

    http://voxeu.org/content/brexit-beckons-thinking-ahead-leading-economists.


 [7] Bloom, N., and Mizen, P. (2017). “New survey evidence on the impact of Brexit on UK

    …rms,”Voxeu: http://voxeu.org/article/new-survey-evidence-impact-brexit-uk-…rms.


                                                                         The consequences
 [8] Dhingra, S., Ottaviano, G., Sampson, T., and Van Reenen, J., (2016) ‘

    of Brexit for UK trade and living standards,’CEP working paper.


                          Estimating the e¤ects of trade policy’
 [9] Feenstra, R. (1995). ‘                                    , in (G. Grossman and K.

    Rogo¤, eds.), Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier.


[10] Kee, H.L. (2007). Book review of James Anderson and Peter Neary, Measuring the

    Restrictiveness of International Trade Policy, in Journal of International Economics,

    vol. 73, no. 2, p. 434-438.


                                       Trade Fraud, Trade Elasticities and Non-Tari¤ Mea-
[11] Kee, H.L., and Nicita, A. (2017). ‘

    sures,’World Bank Mimeo.


                                                     Import demand elasticities and trade
[12] Kee, H.L., Nicita, A. and Olarreaga, M. (2008). ‘

               , Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 90, no. 4, p. 666–
    distortions’                                                            682.

                                             8
                           Figure 1: Exports of UK by Country




          Table 1: Summary Statistics of Trade Policies of UK’ s Main Partners
                                                            EU China USA
                       Maximum MFN tari¤ ( percent) 74.9            65    350
                        Minimum MFN tari¤ ( percent)          0      0      0
          Product subjected to positive tari¤ ( percent)     75     93     58
                             Maximum AVE ( percent) 1725          1627 1900
                              Minimum AVE ( percent)          0      0      0
           Product subjected to positive AVE ( percent)      33     48     25


                                                     Estimating Trade Restrictiveness In-
[13] Kee, H.L., Nicita, A. and Olarreaga, M. (2009). ‘

    dices,” Economic Journal, 2009, vol. 119, p. 172–199.


[14] Kee, H.L., Neagu, C., and Nicita, A. (2013). “Is Protectionism on the Rise? Assessing

    national trade policies during the crisis of 2008,”the Review of Economics and Statistics,

    2013, Vol. 95, No. 1: 342–346.


[15] Mulabdic, A., Osnago, A., and Ruta, M. (2016). “Deep Integration and UK-EU Trade:

    Before and After Brexit,”World Bank Mimeo.




                                             9
                Figure 2: Exports of UK by Sector




       Table 2: Current OTRI of UK’s Main Trading Partners
                                                 EU China USA
Import Weighted Average MFN Tari¤ ( percent) 3.04      5.00 1.19
               Import Weighted AVE ( percent) 3.43     1.31 4.50
              Import Weighted Trade Elasticity -2.11 -1.57 -1.29
                      Current OTRI ( percent)      0   2.38 0.53




         Table 3: Potential Short-Run Trade Impact of Brexit
                                                   EU China USA
Potential Change in OTRI post Brexit ( percent) 0.93         0 0
Potential Change in Trade post Brexit ( percent) -1.96       0 0
Potential Change in Trade post Brexit ($Billion) -3.14       0 0



                               10
