                                                  WPS8146


Policy Research Working Paper                    8146




            Measuring Ownership, Control,
                  and Use of Assets
                                 Cheryl Doss
                                Caitlin Kieran
                                 Talip Kilic




Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
   &
Development Data Group
July 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8146


  Abstract
 Assets generate and help diversify income, provide collat-                         understanding of the interrelationships among ownership
 eral to access credit, alleviate liquidity constraints in the                      and rights, and whether these relationships vary across indi-
 face of shocks, and are key inputs into empowerment.                               viduals. Through a review of the existing approaches to
 Despite the importance of individual-level data on asset                           data collection and the relevant literature on survey meth-
 ownership and control, and that most assets are owned                              odology, this paper presents an overview of the current
 by individuals, solely or jointly, it is typical for the micro                     best practices for collecting individual-level data on the
 data on asset ownership to be collected at the household                           ownership and control of assets in household and farm
 level, often from only one respondent per household. Even                          surveys. The paper provides recommendations in three
 when the data are collected at the individual level, with                          areas: (1) respondent selection; (2) definition and mea-
 identification of reported or documented owners of a given                         surement of assess to and ownership and control of assets;
 asset within the household, the information is still often                         and (3) measurement of the quantity, value, and quality
 solicited from a single respondent. Further, the identifi-                         of assets. Open methodological questions that can be
 cation of owners is seldom paired with the identification                          answered through analysis of existing data or the collection
 of individuals who hold various rights to assets, limiting                         and analysis of new data are identified for future research.



  This paper is a product of the Gender Innovation Lab, Office of the Chief Economist, Africa Region and the the Living
  Standards Measurement Study, Development Data Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at cheryl.doss@qeh.ox.ac.uk.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                     Measuring Ownership, Control, and Use of Assets

                         Cheryl Doss†, Caitlin Kieran‡ and Talip Kilic*1




JEL Codes: C83, D31, J16.
Keywords: Gender, Asset Ownership, Wealth, Survey Methodology, Household Surveys.



1†
  Corresponding author: cheryl.doss@qeh.ox.ac.uk. Senior Departmental Lecturer in Development
Economics, Department of International Development, Oxford University. ‡ Ph.D. Student, Agricultural
and Resource Economics, University of California, Davis, kieran@primal.ucdavis.edu. *Senior Economist
and Survey Methods Team Leader, Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS), Survey Unit,
Development Data Group, The World Bank, tkilic@worldbank.org. This paper is part of a broader
collaboration on methodological experimentation among several researchers from the World Bank Gender
Innovation Lab, the World Bank LSMS, the CGIAR Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets led by
the International Food Policy Research Institute, the International Rescue Committee, and Oxford
University to improve the measurement of time use, women’s agency, and ownership and control of assets:
three key constructs in women’s empowerment, known both for their centrality in the current policy debate
on gender equality and for the challenges posed by their measurement. The broader collaboration aims to
achieve three goals: (1) shed light on the relative quality of the existing methods of measuring these
constructs; (2) design and test new ideas to measure these constructs; and (3) generate evidence on which
measurement method is most appropriate given the policy and research question at hand.
1. Introduction

Ownership and control of physical and financial assets are essential to an individual’s well-
being. Assets generate and help diversify income; provide collateral to gain access to
credit; alleviate liquidity constraints in the face of shocks; and provide status in society
(Deere and Doss, 2006). A large body of literature demonstrates the critical role that assets,
and not just income, play in poverty reduction (see Johnson et al. (2016) for a review).
Although economic research focused on asset ownership and wealth has traditionally
assessed household asset portfolios, an increasing number of studies over the last decade
have emphasized the importance of the collection and analysis of individual-level
information on ownership and control of physical and financial assets. This represents an
important shift because it acknowledges that men and women often have differential access
to, control over, and ability to benefit from assets.

The empirical utility of high-quality, individual-level data on asset ownership and control
cannot be overstated. First, these data enrich the analyses of gender differences in wealth,
revealing the extent of economic disadvantage accumulated by women over the life cycle
and providing a long-term and more holistic overview of the gender dimensions of
economic inequality (Warren, 2006; Deere and Doss, 2006; Ruel and Hauser, 2013).
Second, in comparison to household-level analyses, asset studies focused on individuals
provide more nuanced insights into the determinants of poverty and vulnerability by
capturing additional vulnerabilities faced by women, whose rights over assets often
disappear upon dissolution of her household whether due to death, divorce, or separation.2
Third, the desired individual-level data directly inform microeconomic research that
focuses on women’s empowerment and intrahousehold bargaining and cooperation and
that often utilizes control of assets as a proxy for the individual’s empowerment/bargaining
power. Evidence suggests that the decisions made within the household are different when
women have higher bargaining power and that the outcomes generally increase the well-
being of women and their children (Allendorf, 2007; Beegle et al., 2001; Deininger et al.,
2010; Doss, 2006; Duflo, 2003; Haddad et al., 1997; Menon et al., 2014; Quisumbing and
Maluccio, 2003; Thomas, 1990). Finally, understanding who uses and controls assets is
crucial for appropriate design and targeting of livelihood interventions to not only enhance
the productivity of farmers and entrepreneurs but also ensure that these interventions do
not have unintended consequences.3

2
  For instance, Quisumbing et al. (2011) find that, in Bangladesh, weather-related shocks impact men’s assets
more than women’s assets, but shocks related to illness have a larger impact on women’s assets. In Uganda,
drought shocks have an effect on women’s assets, but not on men’s assets.
3
  Evidence has demonstrated that secure land rights increase agricultural production at the household level,
but very little research exists on this topic at the individual level. Goldstein and Udry (2008) find that in
Ghana, women farmers had less secure land rights than men, and were thus less likely to leave their land
fallow due to their increased risk of losing land that they were not actively farming. Quisumbing et al. (2001)
reveal also in Ghana that women were more likely to invest in land with secure property rights by planting

                                                                                                             2
Despite the importance of individual-level data on asset ownership and control, and the
fact that most assets are owned by individuals, either solely or jointly, it is typical for the
micro data on asset ownership to be collected largely at the household-level, often from
only one respondent per household (Doss et al., 2008; Deere et al., 2012; Ruel and Hauser,
2013). Even when household survey data are collected at the individual-level, with
identification of reported or documented owners of a given asset within the same
household, the information is often collected from a single respondent, often the household
member designated as the “most knowledgeable” household member. Further, data on
ownership are seldom paired with data identifying individuals who hold various rights to
assets, limiting our understanding of the inter-relationships among ownership and rights,
and whether these relationships vary across individuals (Kilic and Moylan, 2016).

Accurate measurement of ownership, control, and use of assets is essential for correctly
diagnosing problems and developing recommendations to address these challenges within
developing countries. Although sex-disaggregated asset ownership indicators are part of
the data agenda for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), gaps remain in our
knowledge of how best to collect these data. Identifying the best practices on questionnaire
design and respondent selection protocols is in turn necessary to promote the availability
and comparability of these indicators on a cross-country basis (Kilic and Moylan, 2016).

This paper assesses what we know and what we do not know regarding best practices for
collecting individual-level data on the ownership, control, and use of assets in the context
of household and farm surveys.

Section 2 defines assets, control, use, and ownership, and identifies the challenges to both
measuring and understanding exclusive and joint forms of asset use, control, and
ownership. Section 3 provides an overview of existing approaches to micro data collection
on asset use, control, and ownership, highlighting how different methods have
operationalized different definitions. Section 4 assesses the strengths and weaknesses of
diverse approaches to three key methodological questions: (1) Who should be interviewed:
Can one proxy respondent for the entire household provide adequate information? Does
reporting vary by sex of respondent? (2) How can one define and measure control, access,
and ownership of assets within a survey? (3) How can one reliably measure asset quantity,
value, and quality? Section 5 concludes by identifying methodological questions that can
be answered through analysis of existing data or through the collection and analysis of new
data, and the implications of answering these questions.


cocoa trees. While more research is needed to understand the conditions under which strengthening women’s
property rights will increase aggregate agricultural productivity and sustainable management practices (Doss
2017), sufficient evidence has demonstrated that livelihood interventions that do not recognize the gender
asset gap run the risk of exacerbating inequalities (Meinzen-Dick et al. 2011).

                                                                                                          3
2. Conceptual Framework

Before assessing the state of knowledge on asset measurement, it is important to lay out
the key conceptual issues. First, we must define assets, which generally refer to resources
controlled by individuals, households, or formal or informal groups (see Johnson et al.
(2016) for a review of asset definitions). They serve as a means of storing value and may
provide a stream of benefits over time. In our paper, we use a definition of assets based on
the Sustainable Livelihoods Framework, which includes five capitals: (1) natural,
including land, livestock, water, and trees; (2) physical, including housing and agricultural
and household durables; (3) financial, including cash, savings (formal or informal), and
financial investments including stocks and bonds; (4) human, including health,
knowledge, education, labor power, and skills; and (5) social, including group membership
and social networks (Scoones 1998). Some recent work categorizes land, housing,
livestock, and durables all as physical assets, as distinct from financial, human and social
assets (Doss et al, 2014).

Further, we focus our review on natural (specifically land and trees) 4 , physical, and
financial assets. While human and social capital are important for understanding
mechanisms to reduce poverty, increase women’s empowerment, and improve livelihoods,
methods of measuring human capital have been widely studied, including from a gender
perspective. The approaches to studying social capital require methods that differ
considerably from those used for studying natural, physical, and financial assets. In
addition, we exclude the analysis of access to and control over common property resources,
mainly due to our pragmatic focus on areas in which cross-country applicable
recommendations could be provided.5

Although a livelihoods perspective might promote a focus on productive assets, such as
land, dwelling, livestock, and, agricultural equipment, a bargaining perspective would
encourage us to also consider other assets that may be of value, especially to women, such
as jewelry. To understand how individuals accumulate assets as they move out of poverty
– and how the accumulation of assets propels the movement out of poverty – it is important
to consider not only those assets that have high value, such as land and livestock, but also
those that have less economic value, and which may contribute to livelihoods or well-being
such as consumer durables and smaller agricultural equipment items.



4
  Although water is also important, the access to and control over water is a substantially different issue with
an extensive literature that is beyond the scope of this paper.
5
  Common property could include forests, rangelands, or water systems. The extent to which these assets are
controlled by men, women, or jointly, as well as the resulting implications for livelihood strategies or
empowerment (such as through leadership in the group tasked with the common property management) can
be explored (Meinzen-Dick et al., 2011).

                                                                                                              4
There are myriad definitions of ownership, control, and use of assets; they represent the
wide variety of rights over assets. Schlager and Ostrom (1992) characterize different
bundles of rights along a continuum from access or use rights to control rights to ownership
rights. According to the Collective Action and Property Rights (CAPRi) program, use
rights might include the right to access the resource (e.g. walk across a field), withdraw
from a resource (e.g. pick wild plants), or exploit a resource for economic benefit (e.g. fish
commercially). Control or decision-making rights include the rights of management (e.g.
plant a crop), exclusion (i.e. prevent others from accessing a resource), or alienation (e.g.
rent out, sell, or give away the rights) (CAPRi, 2010). Transfer rights, including
bequeathing, as well as the ability to distribute benefits from the assets, may be considered
control or decision-making rights.

A major challenge in measuring asset ownership is that the approaches necessarily vary
substantially by asset type and by context. Understanding the definition of ownership in
each setting requires an understanding of what rights are generally associated with
ownership. This may include the full bundle of use and control rights or it may be defined
as the right of alienation. The System of National Accounts uses two definitions of
ownership, distinguishing between the legal owner and the economic owner.

           “The legal owner of entities such as goods and services, natural resources, financial
           assets and liabilities is the institutional unit entitled in law and sustainable under
           the law to claim the benefits associated with the entities. By contrast, the economic
           owner of entities such as goods and services, natural resources, financial assets and
           liabilities is the institutional unit entitled to claim the benefits associated with the
           use of the entity in question in the course of an economic activity by virtue of
           accepting the associated risks” (UN Statistics, 2009. p. 195).

In practice, the approaches to collecting ownership data in household surveys do not map
cleanly onto the concepts of the various rights. Household surveys tend to gather
information on reported (or perception-based) ownership, documented ownership, or
occasionally both. For reported ownership, the respondent(s) is/are asked who owns an
asset, while for documented ownership, the respondent(s) is/are generally asked whose
name(s) is/are listed as owner(s) on an ownership document such as a title, will, or receipt.6
While documented ownership is often considered the most secure, it is only relevant for
certain assets, and only in places where the enforcement of the associated rights is effective.

Ownership, whether reported or documented, does not overlap consistently with the other
property rights articulated above. When there are benefits, such as tax reductions in India
for property registered to women, this does not necessarily translate into increased control

6
    Only rarely do enumerators ask to see copies of the ownership documents.

                                                                                                 5
over the property by the woman whose name it is in (especially if she is unaware that her
name is on the document). And in places where documented ownership is rare, women
may have the rights to manage land and obtain the economic benefits from it, even if they
are not considered the owner. Thus, information on both ownership and other rights may
be important.

One analysis that compares the ownership, management, and control over output of
agricultural land in six African countries finds that often these rights do not overlap
(Slavchevska et al., 2017). The form of rights holding is defined to be that solely by a man,
solely by a woman, joint by a man and woman, and other. The overlap between ownership
and management ranges from 47% in Malawi to 84% in Niger. And the overlap between
ownership and control over output ranges from 40% in Malawi to 71% in Uganda. This
strongly suggests that these rights are distinct and may be held by different people.

Another challenge in measuring who owns, controls, and uses an asset is that one or more
individuals or groups can hold these rights. In some cases, different people or groups may
have different rights over the same asset and the benefits of ownership or control may vary
depending on whether asset is owned or controlled individually or jointly. The most
common form of joint ownership is between spouses, but it can also occur between parents
and children, siblings, or others. As data become more widely available on individual and
joint ownership, it will provide opportunities for analyses of how their impacts differ. There
is a longstanding debate in the literature as to whether women are better off with individual
or joint property rights, especially regarding land (Agarwal, 2003; Jackson 2003). Better
data will allow us to empirically analyze these questions across contexts.

The rules about the extent to which marriage confers property rights are an important factor
influencing individual and joint property rights. A range of marital property rights exist;
on one end of the spectrum is the common property regime, in which all property owned
by any member of the couple is considered jointly owned. On the other end is the separation
of property regime, in which marriage does not provide one with any rights to the spouse’s
property. In between the two extremes are the partial community property regimes, in
which typically the assets brought to the marriage or inherited by an individual during the
marriage are individual property, but all other property acquired during the marriage is
joint. Only 79 of the 173 countries analyzed in Women, Business and the Law (2016) have
a full or partial community property regime, indicating that separation of property is the
most common marital regime globally. A single country can have more than one marital
property regime, often based on religion, ethnicity or region, and couples can often opt out
of the default marital property regime, so it is important to identify which regime applies
to a specific couple.



                                                                                            6
Finally, the means of acquisition of property may confer or limit particular rights over it.
For instance, inherited land may come with stipulations about whether it includes the right
to sell or transfer it outside of the family. Whether the inheritance was natal, from one’s
birth family, or marital, from one’s spouse, may also affect the rights.

In many countries, inheritance laws do not guarantee equal rights to sons and daughters. In
addition, even where sons and daughters have equal rights, parents often choose to provide
their sons with a larger inheritance. Analysis of this may be complicated by the fact that in
some contexts, the dowry provided to a daughter may be viewed as her inheritance,
although she may not control it directly (Botticini and Siow, 2003). Parents may also
provide sons and daughters with different types of bequests; in the Philippines, while sons
are preferred regarding land inheritance, daughters receive more schooling (Estudillo,
Quisumbing, and Otsuka, 2001). Moreover, even when daughters inherit, they may face
pressure to waive these rights. For example, in many Muslim families, women give their
inheritance rights to their brothers in exchange for the right to visit and maintain good
relations with their birth family. Inheritance laws are also important for widows, but often
discriminate against them. Thirty-five of the 173 economies assessed in Women, Business
and the Law (2016) do not provide male and female surviving spouses with the same
inheritance rights. It is therefore essential to obtain information on both inheritance laws
and practices.

As we consider the approaches to collecting data on asset ownership, we will keep in mind
these various conceptual issues, including the definition of assets and the rights over them,
joint ownership contrasted with individual ownership, the rules regarding property within
marriage and the patterns of inheritance.


3. Overview of Existing Approaches to Data Collection on Individual-Level Asset
   Ownership, Control, and Use

To identify the gaps in our knowledge of how to best collect individual-level asset data, it
is essential to review existing methods of collecting such data. The methodological
differences across the efforts that are reviewed below are in part related to the differences
in their objectives. We begin by discussing each effort and then assess the key lessons
learned. For easy reference, Table 1 provides an overview of each data collection exercise
that is reviewed in this section.

Key elements of the approaches include: What is the sample? Who is interviewed? How is
the survey questionnaire structured? What is the unit of analysis? Does it allow us to
analyze how the assets are owned? Can we assign ownership to specific individuals for


                                                                                           7
whom we have information on sex, age, marital status, etc.? What types of assets are
included? How is ownership defined? Which rights are identified? Does the survey allow
us to distinguish individual and joint ownership? How were the assets acquired? And
finally, does the survey collect data on the value of assets?

3.1     Gender Asset Gap Project

The Gender Asset Gap project was initiated in 2009 to demonstrate the importance and
feasibility of collecting nationally representative, individual-level data on physical and
financial assets. The project collected data that were nationally representative for Ghana
and Ecuador and representative at the state level for Karnataka, India. The primary goal
was to measure asset and wealth gaps between men and women. The data collection
included both qualitative fieldwork and a household asset survey. In the qualitative phase,
the key themes of focus group discussions were the accumulation of assets over the
individual life cycle, the importance of assets, the market for assets, and household
decision-making over asset acquisition and use. In combination with key informant
interviews and a literature review of legal, marital, and inheritance regimes, this work
formed the basis for adapting the household survey template to the three specific contexts.7

The household asset surveys, conducted between May 2010 and January 2011, included
two survey instruments. The first instrument created a roster of all assets owned by anyone
in the household, including dwelling, agricultural land, other real estate, livestock,
agricultural implements, non-farm businesses, consumer durables, and identified the
owners of each listed asset. 8 In Ghana and Karnataka, the person who was the most
knowledgeable about the assets owned within the household was chosen as the respondent
for the first instrument. In Ecuador, the primary couple was interviewed together whenever
possible. The second instrument was administered separately to two adult members of the
household and collected additional information including ownership of financial assets and
rights and decision-making over assets.

The unit of analysis was the asset, with information collected on the owner or owners of
each asset. Up to three owners could have been listed for each asset or it could have been
coded “owned by all household members.” Because the owners are identified with an ID
number that can be matched to the household roster, it is possible to compile the
information at the individual-level, identifying the assets owned by each household
member and associating them with the owner’s characteristics.



7
  For detailed information on the survey methodology and the lessons learned, see Doss et al. (2011).
8
  Additional information was collected in each of the surveys, but the placement and content varied across
the three countries and is less relevant to this analysis.

                                                                                                        8
Much of the analysis conducted as part of the project has used the information from the
household roster, which uses proxy respondents for information about other household
members. Additional information is available for the two respondents of the individual
questionnaire.

The project also collected data on the value of each asset, using three measures of value:
the potential sales price, the construction cost (for dwellings), and the rental value. The
three project countries differed in the placement of the valuation questions and the
respondents for these. In Ecuador, the valuation questions were asked in the household
inventory completed by the principal adults of the household (i.e., a couple, or a sole male
or female head). The respondents were asked to list all assets owned by a household
member and to provide a value for each asset. In Ghana, the valuation questions were only
asked in the household inventory and only one person responded to this section. In
Karnataka, the valuation questions were asked in the individual questionnaires.

3.2     Methodological Experiment on Measuring Assets from a Gender Perspective

The World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS), the United Nations
Evidence and Data for Gender Equality (EDGE) project 9 and the Uganda Bureau of
Statistics collaborated on the design and implementation of the Methodological
Experiment on Measuring Asset ownership from a Gender Perspective (MEXA). MEXA
was a randomized household survey experiment implemented in 2014 across 140
enumeration areas (EA) in Uganda to test the relative effects of different approaches to
respondent selection and questionnaire design on the estimates of ownership of and rights
to physical and financial assets. Together with the UN EDGE-supported household surveys
implemented in Georgia, Maldives, Mexico, Mongolia, Philippines, and South Africa in
2015-2016, MEXA is informing the international guidelines on individual-level
measurement of asset ownership and control that will be submitted by the UN EDGE
project to the United Nations Statistical Commission for adoption in 2017 (see Kilic and
Moylan (2016) for more details on the design, implementation and analysis of MEXA).



9
  The EDGE project is executed jointly by the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and seeks to accelerate
existing efforts to generate comparable gender indicators on health, education, employment,
entrepreneurship, and asset ownership. The project focuses on (i) the development of a platform for
international data and metadata compilation covering education, employment and health indicators, (ii) the
development of international definitions and methods for measuring gender-disaggregated entrepreneurship
and asset ownership, and (iii) testing the newly developed methods in selected countries. These seven
household surveys tested different approaches to data collection in an iterative fashion, over the period of
2014-2016, for informing the international guidelines on the measurement of individual-level asset
ownership and control. This document was circulated in draft form for comments during the 2017 United
Nations Statistical Commission.

                                                                                                          9
The key research questions that guided the MEXA experimental design included: 1) Does
interviewing only the “most knowledgeable” household member, as is typically done in
household surveys, yield comprehensive information about individual-level asset
ownership and control for both men and women? 2) How much can we improve
understanding of (i) intra-household asset ownership and control and (ii) inter-relationships
between reported, economic and documented ownership of, and rights to assets by
interviewing multiple household members, as opposed to the most knowledgeable
household member? 3) Do partners provide different information about personal and each
other’s asset ownership when interviewed separately versus together? 4) Do individuals
provide different information about personal asset ownership when interviewed separately
but asked to report only on assets they own versus assets owned by any household member,
including themselves?

In view of the prevailing protocols on respondent selection and fieldwork implementation,
and the research questions, MEXA tested 5 survey treatments, each of which sought to
establish a different interview setting while uniquely identifying, at the asset-level and
across 13 asset classes, reported owners, economic owners, documented owners and
holders of rights to (i) bequeath, (ii) sell, (iii) rent out, (iv) use as collateral, and (v)
invest/make improvements. Within each enumeration area, 4 households were assigned at
random to each treatment arm.

Arm 1 (standard of practice) interviewed the individual who, following the enumerator’s
introduction of the survey, was identified to be the “most knowledgeable” household
member.” This respondent was asked about the assets owned by each member of the
household, exclusively or jointly with others within or outside the household, in each asset
class.10 Arm 2 interviewed the randomly selected member of the principal couple while
Arm 3 interviewed the principal couple together. The questionnaire for Arm 2 and Arm 3
was otherwise identical with respect to Arm 1. Arm 4 and Arm 5 each interviewed up to 4
adult household members, 18 years and above; attempts were made to conduct the
interviews simultaneously. In each case, an attempt was made conduct the interview
without others present.

Identical to Arms 1 through 3, each respondent in an Arm 4 household was asked
independently about the assets owned by each member of the household, exclusively or
jointly with others within or outside the household, in each asset class. In this respect,
reported owners, economic owners and documented owners (as applicable) were uniquely
identified based on ID numbers sourced from household roster through the following

10
  In line with the prevailing implementation protocols, the selection of the most knowledgeable household
member was a function of the adult individuals that were available at the time of the interview. This could
have meant that the first choice for the most knowledgeable member was not interviewed if he/she was
unavailable during the time that the field team was going to be in that enumeration area.

                                                                                                        10
questions: “Who owns this [ASSET]?” (identifying reported owners); “If this [ASSET]
were to be sold/rented out today, who would decide how the money is used” (identifying
economic owners); and “Whose names are listed as owners on the ownership document for
this [ASSET]?” (identifying documented owners).

In contrast, Arm 5 only inquired about the assets owned by the respondent, exclusively or
jointly with others within or outside the household, in each asset class. Another household
member’s potential joint ownership of an asset was identified only conditional on the
respondent’s identification of himself or herself as an owner of that asset. For example, in
the case of inquiring regarding the dwelling reported ownership, Arm 5 would have asked
first “Are you among the owners of this dwelling?” followed by “Who else owns this
dwelling?” to capture, if applicable, other household and/or non-household members that
may be joint reported owners.

Finally, Arm 4 and Arm 5 had each respondent create an independent roster of assets in
each asset class with the idea that the analysis team would attempt to create a panel of
assets across the respondents of the same household based strictly on the household survey
data. This decision was thought to better capture assets that may be hidden from other
household members, and still did not compromise the objective of creating a household-
level wealth aggregate that would ultimately feed into the System of National Accounts.

3.3    Gender, Agriculture, and Assets Project

The Gender, Agriculture, and Assets Project (GAAP), led by the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI) and the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), and
funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, aimed to better understand the dynamics
of gender and assets in agricultural development programs. The GAAP portfolio included
eight agricultural development projects from South Asia and Africa from 2010 to 2014.
Each project collected both qualitative and quantitative information on individual asset
ownership and control, but each data collection effort was tailored to the individual project,
rather than standardized. The person chosen as the respondent also varied by project. The
purpose was to collect data for impact evaluation, rather than to obtain representative data
on patterns of asset ownership.

Most of the GAAP surveys collected information on the number and value of assets owned
by the household and by individuals within the household. Asset types included livestock,
agricultural and non-agricultural productive assets, and non-productive assets. In addition
to gathering data on who owns assets, either individually or jointly, the surveys gathered
data on who holds certain rights over assets, such as the right to use, rent out, sell, lend, or
prevent others from using the asset; who can decide how to spend money generated from


                                                                                             11
the asset; who can decide who inherits the asset; and who can decide what type of crops to
cultivate.

Based on the findings from the first phase, the project produced a Gender and Assets
Toolkit11, which includes a list of best practices for collecting gender and assets data at the
project level. The best practices highlight (1) the importance of using both quantitative and
qualitative research methods for understanding complex gender and assets dynamics, and
(2) the need for analyzing gender asset gaps over time rather than simply capturing
snapshots of men’s and women’s control over assets. In addition, this list focuses on the
importance of tailoring data collection methods to specific contexts and measuring
ownership, use, and control rights rather than simply focusing on asset ownership.

3.4        Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index

The Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI) survey instrument, developed
by the IFPRI, Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, and the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), captures data on five domains of
empowerment in agriculture, one of which is the access to and control of productive
capital. 12 The purpose of the survey instrument is not to identify individual asset
ownership, but to collect data to use in an indicator of women’s empowerment in
agriculture.

The WEAI was piloted in Bangladesh, Guatemala, and Uganda in 2011-12 and has since
been collected in baseline surveys for Feed the Future’s 19 focus countries across Asia,
Latin America, and Africa south of the Sahara. In general, these surveys are representative
of Feed the Future’s zones of influence. In some cases, the WEAI modules are integrated
in larger surveys, but in all cases, the WEAI is administered with a Household
Questionnaire, which includes a household roster. Within each household, the individual
survey instrument is administered to both a primary and a secondary respondent—one man
and one woman aged 18 and over—who are self-identified as the primary members
responsible for social and economic decision making within the household. They are
usually, but not necessarily, husband and wife. The interview may also be conducted solely
with a woman primary respondent if there is no adult man in the household.

Questions on productive assets are included in the section for the domain on control of
productive capital. Each respondent is asked a series of questions about agricultural
resources and assets, including agricultural land, large livestock, small livestock, poultry,
fish pond/fishing equipment, mechanized and non-mechanized farm equipment, nonfarm

11
     The toolkit can be accessed at https://tinyurl.com/gaaptoolkit.
12
     For more information on the WEAI, please visit https://www.ifpri.org/topic/weai-resource-center.

                                                                                                        12
business equipment, house, large and small consumer durables, cell phones, non-
agricultural land and means of transport. In the baseline surveys, these questions included
on productive capital: 1) Does anyone in your household currently have any [item]?, 2)
How many of [each item] does your household currently have?, 3) Who owns most of [each
item]?, 4) Who can decide whether to sell [each item] most of the time?, 5) Who can decide
whether to give [each item] away most of the time?, 6) Who can decide to mortgage or rent
out [each item] most of the time?, 7) Who contributes most to decisions regarding a new
purchase of [each item]?

The focus is on understanding who owns most of the assets, which serves as a proxy for
bargaining power within the household. Thus, a woman who lives in a household with three
parcels of land and owns one of them, would not be identified as a landowner. Similarly,
if she can decide whether to sell only one parcel, but not most, the instrument will not
identify her as having these land rights. It does not provide data to calculate how each asset
is owned (jointly or individually and by whom) or the incidence of asset ownership by
individuals, although one can impute the extent to which groups of assets (in predefined
categories) are solely or jointly owned. Note that the WEAI is designed to be administered
together with a household survey that collects asset information, so the WEAI should not
be considered as a stand-alone module.

Instead of using household member identification numbers, the WEAI uses very detailed
response codes. For the questions regarding who owns or control specific assets, the
response codes usually include: (1) self (2) partner/spouse (3) self and partner/spouse
jointly (4) other household member (5) self and other household member(s), (6)
partner/spouse and other household member(s), (7) someone (or group of people) outside
the household), (8) self and other outside people, (9) partner/spouse and other outside
people, and (10) self, partner/spouse and other outside people. Thus, it provides
information on whether most of the assets in each type are owned individually or jointly.
Because the WEAI is administered together with a household questionnaire that includes
a household roster, it is possible to map some of the codes in the WEAI back to the
household roster.

The more recent Abbreviated WEAI (A-WEAI), a shorter version of the original WEAI
asks, “Does anyone in your household currently have any [item]?” and “Do you own any
of the item?” Respondents can reply that they own an item solely or jointly or that they do
not own any of an item. This facilitates calculation of the incidence of ownership by men
and women within the sample.




                                                                                           13
3.5        Demographic and Health Surveys

The Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) are nationally representative household
surveys on fertility, health, and family planning behaviors and attitudes, collected in over
90 countries, and administered by host country governments with technical assistance from
ICF International and other agencies under the MEASURE project. 13 Since 2009, they
have included questions about land and housing ownership.

All DHS surveys include a minimum of two questionnaires—a Household Questionnaire
and a Women’s Questionnaire. The Household Questionnaire can be administered to any
capable member of the household age 15 years or older and collects information on
individual and household characteristics. All women of reproductive age (15-49) that are
identified in the household roster are eligible to respond to the Women’s Questionnaire. In
addition, many surveys include a Men’s Questionnaire, generally administered to men (age
15-49/54/59, depending on the country). In some cases, the sample only includes ever or
currently married men and women.

The DHS sample sizes vary widely across countries and years, but are generally between
5,000 and 30,000 households, and are based on calculations of the optimal sample size for
two-stage cluster sampling in each country. Due to the structure of the survey, more women
are interviewed than men. The DHS are typically conducted every five years to facilitate
analysis of changes over time.

Questions are asked both about household landholdings and about whether the respondent
is an owner. For both land and housing, the respondents are typically asked, “Do you own
any land either alone or jointly with someone else?” and responses of no ownership, sole
ownership, joint ownership or both sole and joint ownership are allowed.

Thus, the unit of analysis is the respondent and the survey identifies irrespectively of
whether he or she is a landowner. A similar question is asked about housing. If an
individual identifies as a joint owner, the other owner is not identified. No information is
collected on the value or area of the land or housing.

3.6        World Programme for the Census of Agriculture

The World Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA), housed at the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), provides methodological
guidelines and technical assistance for country agricultural census operations. The WCA
2010 round was undertaken from 2006 to 2015, and was centered around a modular

13
     For more information, please visit: http://www.measuredhs.com.

                                                                                         14
approach to data collection, including a core census module and one or more census
supplementary modules, depending on the country.

The core census module items that are important for gender-sensitive analysis of land and
livestock ownership and management include the identification and location of the holding,
the legal status of the holder, the sex of the agricultural holder, land tenure types and size
of the holding, and livestock types and quantities. An important methodological difference
between the 2000 and the 2010 rounds is that the latter introduced the concept of the sub-
holding and sub-holder. By recognizing that an agricultural holder could be a group of
people such as a husband and wife, the 2010 round aimed to improve measurement of the
role of multiple household members, and especially women, in the management of a
holding.

An FAO review of 86 agricultural censuses conducted between 2006 and 2013 revealed
that while almost all collected information on the sex of the holder and the land tenure of
the holding, only a few countries provided analysis of sex-disaggregated data in their
reports. The review also covered the availability of data on sub-holdings and sub-holders.
Although many countries implemented parcel-level modules, only African countries had
collected data on the sex of the parcel manager or owner. Many countries faced challenges
implementing the concepts of sub-holders and sub-holdings (FAO – UBOS Expert
Consultation, 2014). Therefore, these concepts are not included in the WCA 2020 round,
but the concept of a joint holder—or a person making decisions about the holding in
conjunction with another individual within or outside one’s household—remains. In
addition, the WCA 2020 guidelines recommend (1) collecting information on the sex of
any household members – not limited to the holder or joint holders – making managerial
decisions14 on the holding, and (2) disaggregating the area of crops and the number of
livestock by the sex of the person managing them and the area of land owned and the
number of livestock owned by the sex of the owner.

3.7     Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture

The World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study - Integrated Surveys on Agriculture
(LSMS-ISA) program provides technical and financial support to national statistical offices
in Sub-Saharan Africa in the design, implementation and analysis of national, multi-topic,
panel household surveys that have a strong focus on smallholder agriculture and that are
modeled on the integrated household survey design of the LSMS.15 In addition to the goal


14
  The list of managerial decisions varies by country.
15
  The LSMS-ISA is implemented by the Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS), housed within the
Development Data Group of the World Bank. The unit-record anonymized data and documentation
associated with each survey supported by the LSMS-ISA are made publicly available within 12 months of

                                                                                                  15
of producing policy-relevant agricultural data, the LSMS-ISA emphasizes the design and
validation of innovative survey methods, the use of technology for improving survey data
quality, and the development of analytical tools to facilitate the use and analysis of the data
collected.

The surveys supported by the LSMS-ISA are implemented by the National Statistics Office
of each participating country. Each survey interviews between 3,000 and 5,000 households
at baseline. The panel dimension of the surveys necessitates tracking of households as well
as individuals who no longer reside at baseline dwelling locations. Each interviewed
household receives a multi-topic household questionnaire, coupled with agricultural
questionnaires on crop, livestock and fishery production, conditional on household
participation in these domains. While the content of the questionnaire modules can exhibit
cross-country variation driven by country specificities, there are also marked similarities
in the type and the wording of key questions, and the level at which information is solicited.

On asset ownership, currently, the surveys uniquely identify reported owners with the
household (i.e. up to 2 owners identified from the household roster) at the asset level, for
agricultural land, livestock, and household non-farm businesses. Specific to agricultural
land and non-farm businesses, up to 2 managers are identified from the household roster
for each cultivated plot/non-farm business, and in the case of livestock, up to 2 caretakers
are again uniquely identified for each livestock type reported to be owned. The surveys
require the manager/caretaker of each plot/non-farm business/livestock type to report on
the entity in question. If a proxy respondents is used, the proxy respondent is often
identified, linked to the household roster, in the questionnaire instrument – though this
aspect of survey design does exhibit inter-temporal and cross-country variation. The
LSMS-ISA is working towards enhancing the scope of individual-disaggregated
information collection on ownership of and rights to physical and financial assets, in line
with the recommendations of the methodological research that is reviewed in section 4.16

3.8     Global Findex

Launched in 2011 by the World Bank Development Research Group, with funding from
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Global Financial Inclusion (Global Findex)
database collects survey data on how individuals save, borrow, make payments, and
manage risk. Thus, it includes detailed information on the financial assets owned by
individuals.

completion of fieldwork in each country. For more information about the LSMS and the LSMS-ISA, please
visit www.worldbank.org/lsms.
16
   Expanding the scope and cross-comparability of the information collected on financial assets could be an
easy win for the LSMS-ISA, perhaps exploring synergies with the questionnaire design promoted as part of
the Global Findex.

                                                                                                        16
Collected in partnership with the Gallup World Poll in 2011 and again in 2014, the Global
Findex interviewed approximately 150,000 randomly selected adults (age 15 and over)
across countries in each survey round. This sample is representative of more than 97
percent of the world’s adult population, and nationally representative of each of the more
than 140 countries included in the database.17

The Global Findex includes over 100 indicators of financial inclusion, summarized for all
adults and disaggregated by key demographic characteristics—gender, age, and income.
Because the Global Findex samples individuals, all the questions are about the respondent
and specify whether the respondent should answer about him or herself alone or jointly
with someone else. For example, the questionnaire asks, “Do you, either by yourself or
together with someone else, currently have an account at any of the following places?” No
information is collected on other assets.


4     Best Practices and Known Gaps

Given the various approaches discussed above, in this section, we focus on what we can
learn from the different approaches, what their strengths and weaknesses are relative to
each other, and the research questions for which each is suited.

4.1      Defining and Measuring Ownership, Control, and Use of Assets

In any discussion of women’s landownership, someone inevitably raises the issue that it is
women’s access to land, not their ownership of land, that matters. Yet, no empirical
analyses have analyzed the relevance of ownership and access to various outcomes. While
access is important for women to produce livelihoods, ownership may imply more secure
tenure rights. Figuring out how to identify these different issues within surveys is
challenging. There are several key dimensions, including the right to use land and to keep
the proceeds from the land and the security of tenure.

When considering ownership, the first challenge is to define it. Often, we simply ask the
respondent whether he or she is an owner; occasionally we also ask if there is an ownership
document. The potential of what ownership will mean varies across contexts. In some
places, the state officially owns all the land and individuals only have use rights. Yet, when
these rights are transferable, they are often similar in practice to ownership rights. In other

17
  In economies where less than 80 percent of the population has telephone coverage, surveys are conducted
face to face. This is also the case in countries where in-person interviews are the customary method of
conducting surveys. In all other countries, the questionnaires are administered over the telephone. For more
information, please visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/globalfindex.

                                                                                                         17
places, the right to use the land is allocated by the community; the rights may provide long-
term tenure security or may be quite vulnerable to transfer. To develop measures that are
both internationally comparable and locally relevant, one approach is to define ownership
as the strongest bundle of rights possible in that context.

To measure control and use rights, surveys have used two approaches. One is to ask about
the rights that individuals have over property. These may include the right to transfer
(through sales or bequests) or the right to manage or change the asset (such as by planting
permanent crops or building terraces). The second is to ask about who makes decisions
about the property, such as what to plant on the land.

While numerous studies focus on a particular set of rights, claiming that the other rights
are correlated, no systematic study has considered the correlation across the bundle of
rights in a variety of contexts. The one paper that does this only considers six countries in
Africa. It finds that ownership, management, and control over output do not necessarily
overlap and that the patterns differ markedly across contexts and for men and women
(Slavchevska et al, 2017). It would be useful to compare these rights across a broader range
of contexts.

4.2     Exclusive and Joint Ownership

Any of the property rights discussed above—ownership, control, and use—may all be held
individually or jointly. 18 Much of the literature on asset ownership as an indicator of
women’s bargaining power has not considered whether the property is owned individually
or jointly. Depending on the marital regime, assets acquired within marriage may be owned
jointly or individually. Further, the social norms regarding ownership within marriage may
or may not match the legal regulations. Ownership may also be shared intergenerationally;
the transfer of land and housing may happen over time as the parents turn over
responsibility for the farm to their children.

There are two approaches to identifying individual and joint ownership, again based on the
unit of analysis at the level of the assets or of the individuals. First, if the data are collected
about each asset, it is possible to identify the owner(s) of each asset. Then, for each asset
we know whether it is owned individually or jointly and by whom. The second approach
asks each individual respondent who owns any of a specific asset type, whether they own
it individually, jointly, or at least one individually and one jointly.




18
  In addition, some property such as land may be held by a community as common property. There are a
range of issues regarding how to obtain data on common property which are beyond the scope of this study.

                                                                                                      18
The Gender Asset Gap Project found that the patterns of individual and joint ownership
varied widely across the three countries and across assets. Savings were almost always
reported as being owned individually, while land ownership patterns varied across
Ecuador, Ghana, and Karnataka. In addition, the Gender, Assets, and Agriculture Program
found that women in different parts of the world had different preferences for whether they
own land and other assets individually or jointly.

Knowing the identity of the joint owners does not necessarily tell us whether the ownership
rights are shared equally among them. Ownership may be joint but not equal. One analysis
of land rights in Uganda finds that even when spouses jointly own land, women are reported
as having fewer rights regarding land (Doss, Meinzen-Dick, and Bomuhangi, 2014).
Additional work on the rights held by joint owners would provide useful insights into how
the rights are shared.

Asset ownership is often used as an indicator of women’s bargaining power. However,
little research has considered whether the level of bargaining power depends on whether
the asset is owned individually or jointly. As a richer set of data becomes available, this
will be an important area to explore.

4.3    Questionnaire Design

There are two main approaches to the design of survey modules on asset ownership.

The first uses the asset as the unit of analysis, identifying the owner(s) and potentially the
value of each asset. This approach is used by the Gender Asset Gap Project, MEXA, and
the surveys supported by the LSMS-ISA. Consequently, the researcher can develop
measures at the asset level, such as the share of land or livestock that is owned by women.
In addition, if the owners are associated with a unique ID code that allows us to match them
with their individual characteristics, one can identify which individuals within the
household are owners, and develop incidence measures of ownership of assets by sex, age,
marital status, and/or other individual attributes.

In the context of MEXA, Kilic and Moylan (2016) find that questionnaire design affects
reporting on personal ownership of and rights to assets. When subject to a questionnaire
with a sole focus on respondents’ personal ownership of assets in Arm 5, female
respondents identify themselves as (overall and joint) owners of dwelling, livestock and
financial assets at a substantially higher rate compared to their female comparators in
households in Arms 1 through 4 in which one or more respondents may have been subject
to a questionnaire with a joint focus on respondents’ as well as other household members’
ownership of assets. For instance, within the sample of female respondents, compared to


                                                                                           19
Arm 1 in which the self-identified most knowledgeable household member is the sole
respondent, Arm 5 increases the incidence of joint reported dwelling ownership, on
average, by 11.4 percentage points. This marginal effect corresponds to 81 percent of the
comparable average for Arm 1. The comparable marginal effect associated with Arm 5
estimated within the sample of female respondents with regard to joint reported financial
account ownership is 3.9 percentage points, corresponding to 76 percent of the comparable
average for Arm 1. Similar treatment effects are derived also for the male respondents in
Arm 5 households in the analysis of (overall and joint) documented and (joint) economic
ownership of dwelling and agricultural land as well as (joint) reported ownership of
livestock and financial accounts.

When multiple people are interviewed from the same household, another challenge is to
determine when they are reporting on the same asset. For example, if a man says that he
owns a parcel of land individually, and a woman in the same household says she owns one
jointly with him, it is useful to know if they are talking about the same parcel. One way to
do this is to use the approach of the Gender Asset Gap Project and begin with an asset
inventory and then use it to ask respondents further questions about the specific assets
identified. Respondents may be asked if they own additional assets that were not listed.19

The second approach to questionnaire design uses the individual as the unit of analysis,
determining whether the individual is an owner or a right holder. The DHS and the WEAI
surveys use a version of this approach, which makes it easy to create measures of the
incidence of ownership by sex and individual characteristics. The questionnaire design is
closely related to respondent selection, which we now turn to.

4.4      Respondent Selection

Research demonstrating that the choice of respondent can influence the conclusions of a
study highlights the importance of understanding three key issues. First, it is critical to
know who can provide the most accurate and complete information on specific topics.
Second, in some circumstances, it may be useful to know when household members would
provide different information in response to the same question. For example, knowing if
the husband and wife disagree about who owns a particular asset may provide useful
insights. This disagreement may be correlated with other differences in perceptions or



19
  The Gender Asset Gap Project found relatively few assets added in the individual interviews. Additional
work could be done to determine whether this is because the inventory approach does result in most
household assets being listed or whether respondents become fatigued and uninterested in listing additional
assets. After experimenting with respondent-specific asset rosters while interviewing multiple adults in each
household in the context of MEXA Arm 4 and Arm 5, Kilic and Moylan (2016) recommend the approach
the followed by the Gender Asset Gap project as well.

                                                                                                          20
outcomes. Finally, biases may arise as a result of interviewing certain individuals and not
others.

The literature provides some empirical evidence on the impact of having one household
member provide information about others. Fisher et al. (2010) find that when husbands
alone are interviewed in Southern Malawi, the information can be used to accurately
calculate aggregate poverty measures, including the poverty headcount and poverty gap
indexes. However, the reported determinants of poverty differ depending on whether the
wife’s estimate of her own income is used to calculate household income. In this context,
husbands underestimate their wife’s income, on average, and do not accurately estimate
the total household income in most households (Fisher et al., 2010). Relatedly, Chen and
Collins (2014) use cross-reports of spouses’ incomes and expenditures to assess the source
of information asymmetries and their impact on farm production and efficiency in Ghana.
Spouses have very poor estimates of each other’s income and expenditures, both in total
and by type of good.

On labor, Bardasi et al. (2011) find that female labor statistics do not differ by self/proxy
reporting, but that proxy responses produce much lower male employment rates than do
self-reports. Similarly, Dammert and Galdo (2013), and Janzen (2015) report significant
effects of proxy respondents on child labor estimations in Peru and Tanzania, respectively,
Analyzing LSMS-ISA data from Malawi and Nigeria, Palacios-Lopez et al. (2017) find
opposite effects of respondent gender on reported female labor share in crop production –
7 percentage points higher if the respondent is female in Malawi, lower but non-significant
in Nigeria.

These studies suggest that proxy respondents may not provide adequate information on the
income and labor inputs of others, including on that of their spouse. Subsequently for asset
ownership and control, the key methodological question is whether it is sufficient to
interview one household member regarding the assets owned by all household members.
Or perhaps a better formulation of this question is, under what circumstances is it sufficient
to interview one household member versus multiple individuals? And if multiple, which
household members should be interviewed? The answers depend on the analytical
objective, as detailed below.

Many large-sample household surveys, including the LSMS-ISA, end up collecting
individually disaggregated data regarding the ownership of assets of all household
members, often through proxy respondents. Table 2 provides, by sex, the module-specific
incidence of use of proxy respondents for information on individuals 18 years of age or
older in selected LSMS-ISA-supported household surveys. Even for a household survey
program that has achieved remarkable success on many fronts since 2009, the level of


                                                                                           21
reliance on proxy respondents leaves significant room for improvement. In the case of the
DHS and the WEAI, the respondents are women and men of reproductive age, and the
principal man and woman, respectively. The disadvantage, in turn, is that we do not have
information on ownership of and rights to physical and financial assets among non-
respondents.20

There are a handful of studies that allow us to explore the implications of interviewing
multiple interview targets in the same household while collecting information on individual
asset ownership and control. Jacobs and Kes (2014) report that the majority of couples in
the study sites in Uganda and South Africa disagree on whether land or housing is owned
jointly by couples. Women are more likely than men to report joint ownership of these
assets. Twyman et al. (2015) find higher levels of agreement on who jointly owns land in
Ecuador, with couples agreeing that 79 percent of parcels are owned jointly. They note the
existing disagreement stems from women owners reporting joint ownership on parcels to
which men claim sole ownership.21

Unfortunately, there is no “gold standard” against which to measure these different
approaches. For a few large assets, such as land, housing, and potentially vehicles, there
may be legal records identifying the owner. However, it has not yet been possible to match
administrative records with the survey results and there are a multitude of reasons why a
gold standard measurement approach anchored in administrative records could prove to be
elusive (Kilic and Moylan, 2016).

Qualitative fieldwork conducted in the Gender Asset Gap Project found that an individual
was more likely to know about the physical assets owned by other household members
than about the financial assets held by others. Thus, the survey instruments treated physical
and financial assets differently. While information on physical assets were collected in both
the household and individual survey instruments, data on financial assets were only
collected in the individual survey instrument; each of the two respondents was asked only
about his or her own financial assets, and whether these were held individually or jointly
with someone else.

Kilic and Moylan (2016) report the results from MEXA, which sought to explore, in the
context of a randomized household survey experiment the impacts of different approaches
to respondent selection and questionnaire design on the analysis of ownership of and rights
to physical and financial asset assets. The authors find that with respect to the standard

20
   While it would be possible to ask a proxy respondent to provide information on each household member,
this has not yet been done in the context of the DHS and the WEAI.
21
   An open empirical question is whether women are more likely to report joint ownership if the legal system
supports and enforces it, and are less likely to do so where the enforcement is weak and customary law
prevails, as in Africa.

                                                                                                         22
practice of interviewing the most knowledgeable household member (Arm 1), interviewing
multiple adult members in the same household with a questionnaire that asks the
respondents to identify the assets owned by each member of the household, exclusively or
jointly with others within or outside the household (Arm 4) drives both female and male
respondents to be more inclusive in their reporting of which household members of the
opposite sex own the priority asset classes, namely dwelling, agricultural land, livestock
and financial assets.

While the effects are large in magnitude, they are underlined by distortionary proxy
respondent effects. These effects are most evident in the comparison of respondent versus
proxy-respondent reporting regarding the respondent’s reported ownership, economic
ownership and right to bequeath in Arm 4 households with 2 or more individual interviews.
This comparison, in the context of dwelling, agricultural land and financial accounts,
reveals that even when respondents, both men and women, do not claim to be owners or
rights holders, they may be tagged as reported owners, economic owners and rights holders
by other respondents within their household. For instance, 9 percent of the female
respondents that do not consider themselves to be dwelling owners are classified as joint
reported owners by others. Similarly, 11 percent of the female respondents that do not
report owning a financial account are reported to be exclusive financial account owners by
others.

These types of distortionary proxy respondent effects are also observed in Arm 5
households with 2 or more interviewers, but they are markedly smaller in magnitude since
the Arm 5 individual questionnaire focuses only on respondents’ personal ownership of,
and rights to assets, and is set up to identify alternative household members as owners
and/or right holders in a given interview only through joint arrangements with the
respondent.

In view of these findings, together with the Arm 5 questionnaire design effects reviewed
in the previous section, Kilic and Moylan (2016) recommend, for those intending to collect
intra-household information on individual ownership of, and rights to physical and
financial assets as part of household surveys, 1) reducing the reliance on a single
respondent, 2) expanding the practice of interviewing multiple age-eligible individuals per
household, with a focus on the members of the principal couple if a couple is present, and
3) probing directly regarding respondents’ personal ownership of and rights to assets,
whether exclusively or jointly with someone else, as in Arm 5.

These recommendations are buttressed by previous calls for collecting data on ownership
of, and rights to assets at the individual level as well (Grown et al., 2005; Doss et al., 2011),
and have already informed the design of the Malawi Fourth Integrated Household Survey


                                                                                              23
(IHS4), which was implemented by the National Statistical Office from April 2016 to April
2017 with support from the LSMS-ISA initiative. The IHS4 interviewed 12,480 cross-
sectional households across 780 enumeration areas (EAs), and in parallel attempted to track
an additional national sample of 1,989 households that have been previously interviewed
in 2010 and 2013 by the Third Integrated Household Survey (IHS3) and the Integrated
Household Panel Survey (IHPS). The IHS4 cross-sectional and panel components
administered a multi-topic Household Questionnaire, and if applicable, Agriculture and
Fishery Questionnaires, in each sampled household. As part of the panel component
specifically, the IHS4 aimed to administer an Individual Questionnaire to all adult
household members, with the ultimate response rate of 80 percent among the age-eligible
interview targets. The individual interviews administered augmented and contextualized
versions of selected Arm 5 MEXA questionnaire modules 22 , and the existing IHS4
questionnaire modules on education, health, employment and food insecurity23. Further, in
case of an agricultural household that is reporting to own and/or cultivate land in the
reference rainy season, the household inventory of agricultural parcels that is created as
part of the IHS4 Agriculture Questionnaire were fed into each individual interview.24

Ultimately, the purpose of the survey may shape the choices regarding whom to interview.
If we want to understand the bargaining power or empowerment effects of asset ownership,
then asking individuals about their own ownership or rights over assets is likely to best
capture their perceptions, in line with the empirical evidence reviewed above. For intra-
household analyses that the individual disaggregated data on asset ownership and control
would seek to inform, multiple age-eligible individuals should be interviewed, with the
possibility of (i) attempting to interview of age-eligible household members as in MEXA
or (ii) focusing on the members of the principal couple in the married/co-habitating
household sub-population or (iii) selecting a random age-eligible household member and
his/her partner if applicable across the entire household population.25

If multiple people are interviewed for intra-household analysis, there may be multiple
responses about the same asset. There are different ways to handle this, depending on the

22
   These modules include dwelling, agricultural land, and financial accounts, loans and liabilities.
23
   On individual-level measurement of food insecurity, the IHS4 Panel Subcomponent used the individual-
referenced questionnaire module that is developed by the FAO Voices of Hungry Project for the computation
of the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), an SDG indicator.
24
   The IHS4 cross-sectional Agriculture Questionnaire also collected parcel-level data on reported, economic
and documented ownership, and rights to sell and bequeath but following the Arm 1 approach, per usual
practice in Malawi. The parallel implementation of the IHS4 cross-sectional and panel components will,
therefore, offer another opportunity to assess potential Arm 5 effects, vis-à-vis Arm 1, on the agricultural
land-related outcome variables. Within Arm 5 specifically, the IHS4 data will allow for the comparison of
respondent and proxy respondent reporting regarding respondent ownership of and rights to agricultural land,
but this time at the asset-level.
25
   The UN EDGE international guidelines on individual-level measurement of asset ownership and control
are expected to expand on these scenarios and their implications for fieldwork design and sampling.

                                                                                                         24
research question. The fallback option could always be to accept each person’s response as
to whether they are an owner. An alternative option is to reconcile the responses so that
one owner or set of owners is identified for each asset, based on reconciling the responses
to arrive at one answer. The Gender Asset Gap Project, particularly for Ecuador, used
information on the marital property laws, the respondents’ marital status, and when the
asset was acquired to report the owner or owners when there was a discrepancy among
respondents.

4.5     Quantification, Valuation, and Quality Assessment

Beyond knowing whether individuals own particular types of assets, we may want to know
whether they own more than one and whether their assets are valuable. While simply
identifying the owners of assets allows us to calculate measures of the incidence of
ownership, often we want more information about their assets such as quantity, value,
and/or quality.

Identifying the quantity owned of most assets is relatively straightforward. Survey
designers use two approaches. The first approach uses the asset as the unit of analysis and
identifies the owners of each asset. It is then possible to calculate the quantity owned by
each individual.26 A second approach, which can be employed when the individual is the
unit of analysis, is to ask each respondent how many of each asset they own, whether
individually or jointly with someone else.

When the asset is the unit of analysis in the survey, then it is relatively easy to ask additional
questions about the quality or value of each item. Identifying the value of each asset allows
for the aggregation across assets and the calculation of the gender wealth gaps.

There are, however, a number of challenges to obtaining good measures of asset values.
For consistent answers, one should specify the measure of value being asked. Asking the
original purchase price and the year of acquisition facilitates calculation of the depreciated
value, assuming a typical amount of wear. A common approach is to ask the price that
would be received if the asset were sold, assuming that there are markets for such goods
and the respondent is aware of the market price. When sales markets are limited, rental
markets for land or housing may provide insights into value. A final measure is cost to
replace the asset.

When markets are thin or nonexistent for a particular asset, it may be hard to have
respondents provide a value. For example, rural houses that are constructed by the

26
  At least one exception in reliable self-reported asset quantification is farmer-reported land area
measurement (Carletto et al., 2015; 2016).

                                                                                                 25
household may not have an explicit market value. In addition, respondents may be
unwilling to name a price if they think the enumerator is interested in purchasing it. In such
case, they may want to say that it is invaluable.

A further challenge is that there may be some systematic bias in reported values depending
on who is asked. Doss et al (2016), using the Gender Asset Gap Project data, find that the
values provided by women have a narrower distribution than those provided by men for
housing and agricultural land. Linked to the discussion in Section 4.4, respondent selection
may too influence the size of the calculated gender wealth gap. There is much more scope
for understanding how patterns of reported values vary systematically in accordance with
sex and other individual attributes. Additional research with the MEXA data may be able
to provide further insights into this question.

Given the difficulties associated with obtaining monetary values for some assets, it may be
possible to obtain information on the characteristics of the asset. For example, many
surveys collect data on housing characteristics such as size, amenities, construction
materials, etc. This allows for the construction of a housing quality index that may be
compared across owners.

Finally, to understand gender gaps in land ownership, it is useful to have information on
land areas. Carletto et al. (2015), using the LSMS-ISA data for 4 African countries,
document substantial measurement errors in farmer-reported plot areas compared to the
GPS-based area measures for the same plots. These differences result in underestimation
of land inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient and biased estimates of the
relationship between land and productivity. Carletto et al. (2016) further show that GPS
provides highly accurate land area measures compared to the gold standard methodology
of using compass and rope, and does so across the entire distribution of plot areas. Although
research has not addressed whether men and women provide systematically different
estimates of land area, using GPS would avoid these potential biases.


5   Conclusions and Moving Forward

While there is strong evidence that ownership, control, and use of assets is important for
creating livelihoods, reducing vulnerability, and increasing voice within the household and
community, there are still numerous gaps in our knowledge about how best to obtain these
data and what aspects of the data are most relevant.

Many research questions remain. We can begin to answer some of them with existing data,
while others will require collection of additional data. First, to what extent are the various


                                                                                           26
rights regarding assets correlated? For example, in which contexts are the ownership,
management, and rights to the economic benefits of land all held by the same person?
When are they held by different people? Which of these rights is most closely associated
with the benefits of ownership? If women have access and control rights, does providing
them with ownership rights result in any changes in their decisions or well being? Which
assets matter for which outcomes? As land becomes scarcer, it may become even more
difficult to secure women’s land rights. However, to what extent can women’s rights to
housing or businesses provide similar levels of security, empowerment, and/or livelihoods?
A recent literature suggests that there are asset poverty thresholds, below which it is
difficult for a household to move out of poverty (see Kraay and McKenzie 2014 for a
review). The empirical results are mixed, but the concept has had a significant influence
on policy. It suggests that if people have below the threshold level of assets, they will need
to sell them to cover basic expenses. However, above the threshold, they will be able to
generate income and begin to move out of poverty. Yet the question of whether there is a
threshold level of assets for individuals within households remains unexplored. Is there
some minimum share of assets that a woman must own to have a voice in household
decision-making or to allow her an adequate fallback position?27

A third set of questions is related to individual and joint ownership of assets. These
questions tie in with an earlier debate regarding whether women’s individual land rights
should be the focus of policy (Agarwal 2003) or whether women’s land rights may be
strengthened by recognizing their embeddedness in broader social systems that provide
forms of joint ownership (Jackson 2003). From an economic bargaining model perspective,
individual asset ownership may provide a better fallback position than jointly owned assets,
particularly immovable assets such as land. If assets are owned jointly, it may be difficult
to obtain one’s share of the value when leaving. On the other hand, joint property rights
may be embedded in deeper social relationships that provide added benefits. There is
substantial scope for further analyses of the relationships of individual and joint property
rights with a wide range of outcomes. 28

27
   In case of marital dissolution, the fallback position may depend also on norms and traditions governing
dissolution. Information on these practices could be solicited in the community surveys that may be a part of
the household surveys that would elicit the individual disaggregated data of interest on asset ownership and
control.
28
   A related strand of research is interested in relative household and individual welfare gains associated with
(1) improving relative bargaining power of spouses versus (2) enhancing intra-household cooperation among
them. While the latter may be proxied by individual-level data on joint asset ownership, the comparable scope
of information on exclusive ownership could help define the former. McCarthy and Kilic (2017) develop a
non-cooperative bargaining model that presents conditions under which relatively large gains would be
expected from moving to more equitable bargaining power versus achieving intra-household cooperation.
They test their model’s predictions using the LSMS-ISA data from Malawi, and specifically the individual-
disaggregated data on the control of income, as opposed to asset ownership, across a comprehensive spectrum
of income generating activities. The authors find that relative to increasing wives' bargaining power (defined
as the share of total disjoint (male + female) income that is under female control), improving cooperation
between spouses (defined as the share of total household income that is under joint control) exerts larger and

                                                                                                             27
Other questions need further experimentation and data collection in the field. One set
revolves around how the structuring and framing of questions about ownership affect the
responses. In this respect, comparisons across countries with different marital and
inheritance regimes will be useful. Additional research is also needed to further identify
whether there are systematic differences in how men and women report values of assets.

A variety of methods could be useful in filling these methodological knowledge gaps. One
would be to design and test anchoring vignettes describing specific scenarios, to provide
respondents with more contextual information. In addition, simple tweaks in the interview
environment could then provide more insights. For example, do household members’
incentives to centralize their responses around various social norms vary with (1) the
gender of the enumerator, and (2) whether they respond anonymously in the presence of
the enumerator, rather than in the presence of their spouse or others. Some unanswered
questions require detailed qualitative work, such as whether there are cognitive gender
differences in the interpretation of questions related to reported ownership, economic
ownership, and specific rights. This information would allow us to systematically identify
and analyze sources of response error and the stage in the cognitive process at which errors
occur, and assess whether this differs by sex or other characteristics. Qualitative work will
again be needed to complement our analyses of overlaps of asset rights and enhance our
understanding of how men and women perceive and value joint versus individual
ownership, control, and use of assets.




statistically significant positive impacts on total household income and consumption expenditures per capita,
as well as the share of household consumption devoted to public goods.

                                                                                                          28
6   References

Agarwal, B. (2003). “Gender and land rights revisited: exploring new prospects via the
        state, family and market.” Journal of Agrarian Change, 3.1-2, pp. 84–224.
Allendorf, K. (2007). “Do women’s land rights promote empowerment and child health in
        Nepal?” World Development, 35.11, pp. 1975–1988.
Bardasi, E., Beegle, K., Dillon, A., and Serneels, P. (2011). "Do labor statistics depend on
        how and to whom the questions are asked? Results from a survey experiment in
        Tanzania." World Bank Economic Review, 25.3, pp. 418–447.
Beegle, K., Frankenberg, E., and Thomas, D. (2001). "Bargaining power within couples
        and use of prenatal and delivery care in Indonesia." Studies in Family Planning,
        32.2, pp. 130-146.
CAPRi (CGIAR Systemwide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights). (2010).
        Resources, rights, and cooperation: a sourcebook on property rights and collective
        action for sustainable development. Washington, DC: International Food Policy
        Research Institute (IFPRI).
Carletto, C., Gourlay, S., Murray, S., and Zezza, A. (2016). “Cheaper, faster, and more
        than good enough. Is GPS the new gold standard in land area measurement?” World
        Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 7759.
Carletto, C., Gourlay, S., and Winters, P. (2015). “From guesstimates to GPStimates: land
        area measurement and implications for agricultural analysis.” Journal of African
        Economies, 24.5, pp. 593-628.
Chen, J., and Collins, L. (2014). “Let’s talk about the money: spousal communication,
        expenditures, and farm production. American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
        96.5, pp. 1272–1290.
Dammert, A., and Galdo, J. (2013). “Child labor variation by type of respondent: Evidence
        from a Large-Scale Study.” World Development 51, pp. 207-220.
Deere, C. D., and Doss, C. R. (2006). “The gender asset gap: what do we know and why
        does it matter?” Feminist Economics, 12.1-2, pp. 1–50.
Deere, C. D., Alvarado, G. E., and Twyman, J. (2012). “Gender inequality in asset
        ownership in Latin America: female owners vs household heads.” Development
        and Change, 43.2, pp. 505–530.
Deininger, K., Goyal, A., and Nagarajan, H. (2010). “Inheritance law reform and women's
        access to capital: evidence from India's Hindu succession act.” World Bank Policy
        Research Working Paper No. 5338.
Doss, C. (2006). “The effects of intrahousehold property ownership on expenditure
        patterns in Ghana.” Journal of African Economies, 15.1, pp. 149–180.
Doss, C., Grown, C., and Deere, C.D. 2008. “Gender and asset ownership: a guide to
        collecting individual level data.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
        4704.


                                                                                         29
Doss, C., Deere, C. D., Suchitra J. Y., Oduro, A. D., and Hillesland, M. (2011) “Lessons
        from the field: implementing individual asset surveys in Ecuador, Ghana, India and
        Uganda.” Retrieved on May 8, 2017 from http://tinyurl.com/assetgap .
Doss, C., Meinzen-Dick, R., and Bomuhangi, A. (2013). “Who owns the land? perspectives
        from rural Ugandans and implications for large-scale land acquisitions.” Feminist
        Economics, 20.1, pp. 76–100.
Doss, C., Catanzarite, Z., Swaminathan, H., Baah-Boateng, W., Deere, C.D., Boakye-
        Yiadom, L., Suchitra J.Y., and Lahoti, R. (2016). “Do men and women estimate
        property values differently?” Paper presented at the Midwest International
        Economic Development Conference, Minneapolis, MN, May 6-7, 2016.
Doss, C. (2017, Forthcoming). “Women and agricultural productivity: Reframing the
        issues.” Development Policy Review.
Duflo, E. (2003). “Grandmothers and granddaughters: old-age pensions and intrahousehold
        allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review, 17.1, pp. 1–25.
Estudillo, J., Quisumbing, A., and Otsuka, K. (2001). “Gender differences in land
        inheritance, schooling and lifetime income: evidence from the rural Philippines.”
        Journal of Development Studies, 37.4, pp. 23–48.
FAO – UBOS Expert Consultation (2014). “Collecting sex disaggregated data on land
        ownership and management in agricultural censuses.” Retrieved on May 8, 2017
        from http://tinyurl.com/UBOSFAOReport.
Fisher, M., Reimer, J. J., and Carr, E. R. (2010). “Who should be interviewed in surveys
        of household income?” World Development, 38.7, pp. 966–973.
Goldstein, M., and Udry, C. (2008). “The profits of power: land rights and agricultural
        investment in Ghana.” Journal of Political Economy, 116.2, pp. 981-1022.
Grown, C., and Gupta, G.R. (2005). Taking action: achieving gender equality and the
        Millennium Development Goals. New York: Earthscan Publications.
Haddad, L., Hoddinott, J., and Alderman, H. (1997). Intrahousehold resource allocation
        in developing countries: models, methods, and policies. Baltimore, Maryland:
        Johns Hopkins University Press.
Jackson, C. (2003). “Gender analysis of land: beyond land rights for women?” Journal of
        Agrarian Change, 3.4, pp. 453–480.
Jacobs, K., and Kes, A. (2014). “The ambiguity of joint asset ownership: cautionary tales
        from Uganda and South Africa.” Feminist Economics, 21.3, pp. 23-55.
Janzen, S.A. (2017, Forthcoming). “Child labor measurement: Whom should we ask?”
        International Labour Review.
Johnson, N., Kovarik, C., Meinzen-Dick, R., Njuki, J., and Quisumbing, A. (2016).
        “Gender, assets, and agricultural development: lessons from eight projects.” World
        Development, 83, pp. 295-311.




                                                                                       30
Kilic, T., and Moylan, H. (2016). “Methodological experiment on measuring asset
       ownership from a gender perspective (MEXA) technical report.” Washington, DC:
       World Bank. Retrieved on May 8, 2017 from http://tinyurl.com/mexareport.
Kraay, A., and McKenzie, D. (2014). “Do poverty traps exist?” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 28.3, pp. 127–148.
McCarthy, N., and Kilic, T. (2017). “Stronger together: intra-household cooperation and
       household welfare in Malawi.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
       8043.
Meinzen-Dick, R., Johnson, N., Quisumbing, A., Njuki, J., Behrman, J., Rubin, D.,
       Peterman, A., and Waithanji, E. (2011). “Gender, assets, and agricultural
       development programs: a conceptual framework.” IFPRI CAPRi Working Paper
       No. 99.
Menon, N., Rodgers, Y., and Nguyen, H., (2014). “Women's land rights and children's
       human capital in Vietnam.” World Development, 54, pp. 18–31.
Palacios-Lopez, A., Christiansen, L., and Kilic, T. (2017). “How much of the labor in
       African agriculture is provided by women?” Food Policy, 67, pp. 52-63.
Quisumbing, A., Payongayong, E., Aidoo, J.B., and Otsuka, K. (2001). “Women's land
       rights in the transition to individualized ownership: implications for the
       management of tree resources in western Ghana.” Economic Development and
       Cultural Change, 50.1, pp. 157–182.
Quisumbing, A., and Maluccio, J. (2003). “Resources at marriage and intrahousehold
       allocation: evidence from Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Indonesia, and South Africa.”
       Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 65.3, pp. 283–327.
Quisumbing, A., Kumar, N., and Behrman, J. (2011). “Do shocks affect men’s and
       women’s assets differently? a review of literature and new evidence from
       Bangladesh and Uganda.” IFPRI Discussion Paper No. 1113.
Ruel, E., and Hauser, R. (2013).” Explaining the gender wealth gap.” Demography, 50.4.,
       pp. 1155–1176.
Schlager and Ostrom (1992). “Property rights regimes and natural resources: a conceptual
       analysis.” Land Economics, 68.3, pp. 249–262.
Slavchevska, V., De la O, A., Brunelli, C., and Doss, C. (2017). “Beyond Ownership:
       Women’s and Men’s Land Rights in sub-Saharan Africa.” Paper presented at the
       World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty, Washington, DC. March 2017.
Scoones, I. (1998). “Sustainable rural livelihoods: a framework for analysis.” Institute of
       Development Studies Working Paper No. 72.
Thomas, D. (1990). “Intrahousehold resource allocation in developing countries: An
       inferential approach.” Journal of Human Resources 25.4, pp. 635-64.
Twyman, U., Useche, P., and Deere, C. D. (2015). “Gendered perceptions of land
       ownership and agricultural decision-making in Ecuador: who are the farm
       managers?” Land Economics, 91.3, pp. 479-500.


                                                                                        31
United Nations Statistics (2009). System of national accounts. New York, NY: United
       Nations. Retrieved on May 8, 2017 from http://tinyurl.com/nataccounts.
Warren, T. (2006). “Moving beyond the gender wealth gap: on gender, class, ethnicity, and
       wealth inequalities in the UK.” Feminist Economics, 12.1-2, pp. 195- 219.
Women, Business and the Law (2016). Retrieved on May 8, 2017 from
       http://tinyurl.com/womenbusinesslaw.




                                                                                      32
                                                               Table 1. Description of Survey Questionnaires

Survey         Sample              Unit of analysis   Structure          Interviewee              Scope – which assets?     Definition of           Distinguishes   Value
                                                                                                                            ownership               joint and
                                                                                                                                                    individual
Gender Asset   Representative      Asset, with        Household asset    Primary man and          Dwelling;                 Reported,               Yes             Yes
Gap Project    at national level   individual ID      roster and         woman in each            Agricultural Land;        Documented, (as
               for Ghana and       codes so can       individual         household                Livestock;                applicable)
               Ecuador, and        assign             questionnaire                               Agricultural Equipment;   Additional questions
               state level for     individual                                                     Other Real Estate; Non-   on rights over assets
               Karnataka, India    ownership to                                                   Farm Enterprises;         in Ghana and
                                   household                                                      Financial Assets;         Karnataka..
                                   members                                                        Consumer Durables;

MEXA           National sample     Asset, with        Arm 1-Arm 3:       Arm 1: Self-Identified   Dwelling;                 Reported,               Yes             Yes
               of 2,027            individual ID      One asset roster   Most Knowledgeable       Agricultural Land;        Documented (as
               households,         codes so can       created in each    Household Member         Livestock;                applicable),
               distributed         assign             asset domain       Arm 2: Randomly          Agricultural Equipment;   Economic
               across 140          individual         Arms 4-5:          Selected Member of the   Non-Agricultural Land
               enumeration         ownership to       Independent        Principal Couple         and Real Estate; Non-
               areas               household          asset rosters      Arm 2: Members of the    Farm Enterprises;
                                   members            created by each    Principal Couple         Financial Accounts;
                                                      interviewee in     (Together)               Consumer Durables;
                                                      each asset         Arms 4-5: Up to 4        Valuables.
                                                      domain             adult household
                                                                         members (alone,
                                                                         simultaneous)
Gender,        Varied across       Usually            Varies
Agriculture,   projects            individual
and Assets
Project
WEAI           Representative      Individuals        Module of larger   Principle man and        Productive assets         Reported                Asks who        No
               of USAID Feed                          survey;            woman in the                                                               owns most of
               the Future                             questions asked    household                                                                  each asset
               Zones of                               to individuals                                                                                type; codes
               Influence in 19                                                                                                                      include
               countries                                                                                                                            individual
                                                                                                                                                    and joint
                                                                                                                                                    options




                                                                                                                                                                         33
                                                                           Table 1 (Cont’d)
Demographic   Nationally          Individuals     Questions          Woman age 15-49;         Land and housing        Reported             Asks if they     No
and Health    representative in                   including in       some countries                                                        own any,
Surveys       over 90                             larger survey      interview men of                                                      individually,
              countries                                              similar age; Man of                                                   jointly, both,
                                                                     similar age.                                                          or neither
World         Nationally          Agricultural    Census             Holder                   Land, livestock         Holder of land,                       No
Programme     representative in   holdings        questionnaire                                                       owner of livestock
for the       many countries
Census of
Agriculture
LSMS-ISA      8 Countries in      Asset                              Dwelling: Most           Dwelling,               Reported,            Yes
              Africa,             With unique                        knowledgeable            Agricultural Land;      Documented (as
              nationally          individual ID                      household member         Livestock;              applicable)
              representative      codes so can                       Agricultural Land:       Non-Farm Enterprises;
                                  assign                             Manager for each plot    Consumer Durables
                                  individual                         or holder                (selected surveys).
                                  ownership to                       Livestock:
                                  household                          Manager for each
                                  members                            livestock type or most
                                                                     knowledgeable
                                                                     household member
                                                                     Non-Farm
                                                                     Enterprises: Manager
                                                                     for each enterprise
                                                                     Consumer Durables:
                                                                     Most knowledgeable
                                                                     household member
Global        Nationally          Individuals     Individual level   Sampled respondent       Financial assets        Ownership            Doesn’t          No
FINDEX        representative of                   survey                                                                                   distinguish
              140+ countries                                                                                                               between
                                                                                                                                           individual
                                                                                                                                           and joint




                                                                                                                                                                 34
       Table 2: Module-Specific Incidence of Proxy Respondent Use for Data Collection on Individuals 18 Years & Older in Selected LSMS-ISA Countries, By Gender
        Source of                              Education                                         Health                                       Labor
Country Individual-Level       Overall            Male         Female           Overall           Male          Female          Overall        Male           Female
        Information        Obs Percent Obs Percent Obs Percent Obs Percent Obs Percent Obs Percent Obs Percent Obs Percent Obs Percent
        Proxy              3,412      47     1,907    55   1,505     41     3,392     47     1,905    55    1,487    40     3,354     47  1,892    54     1,462    39
Malawi
        Self               3,797      53     1,589    45   2,208     59     3,813     53     1,588    45    2,225    60     3,852     53  1,600    46     2,252    61

           Proxy             13,062     75    5,002     60    8,060     89    13,151     75     5,056    61    8,095   89    12,961   74   4965    59   7996    88
Mali
           Self               4,382     25    3,344     40    1,038     11     4,293     25     3,290    39    1,003   11    4,483    26   3381    41   1102    12

           Proxy              5,447     50    2,280     44    3,167     55     5,548     51     2,331    45    3,217   56    5,294    49   2201    43   3093    54
Niger
           Self               5,440     50    2,865     56    2,575     45     5,339     49     2,814    55    2,525   44    5,593    51   2944    57   2649    46

           Proxy              8,526     52    3,482     45    5,045     58     N/A      N/A     N/A     N/A    N/A     N/A   8,616    53   3569    46   5048    58
Nigeria
           Self               7,834     48    4,238     55    3,596     42     N/A      N/A     N/A     N/A    N/A     N/A   7,744    47   4151    54   3593    42

           Proxy              N/A      N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A    2,865      22     1,721    28    1,144   17    2,835    22   1,707   27   1,128   16
Tanzania
           Self               N/A      N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A    10,249     78     4,530    72    5,719   83    10,275   78   4,543   73   5,732   84

          Proxy              3,481     49     1,951      58     1,530      41     3,610     50   2,008    59   1,602   42    3,489    49   1,938   58   1,551   42
Uganda
          Self               3,654     51     1,409      42     2,245      59     3,628     50   1,408    41   2,220   58    3,561    51   1,387   42   2,174   58
Note: The most recent round for survey data that is publically available is used for each LSMS-ISA country.




                                                                                                                                                                     35
