                                                     WPS8230


Policy Research Working Paper                       8230




          Marital Trajectories and Women’s
               Well-Being in Senegal
                              Sylvie Lambert
                           Dominique van de Walle
                               Paola Villar




Development Research Group
Human Development and Public Services Team
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8230


  Abstract
  Divorce and widowhood succeeded by remarriage are                                 divorce and widowhood as well as subsequent remarriage
  common for women in Africa. A key question is how such                            is documented. Poorer women are more vulnerable to dis-
  discontinuous marital trajectories affect women’s well-be-                        solutions and remarriage and hence bear more of the costs
  ing. Women’s marital trajectories in Senegal are described                        while being nevertheless afforded a safety net in the form
  and correlated with measures of voice, resource constraints,                      of a male protector. Marital breakdowns and their after-
  and consumption welfare. Considerable selection into                              maths have far from neutral effects on women’s well-being.




  This paper is a product of the Human Development and Public Services Team, Development Research Group. It is part
  of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at dvandewalle@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
  Marital Trajectories and Women’s Well-Being in
                       Senegal



      Sylvie Lambert, Dominique van de Walle and Paola Villar1




JEL Codes J12; I31; J16.
Key words: Marital dissolution, Widowhood, Divorce, Welfare, Gender, Senegal, sub-Saharan
Africa.



1
  This paper is here reproduced with some revisions with acknowledgement of UNU-WIDER in Helsinki which
commissioned the original study and holds copyright thereon. Lambert and Villar are at the Paris School of
Economics, Paris, France and van de Walle is with the World Bank in Washington, USA. The authors are grateful
to Cait Brown for help with the DHS, to Ariel Gruver for excellent research assistance and to the World Bank’s
Knowledge for Change Trust Fund for its funding support. We thank two anonymous referees, Jean-Philippe
Platteau and the participants at the University of Namur Gender and Development workshop in February 2017 for
useful comments. These are the views of the authors and need not reflect those of the World Bank and its
affiliated organizations. Corresponding author: Dominique van de Walle, 1818 H St. NW, Washington, DC,
20433; dvandewalle@worldbank.org
1.       Introduction
         Marital trajectories in Senegal are often discontinuous. Divorce is frequent and
widowhood is a common predicament for women, due in particular to the fact that women
marry older men. In 2006/2007, spousal age gaps (male age minus female) averaged 11.2 in
urban and 12.9 in rural areas. At the same date, around 18.5% of ever married adult women
were currently widows or had remarried after widowhood and 13.2% were currently divorced
or remarried following a divorce.2 Women confronted with divorce or widowhood most often
remarry, and may well face one, or more, further marriage dissolutions during their lives.
Remarriage appears to take place relatively rapidly: the median duration between widowhood
and remarriage among those who remarry is one year. For those who are divorced it is two
years.
         Given how common these broken trajectories are, it is of interest to ask how they affect
women’s well-being. Work by economists on marital dissolution in low-income countries is
relatively sparse and hardly exists for the African context, particularly with respect to divorce.
There has been a bit more attention to widowhood, often indirectly through the study of female
headed households (Appleton 1996 (Uganda); Chapoto et al. 2011 (Zambia); Horrell and
Krishnan 2007 (Zimbabwe); and van de Walle 2013 (Mali)). Other social sciences provide the
core of our knowledge in this domain for Africa. As divorces are sometimes instigated by
women, they are likely not to be universally detrimental to women’s welfare. In fact, it has
been suggested that early divorces may be a means for women both to escape family authority,
and to climb the social ladder.3 Indeed, first and usually early, marriages are often arranged
with attending benefits to both families and may be experienced as a constraint from which one
can be freed through divorce. Once divorced, given the lower stakes in terms of bride price for
divorcees, women have more room for choosing their next partner (Dial 2008; Hertrich 1994;
Locoh and Thiriat 1995; Yade 2007).4 In contrast, widowhood, ensuing from adverse
circumstances rather than choice, is universally seen as unfavorable to a woman’s situation
(Locoh and Thiriat 1995).
         Based on conversations with women, numerous anecdotes in the press, and the
literature on the consequences of divorce and widowhood in OECD countries (Amato 2000;
Sevak et al. 2003), one may expect to find negative consequences associated with all types of

2 The statistics given here are based on PSF1 data (described below).
3 Recently, more economists are showing an interest in the links between divorce and social mobility
(Cherchye et al. 2016).
4 In our data, the average bride price paid for marrying a divorcee is about half that paid for a woman in

her first marriage.


                                                     2
dissolution. These may or may not be tempered by remarriage so that the effects may be
lasting. In unstructured, open-ended qualitative interviews conducted by two of the authors in
Senegal in 2012, one of the dominant messages was that women who have the option not to
remarry seized it eagerly.5 Such women tend to talk about married life as an ordeal they are
happy to be in the position to avoid. Echoed in the interviews were general preferences for
non-co-residing husbands and/or mothers in law.
        To date, there have been few studies of divorce or widowhood in Senegal. Antoine and
Dial (2003) and Dial (2008) focus on a small selected sample of women with complex marital
trajectories in Dakar only.6 Another study using fertility surveys that estimated that 17% of all
unions dissolve within the first 5 years is likely to be out of date (Smith et al. 1984).7 The
2015 World Marriage Data reveal that percentages of divorced (or separated) and non-
remarried women in the population have been increasing slightly since the mid-1980s for all
but those below age 30. Rates were between 2% and 3% for ages 30 to 55 until the most recent
period when they seem to have risen more for women over 40 than for younger ones. Current
divorcees account for about 7% of women in the 45-55 age range and only 4% of those
between ages 30 and 40 according to the 2014 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) (Table
A1). Given that the data do not record divorced and remarried women, this increase could be
due to decreasing remarriage rates at older ages, either because age makes non-remarriage
more socially acceptable nowadays or because it makes remarriage more difficult. For women
aged 40-50 the percentage of non-remarried widows was higher than that for divorcees until
the beginning of the 2000s. This has changed in recent years as the percentage of widows has
remained fairly stable while that of divorced women has increased. The 2014 DHS indicates
that the percentage of non-remarried widows is higher than that of divorcees only above age 50
when it reaches 12.5% (Table A2).
        To our knowledge, this study is the first to directly examine the relationship between
marriage dissolution and women’s well-being in Senegal. We focus on women because, as a
result of large spousal age gaps, and the widespread practice of polygamy, ever-married men
rarely, and then only temporarily, find themselves in a non-married state. In fact, although the
share of ever-married men who are currently divorced is similar to that for women (2.5% for




5
  Interviews transcribed in Lambert and van de Walle (2012).
6
  Findings in Antoine and Dial (2003) that one-third of marriages end in divorce and that for the youngest
generation, 25% of divorces occur within 7 years of marriage are likely to be highly specific to their sample.
7
  The survey used was part of the World Fertility Surveys.


                                                         3
men and close to 3% for women), many fewer men than women are currently widowers (1.3%
of ever married-men versus 13.6% of ever-married women).
       The paper uses recent nationally representative data from a new household survey and
data from DHSs to document Senegalese women’s marital trajectories. We describe a simple
framework to help clarify the potential trade-offs faced by women considering remarriage.
This provides a schematic description of the channels through which marital dissolution and
remarriage may affect women’s well-being. We then turn to the data to examine selection into
marital statuses, and how different marital trajectories correlate with current consumption
levels and other individual dimensions of welfare.
       The paper finds that marital breakdowns and their aftermath are far from neutral in
terms of women’s well-being. Poorer women are found to be more vulnerable to both
dissolutions and remarriage, and hence to bear more of the costs while being nevertheless
afforded a safety net in the form of a male protector following marriage dissolution.
       Naturally, the form a woman’s marital trajectory takes is the result of myriad influences
including her family and individual characteristics, social norms and chance, as well as the
legal and economic setting. Selection and endogeneity are rife in women’s life courses. While
the evidence is compatible with our expectations, we acknowledge that the paper does not
establish beyond doubt a one-directional causality between marital status (and its trajectories)
and welfare.
       Using an individualized measure of consumption and the marital status-specific
parameters estimated from a consumption model, we simulate counterfactual consumption
levels for women with different marital trajectories but otherwise identical characteristics. A
subsequent decomposition analysis, which allows us to isolate the consumption impacts of
remarriage, points to the persistent vulnerability of widows. In addition, the findings suggest
that the safety net provided by remarriage is least effective in ensuring consumption levels for
the most vulnerable widows who tend to remarry in leviratic marriages. We suspect such
widows were left no choice but to remarry given their need for economic support, and that, as
suggested by the data, many were constrained to remain within their late husband’s lineage due
to the presence of young (male) children. For their part, divorcees suffer from smaller
consumption losses relative to women in their first union, and do not fare differently by
whether they remarry or not. Furthermore, individual characteristics that affect the quality of
their marriages seem to matter in the same way for their second marriage.
       The paper begins in Section 2 with some background on the legal and institutional
context for marriage in Senegal. Section 3 follows with a brief description of our data. Section

                                                4
4 provides descriptive statistics on marital status and marriage trajectories. We examine
selection issues in Section 5 and associations between marital status and women’s welfare in
Section 6. A final section concludes.


2.      Marriage dissolution in Senegal
        Colonial legislators attempted to minimize social tensions by establishing a variety of
coexisting legal statuses with respect to family law, and more generally the civil code (decree
of November 10, 1903). The Senegalese people could either comply with the rules of a general
statute (similar to French law), or elect to fall under the prescriptions of Islamic, Animist or
Christian statutes according to their beliefs (Brossier 2004; Yade 2007).8 Nonetheless, a
modern-day divorce law that gave women the right to secure a divorce was also introduced at
the time. This was a major step forward for women who, until then, depended on their
husband’s agreement to be freed from matrimonial ties (Yade 2007). However, a wife seeking
a divorce could be asked by the judge to reimburse what she and her family had received from
the husband at marriage.
        In 1972, more than 10 years after independence, a new set of family laws was
approved. It aimed to unify the various statutes present under colonial rule. Two sources of
differentiation remain that are of primary interest for our purposes as they have consequences
for divorcees and widows. In addition to providing dispositions for civil marriages, the law
allows for Islamic and customary marriages performed in front of witnesses to be registered
ex-post in the civil register. Furthermore, the Family Code contains two chapters dedicated to
inheritance rights, one for the general case and one specific to the Muslim population, which
constitutes 95% of Senegal’s population.
        Marriages recorded in the civil register can be ended by divorce. Divorce is a
mandatory step for women who wish to remarry. The judge decides on the custody of children
according to their best interest. In principle, the husband can be required to provide for the
subsistence of his ex-wife.
        Nevertheless, a majority of religious or customary marriages are never officially
registered, and in such cases, customary practices apply in the case of repudiation or divorce,




8
  Note that Islam was already the religion of the majority of the population at the end of the 19th century and that
animism is perfectly compatible with both monotheist religions present in the country. The type of Islam practiced
in Senegal is in fact tinted by animist traditions.


                                                         5
without any available legal recourse for either party.9 Islamic law is not very favorable to
women in general, but as pointed out by Bowen (2017), what matters, and what differs vastly
across countries, is its implementation. In Senegal, repudiation is officially prohibited but
appears to remain fairly common de facto (Dial 2008). For divorce under customary law, the
situation is very asymmetric between husband and wife. A man only needs two adult witnesses
to repudiate his wife, while a woman can only ask for a separation with the final decision up to
others. In such cases, the choice over child custody rests with the father. He can keep the
children (once weaned) if he cares to. Interviews with divorced mothers of young children
show in a striking way the level of apprehension associated with the risk of losing their
children at any moment, upon the father’s decision.10 Whether the husband contributes to child
support when offspring remain with their mother is entirely at his discretion. In the case of an
early divorce (approximately within two years of marriage) initiated by the wife, her family
can be asked to reimburse the bride price. Nevertheless, we find no qualitative evidence of this
actually taking place. At any rate, our data suggest that the existence of such a threat does not
prevent rapid divorces (see Section 4). Riviere (1990) and Locoh and Thiriat (1995) argue that
divorce in West Africa is mostly initiated by women.
         In the case of widowhood, no official support systems exist other than when the late
husband was a public servant (or possibly an employee of one of a few large formal sector
firms, such as the electricity provider). The civil service allocates a pension to widows equal to
a third of the late husband’s wage, to be shared among co-wives if the husband was
polygamous. Nor can a widow systematically count on inheriting from her husband. Although
the statutory Family Code states that wives must inherit a share equal to that of the children,
inheritance practices under Islamic and customary patrilineal laws only allocate one-eighth of
the total bequest to the widow, to be shared among co-wives in the case of polygamy. In
practice, and particularly in the many cases where inheritance is mainly illiquid (a house for
example), wives are excluded from a bequest following their husband’s death; the inheritance
is shared among the husband's children, with sons inheriting more, and more frequently, than
daughters (Lambert et al. 2014). A widow can remarry outside her late husband’s lineage or in
a leviratic marriage, in which she marries one of his relatives, most often a brother. This
arrangement allows her to stay with the children if the paternal lineage wants to keep them.


9
   In our data, 20% of marriages are declared as “civil” or “religious and civil”. The remaining 80% are declared as
“religious” only. This is likely to overestimate the number of unregistered marriages, but is nevertheless indicative
of a low level of formalization.
10
    See Lambert and van de Walle (2012).


                                                         6
Widowed women who have the option also frequently go to live with a son. Those who have
sufficient means to support themselves, usually because they have independent access to
housing, often choose not to remarry, an option aided by having grown sons (Lambert and
Rossi 2016).


3.      Data
        The main data source is the first wave of the survey "Poverty and Family Structure"
(PSF, by its French acronym) conducted in Senegal in 2006-2007 and 2011 (De Vreyer et al.
2008).11 The first wave (PSF1) provides a nationally representative sample of 1,800
households spread over 150 primary sampling units drawn randomly among census districts.
About 1,750 records can be exploited. Households have unusually complex structures in
Senegal (Bongaarts 2001; van de Walle and Gaye 2006). What we will refer to as a household
is often a series of families related in some way and living together in a compound organized
under one head and taking their meals together.
        In addition to the usual information on individual characteristics, the PSF survey
collected detailed information on marital trajectories. Age at first marriage and the number of
previous unions are recorded for each individual. The circumstances (divorce or widowhood)
of the last dissolution are known, as well as some characteristics of the previous spouse.
        A further aspect of the survey that is particularly important for our purposes is that it
collected detail on the structure and budgetary arrangements of each household. To best reflect
intra-household structure and resource allocation, households were divided into groups or
“cells” according to the following rules: the head of household and unaccompanied dependent
members, such as his widowed parent or his children whose mothers do not live in the same
household, are grouped together. This is in the same spirit as the procedure used for the
Senegalese census of 1988 (van de Walle and Gaye 2006). Any unmarried brothers of the head
would also be considered part of his cell. Each wife of the head and her children and any other
dependents then form separate cells. Other women with children or other dependents, whose
husbands are not present, are also considered cell heads. The same goes for any other family
nucleus such as a married child of the household head with his/her spouse and children, or a
sister of the head residing in the household with her children (typically post-divorce or while


11
  Momar Sylla and Matar Gueye of the Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la Démographie of Senegal
(ANSD), and Philippe De Vreyer (University of Paris-Dauphine and IRD-DIAL), Sylvie Lambert (Paris School of
Economics-INRA) and Abla Safir (now with the World Bank) designed the survey. The data collection was
conducted by the ANSD.


                                                    7
her husband looks for a job). This disaggregation emerged from field interviews as being the
most relevant way to split the household into its component groups.
       Consumption expenditures are recorded in several parts: first all common expenditures
are collected (housing, electricity bills, food, etc.). Food expenditures are compiled based on a
detailed account of who shares which meal and how much money is specifically used to
prepare the meal. These are the “DQ” or “dépenses quotidiennes” ─ the name the Senegalese
give to the amount of money a woman has at her disposal to buy fresh ingredients for the
meals of the day. Next, individual consumption is collected at the cell level (e.g. expenditures
on clothing, mobile phones, transportation, and food outside the home). Finally, expenditures
that are shared between several cells but not the whole household are collected.
       A measure of per capita consumption can then be constructed at the cell level allowing
us to identify unequal consumption levels within households. Subgroups also emerge that take
some or all of their meals separately (in 17% of households), thus widening the possibility for
differences in nutritional intake among household members. The data allow us to construct a
relatively individualized measure of consumption that we use to assess women’s individual
economic welfare.
       The analysis presented in this paper is mainly based on the sample of ever married adult
women (15 years of age and older), without age limit, from the 2006 PSF1 database. This
sample is presented by marital status in Table 1.
       A second source of data is the DHSs of 2005 and 2010 which we draw on for
comparison purposes and to complement the analysis using PSF. Specifically, the DHSs
assemble information on aspects of women’s well-being, decision making and resource
constraints that are not represented in PSF.


4.     Marital status in Senegal
       Given the complexity of marital trajectories, computing divorce and widowhood rates
from cross-sectional data is complicated, even when surveys contain recall of past marital
history data. As noted in the Introduction, PSF1 identifies 18.5% of ever married women aged
15 and older as ever-widowed. As can be seen in Table 1, the rates are similar in urban and
rural areas. Regarding divorces, the overall average of 13.2% hides a higher incidence in urban
(16.7%) than in rural areas (10%). However, these numbers are a lower bound on the share of
women who experience either widowhood or divorce. Nearly 7% of ever-married women have
had more than one dissolution. We have no information on how the union that preceded the



                                                8
last dissolution ended. If we assume that all women with more than one rupture and whose last
breakup occurred because of a divorce had previously been widowed, this would give us an
upper bound of 21.5% of ever-married women who have experienced widowhood at least
once. Conversely, if we assume that the previous dissolution of those identified as having been
widowed was a divorce, the estimated upper bound to the proportion of women having
suffered a divorce would be 17.3%.
           By comparison, the 2010 DHS for Senegal identifies 9.2% of all women aged 15 and
older as widows (9.0% in urban and 9.3% in rural), and 1.1% for those in the 15-49 age group.
However, because of Senegal’s high remarriage rates, these DHS statistics vastly
underestimate the incidence of widowhood within a typical woman’s lifespan. Looking instead
at the 2005 DHS which collected more detailed information on marital history (albeit only for
the 15-49 age group), 3.6% and 4.6% of women are ever-widowed in urban and rural areas
respectively, reflecting rates of 2.1% and 3.8% remarried widows among women aged 15-49.
There are far more ever-divorced women. The 2005 DHS identifies 13.1% of all women aged
15-49 as married but previously divorced, while it finds that 5.4% are currently divorced.12
These numbers are in line with the PSF1 estimates, although PSF1 counts relatively more
widows (6.7% of widows or remarried widows in the 15-49 age group) and fewer divorcees
whether remarried or not (14.1% in total in that age group).
           A notable fact is that most women who divorce eventually remarry, although fewer
widows do so. Indeed, according to PSF1, 59% of divorcees and 26% of widowed women
remarry. A majority remarry polygamous husbands (47% and 72%, respectively, compared to
36% of first married women). Half of the remarried widows are remarried within a leviratic
union, among them 83% in a polygamous union.
           Using the latest DHSs for a number of countries for which details on marital histories
were collected, Senegal’s characteristically high remarriage rate following divorce appears to
be shared with other West African countries (Table 2). In countries in the southern and eastern
parts of the subcontinent, divorce rates are higher, but a much larger share of divorcees remain
unmarried. Finally, countries in Central Africa have by far the highest divorce rates, with up to
one-third of women having been divorced at some point in their lives in Gabon, and about half
of them remarried. Table 2 shows that patterns of widowhood rates and remarriage are more
equal across the continent; indeed, about 6% of all women aged 15-49 have been widowed and
in most countries, nearly half are remarried. There are a few outliers, in particular those most


12
     Note that separated women are included in the same category as divorced.


                                                         9
affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic (such as Lesotho, Swaziland and Zimbabwe) where the
widowhood rate is considerably higher and the share of remarried widows lower.
        There is naturally a strong positive age gradient in the likelihood of being widowed.
The top panels of Figures 1 and 2 display the gradient by age and by marriage duration in
PSF1, respectively. In Figure 1, we graph the proportion of all women of a given age (with no
more than a single marital dissolution) who are ever-widowed. As expected, the share of
widowed women steadily rises and at an increasing rate to reach close to 40% of women aged
50-70 and almost 80% of those aged 70 and older. In Figure 2, the y-axis gives the widowhood
rate for a given marriage duration, among marriages that survived for at least that period of
time.
        The bottom panels of these figures show the equivalent computations for divorce rates.
Here, the age patterns show a peak around the age of 40. However, divorce rates by marriage
duration make it clear that those most at risk are recent marriages, since the rate of divorce is
highest in the first five years of marriage.13 This is driven by divorce in urban areas, where the
divorce rate among recent marriages is more than twice as high as in rural areas, reaching an
average of 1.4% per annum during the first five years (against 0.6% in rural areas). One-
quarter of divorces happen within the first three years of marriage, while the median duration
of marriages that ended with a divorce is 7.5 years. Divorces happen more rapidly for the
younger generation, as the first quartile of the distribution of marriage duration is only two
years for women under 40 against six years for women older than 40 (the corresponding
medians are 5 and 14 years).These findings correspond well to the idea that some young
women divorce to escape arranged marriages, while others, who may have impetuously
engaged in a love marriage, tend to divorce quickly when disappointed with their husband, for
example if he tries to limit their autonomy and prevent them from working or finishing their
studies, as suggested by qualitative interviews.
        After 10 years of marriage, a high 8% of unions have ended in divorce (Figure 3).
Decomposing the sample into two cohorts (those aged below and above 40), as done in the first
panel of Figure 4, reveals that the incidence of divorce has increased over time. In the second
panel, it can be seen that this trend is even steeper in Dakar. In contrast, the rate of widowhood
does not appear to have changed over time. The corresponding graphs (not shown) for two
cohorts, whether split around the age of 40 or 60, are indistinguishable.



13
   These results echo findings from the sparse literature (Antoine and Dial 2003; Locoh and Thiriat 1995; Smith et
al. 1984).


                                                       10
        Finally, to give a sense of overall marriage instability, it is informative to look at union
survival rates by women’s ages. Among ever-married women, more than one-quarter have
been through one marriage dissolution by age 45 (Figure 5).14
        Ever-widowed and ever-divorced women tend to differ primarily in two dimensions:
ever-divorced women are more often urban dwellers and they are three times more likely to
have ever been to a French school. This is perhaps not surprising as these characteristics permit
a greater autonomy and are likely to facilitate divorce. In addition, for demographic reasons
and because divorcees remarry more often than widows, widows are older, have more living
children and are more often heads of their households (Table 3).


5.      Determinants of current marital status
        We expect women to face various trade-offs upon marriage dissolution. Widowhood
can be seen as a negative shock. In contrast, divorce, since it can be initiated either by the
husband or the woman herself, may be anticipated, and hence, a positive or negative
development for a woman.15
        When discussing remarriage, women emphasize the importance of consumption levels,
autonomy and the degree of social pressure to be married.16 Autonomy (or bargaining power)
is linked to a woman’s position in the household: for example, a household head is more
autonomous than the spouse of the head, or than wives of higher rank in a polygamous
marriage. The benefits of independence and of not having to take care of a husband were
clearly expressed in most of the interviews we conducted, as was the preference for a
monogamous rather than a polygamous union. One’s position in the household also affects
bargaining power and therefore, the share of household resources one can benefit from. Thus,
the level of consumption accruing to a woman depends on both the household’s average
consumption levels and the woman’s bargaining power. Finally, social pressure to remarry is
mainly driven by age, and for widows, the gender of the progeny. Social norms make it largely
unacceptable for a woman of childbearing age to remain unmarried. Living with an adult son
may alleviate some of this pressure. On the other hand, having a young son can render a
leviratic union unavoidable for a widow if the paternal lineage insists on keeping the child.


14
   This number is comparable to the French case (29% of highly educated and 23% of less educated women have
experienced one marital dissolution before age 45, 1999 data) (Lefèvre and Filhon 2005).
15
   We interviewed both women who themselves chose divorce, and others claiming to have been surprised when
their husband repudiated them. The latter were generally badly off (Lambert and van de Walle 2012).
16
   Note that this ignores other dimensions of welfare often associated with widowhood and divorce, including
bereavement, emotional loss, and changes in social status and identity.


                                                     11
       We expect to see two types of widows remarrying: those for whom the social pressure
is simply too costly (young ones), and those for whom the decline in consumption associated
with the first husband’s death is overly large. The first could well experience a considerable
consumption cost, particularly if constrained to remarry in a given lineage and therefore
deprived of the possibility of a more advantageous match. In contrast, even if their situation
worsens relative to their first marriage, impoverished widows may limit the consumption shock
through remarriage.
       For divorcees, the main difference is that remarriage possibilities may be anticipated.
It is likely that women who chose to divorce foresee either a sufficient income on their own
and a bearable level of social pressure, or relatively good remarriage options. We expect the
most educated and urban women to more often remain on their own, and those without such
assets to more often remarry. Given self-selection, it is a priori unclear whether divorcees will
on average be better off when remarried or not. Repudiated wives, on the other hand, may
suffer greater consumption losses and huge social pressure. They are likely to remarry but
remarriage may not fully compensate in terms of living standards.
       Following on these remarks, we now turn to the data to investigate potential selection
not only into widowhood and divorce but also into remarriage, an issue not previously
identified in the literature. We have argued that there is a strong presumption of differential
selection into marital status. We try to dig deeper into the determinants of being in one status
or another. Trajectories are decomposed into several successive steps. We first discuss the
individual-level correlates of widowhood and divorce, followed by those associated with
remarriage, and finally those that correlate with various aspects of marriage quality.


5.1    Selection into widowhood and divorce
       Tables 4 and 5 show how the probabilities of widowhood and divorce, and of
remarriage, are correlated with women’s individual characteristics. Older women
understandably have a higher probability of widowhood (Table 4). Age is also significantly
associated with divorce, although in a less pronounced way. Characteristics typically
associated with higher standards of living are negatively correlated with becoming a widow;
this is true for both the socioeconomic category of the deceased husband (men employed in the
formal or public sector are more likely to survive) and for the wife’s own level of education.
This strongly suggests that widows are selected among relatively poorer women as has been




                                                12
found elsewhere.17 In Senegal, this may reflect the negative correlation between income and
life expectancy which has been well-documented worldwide (see, for example, Feinstein
1993), or the lower quality of the sanitary environment and access to health care of poor
households. Furthermore, we also observe a greater spousal age gap in poorer households,
mechanically increasing the probability of widowhood for poorer women. Nevertheless, there
is also a surprising negative correlation between rural residence at the time of dissolution and
widowhood.
        With respect to selection into divorce, the story is somewhat different. This is expected
as, unlike with widowhood, divorce results from the choice of at least one spouse. A husband’s
positive characteristics are associated with a lower probability of divorce, while a wife’s
positive characteristics (education) are positively correlated with divorce. Furthermore, urban
areas see more divorces. This suggests that women who have the means (social as well as
economic) to exercise their independence are more likely to be divorced, probably often at
their own initiative. That said, women appear to be less willing to divorce men with desirable
economic situations.


5.2     Selection into remarriage
        Table 5 presents the correlates of remarriage following a dissolution, while Table A3
presents the rural urban decomposition of those estimates. Age at dissolution is the strongest
correlate of remarriage for both divorcees and widows. Indeed, if the dissolution happens
before the age of 25, the probability of remarriage is 1.8 times higher for widows and increases
by more than 60% for divorcees, relative to the situation in which the dissolution happens after
age 40. Women with more traditional backgrounds are more likely to remarry (in particular
after widowhood): this holds for rural dwellers, daughters of polygamous men, and women
who were fostered in childhood. There may be different reasons for the latter two correlations,
from a larger kin network to a better acceptance of polygamy. Irrespective of the age at
dissolution, a polygamous husband awaits three-quarters of women who remarry following
widowhood, and half of those who do so after divorce. Conversely, educated women, who are
more likely to be divorced, are also more likely not to remarry following divorce (this is driven
by urban divorcees). Finally, having a son from the previous union is correlated with lower



17  For example, on the basis of longitudinal data on health and retirement for the U.S., it has been shown that,
allowing for the fact that poorer men are more likely than other men to die young, widows, and particularly young
ones, are more likely to come from poorer households (Hurd and Wise 1989, Sevak et al. 2003).


                                                       13
remarriage for divorcees (a result driven by rural women).18 Various channels may explain this
correlation. On the one hand, for divorcees, having a grown-up son has a positive impact on
consumption level (see table 15), suggesting the possibility of material support that makes
remarriage less necessary. On the other hand, it may be more difficult to retain custody of a
son after remarriage. Finally, women who do not yet have a son, may feel the urge to remarry
to maximize their chances of ever bearing one. Conversely, widows without children from the
late husband are less likely to remarry, probably because levirate marriage is less of an option
for them. As shown in Table 6, levirate unions are prevalent mainly in rural areas. Among
widows who remarry, having a son from the previous union is strongly associated with
remarrying into the deceased husband’s family (levirate). Here again, women’s education is
associated with a somewhat lower probability of this traditional practice.


5.3       Remarriage quality
          Correlations observed in the DHS data between marital characteristics and women’s
autonomy (see Table A5) suggest that a “good” marriage is a monogamous one, without
cohabitation with the in-laws and/or the husband. We therefore investigate the correlates of
such “good” quality remarriage for remarried women in Tables 7 and 8, respectively for
widows and divorcees, recalling that widows are more likely to remarry as higher ranked wives
in polygamous unions. In addition, a civil marriage (for the protection it provides), a husband
working in the formal sector, and the possibility of living with one’s children from the
previous union seem to be other desirable characteristics. Correlations with the latter
characteristics are presented in Tables 9 and 10.
          A late dissolution is associated with a lower probability of cohabitation, in particular,
when the woman has passed child-bearing age, and especially so for ex-widows (Tables 7 and
8). At the same time, it is related to a higher likelihood of remarriage in a polygamous union.
Widows with children from a previous union are less likely to cohabit and even less so for
those with a son at the time of dissolution.
          Divorcees who have been to a French school and who were fostered before age 15 (two
correlated characteristics) appear better able to avoid polygamy; yet having been brought up
with a polygamous father increases the likelihood of marrying into a polygamous union,
maybe because it facilitates acceptance of this type of marriage.




18
     See Table A3.


                                                  14
       Having been to a French school, having been fostered in childhood and having had a
monogamous father all correlate with marrying a husband with a formal sector job, and more
so for widows than for divorcees. Finally, living in a rural area at the time of dissolution is
unfavorable as it reduces access to husbands with formal jobs and increases the likelihood of
polygamy.
       Living in a rural area is associated with other negative outcomes (Tables 9 and 10):
divorcees in rural areas are less likely to have a civil contract for their marriages (this is true
for widows as well); they are more likely to live with their in-laws, and are more at risk of not
living with children from their previous union. Having a son from the previous union is
positively correlated with the probability of living with children from the previous union after
remarriage.
       Interestingly, when we compare these results with the correlates of marriage quality in
these various dimensions for women in their first marriage, it appears that a woman’s
education is associated with protection against polygamy and a higher probability of a civil
marriage in the same way for them and for divorcees when they remarry. Conversely, it does
not go hand-in-hand with such a protective role for widows upon remarriage (see Table A4 for
women in their first marriage).
        Finally, we examine whether a new marriage is associated with social mobility
through the relative characteristics of ex- and current husbands. Concentrating on women
whose first marriage was with a man working in the informal sector, we look at the correlates
of a second husband working in the formal sector. Table 11 shows that the chances of marrying
‘upwards’ are higher for women whose ruptures occurred relatively late (after age 40) and who
have some formal education. There are insufficient observations for women first married to
men with formal sector jobs to explore the correlates of downward mobility.


6.     Differences in welfare levels
       To investigate associations between marital status and women’s welfare, we first turn to
some non-monetary individual welfare indicators as well as measures of decision making
power and resource constraints available from the 2005 DHS. We then examine individualized
measures of consumption using PSF1.


6.1    Measures of well-being, decision-making, and constraints




                                                 15
       The focus of Tables 12 and 13 is all ever-married women aged 15-49. Table 12 begins
with some descriptive statistics on key characteristics that arguably reflect aspects of a
woman’s living standards and well-being. It can be noted that close to one-quarter of this group
have had a union dissolution.
       Controlling for age (as women married only once are on average younger - column 2),
there does not seem to be any difference in body mass index (BMI) correlated with marital
status (column 5).
       Differences appear in nearly every other dimension. Urban remarried widows live in
significantly more asset-poor households than do once-married and widowed women, while
urban divorcees are members of significantly richer households. In rural areas, ever-divorced
women reside in less asset-poor households.
       Current widows are about twice as likely as their remarried counterparts to have
inherited most of their deceased husband’s property suggesting a degree of autonomy and one
reason for why they have not remarried. Finally, the last two columns of Table 12 show the
percentages of women who were born in rural areas but now live in urban areas, and vice
versa. The first could reflect an escape from more stringent social norms, as suggested by the
higher shares of widows and ever-divorced women who have followed this path. Alternatively,
such women may have married into an urban family and simply remained there when the union
ended. Likewise, being urban-born and ending up in rural areas may be interpreted as a
worsening of life conditions, and we see that current divorcees and widows are significantly
less likely to have made this move. But, here too, an alternative story is selection into a rural
marriage prior to the husband’s loss.
       Taken together, the statistics presented in Table 12 are consistent with a situation in
which women who remarry are mostly those who cannot afford to remain husbandless, and
despite remarriage, appear to be living in poorer households.
       Women are asked various questions whose answers can be interpreted as indicative, or
related to, their levels of voice within the household and the constraints they face. A number of
suggestive patterns emerge when we examine how these vary with marital status (Table 13).
Widows are the least likely to report having no say over decisions that affect them and their
households, undoubtedly reflecting the fact that they are more often household heads. Women
in their first union are the most likely ones to have no say in decision-making, with remarried
divorcees not far behind. Divorcees and ex-widows fall somewhere in-between, exchanging
rankings depending on the activity.



                                                16
       In seeking health care for oneself, getting permission is a constraint faced by at most 5-
6% of Senegalese women, and appears not to be strongly associated with marital status. A
much larger share of women point to a cost constraint, with the health care of remarried and
current widows being the most liquidity constrained, at 71% and 68% respectively, and once-
married women the least constrained at 55%.
       Incomes are not typically pooled across the members of a Senegalese household.
Women contribute their labor to the household enterprise and its overall care, but their own
earnings are in general for their own and their dependents’ non-food needs. Women are asked
what share of their earnings is spent on the household. The data suggest that on average around
one-third of women contribute none of their own earnings to household needs. The one
exception among marital statuses is for remarried widows, of which only a low 17% surrender
none of their earnings. Indeed, they are more likely to give up more than half of their personal
earnings than other women (34% versus 16% for married and 21% for ever-divorced women).
The one exception is widows, who, since they more often head their households, are expected
to do so. These statistics are consistent with the idea elaborated in Section 5 that widowed
women without resources or a place to live often remarry poor men who can provide a degree
of social insurance, but not much more than food and shelter.
       Adult female DHS respondents were asked about whether a husband is justified in
beating his wife if she goes out without telling him, neglects the children, argues with him,
refuses sex, or burns the food. The responses follow the same patterns across women (only two
are shown). Widows and divorcees are least likely, and remarried widows most likely to agree
that a husband is justified in beating his wife. Here again, remarried widows stand out as in a
particularly weak position.
       Among women, a larger share of remarried widows never watch television (43%)
followed by women in their first marriage (32%) and remarried divorcees (27%). Current
widows and divorcees are most likely to watch TV and access information and entertainment
on a frequent basis. Such statistics could reflect economic constraints although alternative
explanations are also possible (such as a lower burden in terms of household chores).
       The above are simple correlations for which one should of course be cautious about
making causal interpretations. Note, however, that the associations between the descriptive
statistics and potential indications of decision making power and constraints faced are
consistent with our simple theoretical framework and many of the relationships that emerge
from PSF in what follows for women by marital status.



                                               17
6.2        Differences in consumption levels
6.2.1 A consumption model
           Using the PSF survey, we can document women’s average consumption levels by
marital status for each of the five groups considered (widow (W), remarried widow (MW),
divorcee (D), remarried divorcee (MD), first marriage (M)). Simple descriptive statistics show
that unconditionally, current divorcees and widows have the highest average cell per capita
consumptions and, along with ex-divorcees, reside in higher per capita consumption
households (Table 14).19 Remarried widows fare the worst on average, and particularly when
they are in a levirate marriage with log average cell consumption of only 12.06 as opposed to
12.22 for all remarried widows. Widows remarried outside the lineage of their late husband
enjoy a level of consumption more than 30% higher than those in levirate unions. This may
reflect the fact that remarried widows are different from other women in a few dimensions. As
we saw in Section 6, they indeed cumulate a double negative selection: selection into
widowhood, which suggests they were from relatively poorer backgrounds to begin, and
selection into remarriage, with rural dwellers among them remarrying more often. Negative
selection is even stronger for those remarrying one of their late husband’s kin. Such
disadvantage could also be due to remarriage itself, if entering into a second union after
widowhood confines women to weak bargaining positions within their new households.
           To isolate the consumption implications of marital status itself from those of selection
on the basis of observable characteristics, we conduct a decomposition analysis.
           Table 15 presents regressions for women by marital status group of the log of cell
consumption per person for the ith woman against a vector of attributes x i . This set of

regressions can be written as:
                    ln Ci  ( j  j xi   ij )Sij            ( j  M ,W , MW , D, MD)                       (2)
                              j

Here, all parameters are marital status-specific,  ij is an error term, and S ij  1 if woman i is a

member of group j and S ij  0 otherwise. Noting that  S ij  1 , we can re-write (1) such that
                                                                         j


the parameters for marital-status groups are evaluated as deviations from mean points for a
given reference marital-status group k:

                    ln Ci   k   k xi   ik     [
                                                    j  k
                                                             j     k  (  j   k ) xi   ij   ik ]S ij   (3)



19
     Descriptive statistics on the five groups are given in Tables A6-A8.


                                                             18
Estimating the model in this way also facilitates testing for the equality of the parameters. A
special case is when only the intercepts differ, in which case the model is equivalent to running
a regression with dummy variables for marital status.
         We then use each group’s own estimated parameters to predict consumption for a fixed
reference group’s mean covariates. For example, using the mean attributes of remarried
widows ( x MW ) allows us to determine how much worse-off remarried widows are on average
purely because they are remarried widows; this entails estimating for marital-status group j:
                  E j [ln Ci | MWi  0, xi  x MW ]  E j [ln Ci | MWi  1, xi  x MW ]                     (4)

                             j   j x MW  ln C MW                                                       (5)

(Here E j [.] denotes the expectation formed over the parameters and error term distribution for

group j, while lnC denotes the mean of log consumption for j=MW.)
                  MW




6.2.2 Correlates of consumption
         The regressions control for individual and household characteristics that tend to be
important in the Senegalese context and are common across all three groups of women. These
include age, age squared, and age at first marriage; log household and cell size; the share of
children in the cell; and a series of dummy variables for whether the woman was fostered as a
child, attended a French or a Koranic school, has a son aged 18 or older, belongs to the
household head’s cell, is head of her own cell, (current or ex) husband’s occupation (informal
or formal sector or other, with agriculture the left out option), whether the current (or previous,
for ever-widowed and ever-divorced women) marriage is (was) polygamous, and whether the
woman lives in an urban or rural area.20
         There are some notable differences in the models across marital-status groups. A higher
age at marriage is associated with significantly higher consumption for once-married women,
but not for women in other groups. Larger household size is associated with significantly lower
consumption for all except remarried widows. However, not all the differences in coefficients
are statistically significant. Taking once-married women as the reference, one can only reject


20  Other variables— potentially relevant to living standards but not shared across the groups— were tested. For
all currently married women, whether the husband co-resides and number of co-wives; for previously married
women, the number of past dissolutions and ex-cowives; for remarried women, the duration of widowhood/
divorce prior to remarriage. Only the number of dissolutions is ever statistically significant and this for widows
(with 1.3 the average number of dissolutions) at the 5% level ( W =-0.13, t = 2.10), and for divorcees (1.4),  D =-
0.15, t = 1.7). As other coefficients also change when these covariates are included, predicted effects on
consumption (see below) are altered only slightly. We restrict the model to the same covariates across groups.


                                                         19
the null that the coefficient on age at first marriage is different for widows, and the same is true
for the coefficients on log household size but with respect to remarried widows. A higher cell
size, and cell share of children are associated with lower consumption for all groups, although
the first is only significantly associated with consumption for married and divorced women.
But again, tests of the differences in coefficients relative to once-married women show that
they are statistically indistinguishable from each other.
       There are high returns associated with education. Having attended a French school has
a substantial and highly significant (and statistically indistinguishable) return for all women.
Koranic education is correlated with higher cell consumption for widows and women who
have remarried. Indeed, controlling for age and other covariates, the effects of Koranic
schooling on consumption are about the same as having attended a French school for ex-
widows and half as much for ex-divorcees and widows. However, relative to once-married
women, the difference is significant for ever-widowed women only. Having a son older than
18 appears to be a significant asset for divorcees.
       The largest boost to the consumption of remarried women is having had a formal public
or private sector employee as their (now deceased) husband. For ex-widows this effect ( 
=0.721, t-stat=4.07) far outweighs that of any other covariate. It likely captures the effect of
receiving a pension and being able to keep it for one-self, as a source of personal income. For
both groups, having had a husband in the informal and ‘other’ sectors is also associated with
higher consumption, although tests reveal these not to be statistically different from that
estimated for other women. Urban location significantly boosts consumption for all groups.
The high coefficient for once-married women is only statistically different from that estimated
for ex-divorcees.


6.2.3 Differences in predicted consumption by marital status
       The results in estimating Equation (5) are given in panel 1 of Table 16, where
consumption is evaluated for the mean attributes of MW, and for 10-year age ranges with the
first cutoff at age 40, and urban and rural areas separately. This gives a first insight into the
question of how much worse- or better-off remarried-widows would be if their marital status
changed. The table’s second and third panels do the same for widows and once-married
women, respectively using the mean attributes of widows and of once-married women in the
various age groups.




                                                 20
        Consumption differences are substantial when evaluated for the mean characteristics of
ex-widows. In both urban and rural areas, and for most ages, ex-widows tend to have the
lowest average per capita consumption. The differences are largest and most significant at
young ages and dissipate as women age due to a positive age effect on consumption for
remarried widows. Rural widows are an exception, with insignificant differences at all ages.
Urban remarried widows would have been better off in any other marital status and, in
particular, had they remained husbandless. There are two potential explanations for such a
result. On the one hand, it could be that remarried widows differ in some unobserved
characteristics (potential support from kin network or personal savings, for example) such that
they are relatively poor and cannot support themselves without a husband. This would be
consistent with the fact that the results are in large part explained by the very low constant term
in the consumption equation for ex-widows relative to any other groups. On the other hand, it
could also be, as posited earlier, that remarriage itself is not really a favorable outcome.
Widows who remarry may be constrained to do so for social reasons (especially in the case of
levirate marriages) and may end-up marrying into relatively poor households or with a weak
position within the household due to their marital trajectory.
        Panel 2 shows consumption differences when characteristics are fixed at the mean for
W but parameters are allowed to vary by marital status. In urban areas, widows would be
worse-off as MW or MD throughout the age distribution. W also fare better than MW in rural
areas, although the difference is statistically significantly different from zero only for the
youngest group. Widows in rural areas do not seem to fare substantially worse than other
marital-status groups. Differences favor these other groups but hardly ever significantly so. In
total, widows who did not remarry seem to have chosen the best option given their
characteristics.
       Finally, panel 3 fixes characteristics at the mean for M women. In urban areas, once-
married women would be worse-off with their own characteristics but the parameters of the
other groups. This is particularly true for MW and MD, for whom the predicted changes in
consumption are statistically significant. Rural M women would generally have lower
consumption levels in any other status and significantly so as MW under 40. Generally
speaking, women in their first marriage seem to benefit from this unbroken marital trajectory.
       The same exercise can be done using divorcees as the reference group. Results (not
shown) indicate that divorcees would not have fared very differently had they stayed in their
first union. Conversely, once-married women fare better than if they had ever been divorced,
hinting at the positive selection of women into divorce.

                                                 21
       Comparing widows and remarried widows for a given age at dissolution suggests that,
in urban areas and given their characteristics, widows fare better as widows than they would do
as remarried widows whatever their age at widowhood (Table 17A1). Here again it is also the
case that remarried widows would fare better if not remarried, irrespective of age at
dissolution. In rural areas, the difference in the predicted consumption of these women
according to whether they remarried or not is never significantly different from zero. The same
results are found if we examine duration since widowhood (Table 17B1). After a divorce,
whatever the age at divorce or the duration since divorce, women have the same consumption
level given their characteristics whether they remarried or not (Tables 17A2 and 17B2).


6.2.4 Discussion
       Differences reflect both the consequences of a given marital trajectory and the selection
processes that push or pull women into those pathways. One interpretation of these findings
consistent with what we know is as follows. Women who become widows and remarry often
do so out of necessity, encompassing the two non-mutually exclusive burdens underlined in the
conceptual framework: a lack of resources and strong social pressure. Such women would
appear to consist on the one hand, of a group of poorer women with little fallback position in
the event of their husband’s death, and on the other, of women who, due to social pressure, are
compelled to remarry, often within their late husband’s lineage. Their vulnerability is not
captured by commonly considered observables such as education, age, place of residence, and
the type of job held by the deceased husband, as otherwise we would expect to find them
better-off when remarried rather than not (contrary to results presented in panel 1 of Table 16).
Clearly the unobserved characteristics along which they differ from those who do not remarry
explains part of the consumption gap. Comparing them with once-married women (less likely
to be selected than widows), it appears that for them there is a large economic loss associated
with widowhood at all ages. Remarriage does not, however, compensate them fully for such
loss. Widows, on the other hand, do not seem to incur an economic cost from their marital
status, pointing to a potential positive selection for those who do not (choose to) remarry.


7.     Conclusions
       Marital upheaval is frequent in Senegal. Using data from the 2006 Poverty and Family
Structure household survey, we estimate that anywhere between 18.5 and 21.5 percent of ever-
married Senegalese women have experienced widowhood, while somewhere between 13.2 and



                                               22
17.3 percent have experienced a divorce. Many go on to remarry, and 7 percent of ever-
married women have more than one union rupture. For women, discontinuous marital
trajectories are associated with different consequences according to whether they ensue from
divorce or widowhood.
       In general, we find that poorer women, as identified by lower education and the
deceased husband’s inferior sectors of employment, are more likely to become widows than
better off women. When it comes to divorce, it is urban and more educated women who exhibit
a higher probability. Poorer women among both the widowed and divorced are more likely to
remarry often joining a polygamous union, and for widows, a leviratic one.
       Confirming descriptions for Sub-Saharan African countries by sociologists, and in
accordance with the fact that divorce may be chosen, our analysis suggests that divorce is a
means for some women to escape family authority and gain a relatively comfortable autonomy;
while widowhood is correlated with more negative consequences in terms of welfare. In fact,
current divorcees enjoy a higher level of consumption than any of the other groups of women
we consider. This may be related to formal education, which clearly plays an important role for
divorcees. First and foremost, divorcees are more likely to be educated women. Upon divorce,
higher education is correlated with a lower likelihood of remarriage, probably because these
women have the economic and social possibilities to enjoy autonomy while maintaining an
adequate standard of living. For those who do remarry, education is associated with better
quality unions in various dimensions: more civil marriage contracts, husbands with formal
sector jobs, and a lower likelihood of a polygamous husband.
       Although education is associated with a lower probability of widowhood, more
education is not related to increased social mobility for widows (although when they remarry it
is less likely to be in a leviratic marriage and more likely to be with a man holding a formal
sector job). This may be linked to the fact that widows observed in the sample are on average
older and therefore less educated than the average divorcee, as well as to differences in ages at
dissolution. Although education opens marriage market options for relatively young women, it
may not do so for women who are beyond child-bearing age. Over all, widowhood appears to
be accompanied by negative consequences that are not mitigated by remarriage. This ensues
from a double negative selection: first, poorer women are more likely to experience
widowhood. Second, it seems that the most vulnerable among widows are those who are
compelled to remarry (rural ones) and, for the uneducated ones and those who have a son with
the deceased husband, to enter a leviratic marriage. Leviratic marriages are associated with the
lowest consumption levels. There are two competing interpretations for this finding. Leviratic

                                               23
marriage may be the only option for very poor widows, and happens mainly in very poor
lineages. Alternatively, such marriages may act like a poverty trap for those women who
cannot afford to refuse it, either because of a lack of independent means or because it is the
only way to remain with their children. Those who can afford not to remarry do so, maintain a
level of consumption comparable to that of women in their first marriage, and thereby gain
autonomy. However, differences in observed characteristics between widows and remarried
widows do not suffice to explain the consumption gap. Thus, a worry remains that the causality
runs the other way around, with remarried widows becoming vulnerable because of
remarriage: as social pressure to remarry pushes them to enter a union with a status that may
well be worse than that of other married women. Inquiry into the direction of causality is
beyond the scope of this paper but is clearly of importance. If social pressure makes remarriage
unavoidable for some women, even at a cost in living standards, the implementation of social
transfers to widows together with changes in child custody practices aimed at establishing the
preeminence of the rights of parents over those of the paternal lineage, could contribute to
alleviate this plight.
        The correlations and analysis presented in this paper underscore the relevance of
marital status to women’s welfare and suggest lower levels of well-being and autonomy for
women and particularly widows, who have remarried following a dissolution.




                                               24
References

Amato, Paul (2000). “The Consequences of Divorce for Adults and Children.” Journal of
Marriage and Family 62(4): 1269-1287.

Antoine, Philippe and Fatou Binetou Dial (2003). "Mariage, divorce et remariage à Dakar et
Lomé." Actes du colloque de l'AUF : Familles du Nord, familles du Sud, Marseille 23-26 juin.

Appleton, Simon (1996). “Women-Headed Households and Household Welfare: An Empirical
Deconstruction for Uganda.” World Development 24(12): 1811-1827.

Bongaarts, John (2001). “Household Size and Composition in the Developing World in the
1990s.” Population Studies 55(3): 263-79.

Bowen, John (2017). “Gender, Islam and Law.” WIDER Working Paper 2017-xxx. Helsinki:
UNU-WIDER.

Brossier, Marie (2004). “Les débats sur le droit de la famille au Sénégal : Une mise en question
des fondements de l’autorité légitime?” Politique Africaine 96 :78-98 DOI :
10.3917/polaf.096.0078

Chapoto, Antony, T. S. Jayne, and Nicole Mason (2011). “Widows’ Land Security in the Era
of HIV/AIDS: Panel Survey Evidence from Zambia.” Economic Development and Cultural
Change 59(3): 511-47.

Cherchye, Laurens, Bram De Rock, Frederic Vermeulen and Selma Walther (2016), “Should I
Stay or Should I Go: Marriage and Divorce in Malawi” mimeo

Clark, Shelley, and Sarah Brauner-Otto (2015). "Divorce in Sub-Saharan Africa: Are Unions
Becoming Less Stable?" Population and Development Review 41(4): 583-605.

De Vreyer, Philippe, Sylvie Lambert, Abla Safir, and Momar B. Sylla (2008). "Pauvreté et
structure familiale, pourquoi une nouvelle enquête ?" Stateco, 102: 261-275.

Feinstein, Jonathan (1993). “The relationship between socioeconomic status and health: A
review of the literature.” The Milbank Quarterly 71(2): 279-322.

Dial, Fatou B (2008). Mariage et divorce à Dakar. Itinéraires féminins, Col : Hommes et
Sociétés, Khatalas-Crepos, ISBN 9782845869608

Hertrich, Véronique (1994). Dynamique démographique et changements familiaux en milieu
rural africain. Une étude chez les Bwa au Mali, Thèse de doctorat, Université de Paris 1

Horrell, Sara and Pramila Krishnan (2007). “Poverty and Productivity in Female-Headed
Households in Zimbabwe.” Journal of Development Studies 43(8):1351-1380.

Hurd, Michael and David Wise (1989). “The Wealth and Poverty of Widows: Assets Before
and After the Husband’s Death,’ in David Wise (ed.) The Economics of Aging, University of
Chicago Press.



                                              25
Lambert, Sylvie, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle (2014). "Intergenerational
Mobility and Interpersonal Inequality in an African Economy." Journal of Development
Economics 110: 327-344.

Lambert, Sylvie and Pauline Rossi (2016). "Sons as widowhood insurance: Evidence from
Senegal", Journal of Development Economics, 120: 113-27,

Lambert, Sylvie and Dominique van de Walle (2012). “Transcription des entretiens menés
avec des veuves et des divorcées au Sénégal “ World Bank.

Lefèvre, Cécile and Alexandra Filhon (ed.) (2005) : Histoires de familles, histoires familiales
Les résultats de l’enquête Famille de 1999, INED, Collection : Cahiers, n° 156, 2005.

Locoh, Thérèse and Marie-Paule Thiriat (1995). “Divorce et remariage des femmes en Afrique
de l’ouest. Le cas du Togo”, Population, 50e année, 1 : 61-93.

Rivière, C. (1990). Union et procréation en Afrique. L’Harmattan, Paris.

Sevak, Purvi, David Weir and Robert Willis (2003). “The Economic Consequences of a
Husband’s Death: Evidence from the HRS and AHEAD,” Social Security Bulletin 65(3).

Smith, D.P., Carrasco, E. and McDonald, P. (1984). Marriage Dissolution and Remarriage,
ISI, WFS, Comparative Studies n°34, Voorburg, London.

Takyi, Baffour K., and Christopher L. Broughton (2006). "Marital stability in sub-Saharan
Africa: Do women’s autonomy and socioeconomic situation matter?" Journal of Family and
Economic Issues 27(1): 113-132.

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2015).
World Marriage Data 2015 (POP/DB/Marr/Rev2015).

van de Walle, Dominique (2013). “Lasting welfare effects of widowhood in Mali” World
Development 51, 1-19.

van de Walle, Etienne and Aliou Gaye (2006): “Household structure, polygyny and ethnicity in
Senegambia: a comparison of census methodologies,” in Etienne van de Walle (ed.): African
Households: censuses and Surveys. New York, M. E. Sharpe Inc.

Yade, Awa (2007). “Stratégies matrimoniales au Sénégal sous la colonisation”, Cahiers
d’études africaines, 187-188: 623-642, URL : http://etudesafricaines.revues.org/8342




                                               26
Figure 1: Percentage of ever-widowed and ever-divorced women by age groups, all areas
Note: Sample of all women with at most one marital dissolution.




Source: authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                      27
Figure 2: Widowhood and divorce rates by marriage duration, all areas




Note: upper panel = widowhood rate for a given marriage duration, among marriages that survived for at least that period of
time. Lower panel = divorce rate for a given marriage duration, among marriages that survived for at least that period of time.
Sample of women 15 and older with at most one marital dissolution.
Source: authors’ calculations using the PSF1.




                                                              28
Figure 3: Share of marriages ending in divorce by marriage duration, all areas




Note: sample of women 15 and older with at most one marital dissolution.
Source: authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                      29
Figure 4: Heterogeneity in the incidence of divorce over time and space; upper panel, all
areas; lower panel, Dakar




Note: sample of women 15 and older with at most one marital dissolution.
Source: authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                      30
Figure 5: Union survival rates by age, all areas




Note: sample of women 15 and older with at most one marital dissolution.
Source: authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                      31
Table 1: PSF1 sample of ever married adult women.

 Marital status                           Rural        Urban      TOTAL

 First marriage                   N       1,168         985         2,153
                                  %       71.35        64.89        68.24
 Remarried widow                  N         95           60          155
                                  %       5.80          3.95         4.91
 Remarried divorcee               N        115          132          247
                                  %       7.03          8.70         7.83
 Widow                            N        210          220          430
                                  %       12.83        14.49        13.63
 Divorcee                         N         49          121          170
                                  %       2.99          7.97         5.39
 TOTAL                                    1,637        1,518        3,155
 Remarried widows in:
  a leviratic marriage            N        51             20         71
  a non-leviratic marriage        N        36             34         70
 Unknow type of union             N         8             6          14

Note: Adults are defined as 15 and older. For 14 remarried widows, we have no information on whether the
current husband is a relative of the deceased husband.
Source: Authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                     32
Table 2: Divorce and widowhood rates in Sub-Saharan Africa (percentage of ever-
married women aged 15-49).

                                               Ever-widowed                  Ever-divorced
                               Once
                                                      Remarried                      Remarried
                              married        Widow                       Divorcee
                                                        widow                         divorcee
       Burkina Faso              80            3          3                  3           11
       Niger                     76            2          3                  3           17
       Senegal                   76            2          4                  5           13
       Mali                      81            2          4                 2            11
       Sierra Leone              73            3          7                  4           13
       Nigeria                   83            3          2                 3             9
       Cote D’Ivoire             77            4          2                 10            8

       DRC                       71             3              3             10            14
       Congo                     63             3              2             17            16
       Gabon                     63             2              2             14            19

       Lesotho                   79            12              1              8             1
       Swaziland                 77            11              1              6             4
       Mozambique                80             5              0             15             0
       Namibia                   73             6              2             10             9
       Zimbabwe                  69            11              2             11             8
       Malawi                    66            4               3             12            15
       Uganda                    65             6              3             12            14
       Zambia                    68             6              4             11            12
Note: Samples of ever-married women,
Source: Authors’ based on DHS surveys between 2005 and 2011 depending on the country; and for Senegal, DHS
2005.




                                                    33
Table 3: Differences in socio-economic characteristics between ever-widowed and ever-
divorced women
                                                                          Ever-widowed         Ever-divorced


Rural area                                                                      0.52              0.39***
Age                                                                            58.68              40.21***
Age at first marriage                                                          18.26                18.76
Ever been to a French school                                                    0.13               0.37***
Total number of children (alive)                                                4.54               3.42***
Log of total household consumption per capita (CFA francs per year)            12.38               12.49*
Log of total cell consumption per capita (CFA francs per year)                 12.38                12.42
Household size                                                                 10.73                10.09
Household head                                                                  0.32               0.17***
Cell head (incl. household head)                                                0.61               0.82***

N                                                                               585                  417
Note: All characteristics are expressed as shares of the marital status group except for age, number of children,
consumption aggregates and household size. Divorced includes separated women. All significance tests are
relative to ever-widowed women, where *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                        34
Table 4: Probability of widowhood or divorce and women’s characteristics: All areas
                                               Prob(widow)         Prob(divorce)
 Rural area                                      -0.040***           -0.088***
                                                  (0.014)             (0.018)
 Ref: Husband working in the informal sector
 Husband: agricultural sector                     0.015                0.042**
                                                 (0.016)               (0.019)
 Husband: private formal or                      -0.036**             -0.092***
 public sector
                                                 (0.017)               (0.019)
 Husband: other sector                           0.109***              0.093***
                                                 (0.024)               (0.032)
 Age at first marriage                          -0.005***             -0.005***
                                                 (0.001)               (0.002)
 Ever been to a French school                    -0.027+               0.064***
                                                 (0.017)               (0.017)
 Current age                                    0.010***               0.004***
                                                 (0.000)               (0.001)
 Ref: Wolof/Lebou
 Serere                                           0.021                  0.014
                                                 (0.019)               (0.023)
 Poular                                           0.010                 -0.007
                                                 (0.015)               (0.018)
 Other ethnicity                                 0.058***                0.012
                                                 (0.016)               (0.020)
 Mean of dep. Var                                  0.21                   0.17
 N                                                 2593                  2467
 Pseudo R2                                        0.386                  0.066
Note: Logit model, marginal effects shown. Sample of ever-married women. “Husband’ refers to the one prior to
the widowhood or divorce. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                       35
Table 5: Probability of remarriage: All areas
                                  Probability of                Probability of
                                  remarriage for                remarriage for
                                     widows                       divorcees
 Ref: dissolution after age 40.
 Dissolution before age 25                  0.470***                0.371***
                                            (0.055)                 (0.070)
 Dissolution between ages 25-39             0.291***                0.261***
                                            (0.030)                 (0.072)
 Last dissolution; rural resident           0.082**                 0.109**
                                            (0.035)                 (0.054)
 No children born from last union           -0.130*                  0.065
                                            (0.078)                 (0.069)
 Had a son at time of dissolution            -0.023                 -0.104**
                                            (0.036)                 (0.052)
 Number of marital dissolutions              -0.016                  -0.019
                                            (0.034)                 (0.060)
 Ever been to a French school                 0.011                 -0.121**
                                            (0.047)                 (0.051)
 Polygamous father                          0.098***                 0.071
                                            (0.037)                 (0.049)
 Fostered before age 15                     0.123**                  0.098
                                            (0.048)                 (0.068)
 Ref: Wolof/Lebou
 Serere                                       0.048                   0.011
                                             (0.054)                (0.070)
 Poular                                       0.019                  -0.054
                                             (0.043)                (0.059)
 Other ethnicity                              -0.043                 -0.113
                                             (0.045)                (0.076)
 Mean of dep. var                              0.27                    0.59
 N                                             488                     353
 Pseudo R2                                    0.258                   0.146
Note: Logit models, marginal effects shown. Samples of ever-widowed women (column 1) and ever-divorced
women (column 2). *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                   36
Table 6: Probability of levirate remarriage for remarried widows
                                      All areas        Urban areas                              Rural areas
 Ref: dissolution after age 40.
 Dissolution before age 25                       -0.098                  -0.117                    -0.107
                                                (0.105)                  (0.148)                   (0.135)
 Dissolution between ages 25-39                  -0.113                  -0.149                    -0.043
                                                (0.087)                  (0.126)                   (0.113)
 Last dissolution; rural resident               0.233***
                                                (0.075)
 Had a son at widowhood
                                                0.249***                 0.276**                  0.246**
                                                (0.080)                  (0.131)                  (0.107)
 Number of marital dissolutions                 -0.128*                  -0.270*                   -0.112
                                                (0.072)                  (0.158)                  (0.091)
 Polygamous last marriage                        -0.115                   0.094                   -0.207**
                                                (0.077)                  (0.152)                  (0.097)
 Ever been to a French school                   -0.274**                 -0.216*                  -0.316*
                                                (0.124)                  (0.128)                  (0.186)
 Fostered before age 15                           0.054                   0.017                     0.023
                                                (0.094)                  (0.137)                  (0.134)
 Ref: Wolof/Lebou
 Serere                                           0.059                  -0.025                     0.112
                                                (0.107)                  (0.126)                   (0.175)
 Poular                                          -0.009                  -0.122                     0.001
                                                (0.102)                  (0.172)                   (0.131)
 Other ethnicity                                -0.192**                 -0.223                    -0.168
                                                (0.092)                  (0.206)                   (0.120)
 Mean of dep. Var                                  0.49                    0.31                      0.60
 N                                                 140                      52                        88
 Pseudo R2                                        0.189                   0.275                     0.140
Note: Logit model, marginal effects shown. Sample of remarried widows *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p <
0.12.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                       37
Table 7: Type of remarriage for widows by union and husband’s characteristics.
                                     Co-resides      Polygamy       Husband works in
                                    with husband                    the formal sector
 Ref: dissolution after age 40.
 Dissolution before age 25                      0.379***             -0.261***                  0.035
                                                 (0.090)              (0.101)                 (0.101)
 Dissolution between ages 25-39                 0.283***               -0.134                  -0.017
                                                 (0.081)              (0.099)                 (0.091)
 Last dissolution; rural resident                 0.009                0.128*                  -0.097
                                                 (0.077)              (0.074)                 (0.075)
 No children born in last union                  0.309**                0.156                 -0.294+
                                                 (0.138)              (0.214)                 (0.179)
 Had a son at widowhood                         -0.208***              -0.031                  -0.000
                                                 (0.072)              (0.086)                 (0.080)
 Number of marital dissolutions                   0.128                 0.021                   0.029
                                                 (0.093)              (0.085)                 (0.078)
 Ever been to a French school                    -0.192+               -0.097                 0.400***
                                                 (0.117)              (0.088)                 (0.083)
 Polygamous father                               -0.151*               -0.058                 -0.146*
                                                 (0.079)              (0.077)                 (0.077)
 Fostered before age 15                           -0.129               -0.014                  0.152+
                                                 (0.087)              (0.083)                 (0.095)
 Ref: Wolof/Lebou.
 Serere                                         -0.399***              0.015                   0.249**
                                                 (0.127)              (0.124)                  (0.118)
 Poular                                          -0.155               -0.065                    -0.015
                                                 (0.100)              (0.107)                  (0.104)
 Other ethnicity                                 -0.161*              -0.139                     0.019
                                                 (0.098)              (0.092)                  (0.103)
 Mean of dep. var                                  0.51                 0.74                      0.33
 N                                                 133                  132                       123
 Pseudo R2                                        0.265                0.106                     0.223
Note: Logit model, marginal effects shown. Sample of ever-widowed women. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1,
+
  p < 0.12.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                      38
Table 8: Type of remarriage for divorcees by union and husband’s characteristics.
                                  Co-resides with      Polygamy      Husband works in
                                      husband                         the formal sector
 Ref: dissolution after age 40.
 Dissolution before age 25                    0.252**                -0.145                        -0.227+
                                              (0.107)               (0.163)                        (0.141)
 Dissolution between ages 25-39                0.113                 -0.055                         -0.145
                                              (0.106)               (0.158)                        (0.140)
 Last dissolution; rural resident              0.014                  0.016                       -0.180***
                                              (0.071)               (0.076)                        (0.070)
 No children born last union                   0.032                  0.070                         -0.138
                                              (0.080)               (0.085)                        (0.089)
 Had a son at time of divorce                 -0.024                  0.034                         -0.090
                                              (0.079)               (0.082)                        (0.078)
 Number of marital dissolutions               -0.048                  0.003                         -0.038
                                              (0.059)               (0.072)                        (0.075)
 Ever been to a French school                  -0.079               -0.153**                       0.133**
                                              (0.071)               (0.075)                        (0.068)
 Polygamous father                            -0.116*               0.144**                          0.011
                                              (0.064)               (0.064)                        (0.066)
 Fostered before age 15                        -0.093               -0.186**                         0.069
                                              (0.075)               (0.085)                        (0.083)
 Ref: Wolof/Lebou.
 Serere                                       -0.129                -0.189*                        -0.038
                                              (0.086)               (0.099)                        (0.089)
 Poular                                       -0.088                -0.167**                        0.002
                                              (0.077)               (0.082)                        (0.082)
 Other ethnicity                              -0.048                 -0.102                        -0.003
                                              (0.091)               (0.098)                        (0.102)
 Mean of dep. Var                              0.73                   0.48                           0.34
 N                                              207                    207                           198
 Pseudo R2                                     0.084                  0.087                         0.105
                                                                            ***
Note: Logit model, marginal effects shown. Sample of ever-divorced women.         p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1,
+
  p < 0.12.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                    39
Table 9: Type of remarriage for widows by other union characteristics
                                   Has a civil    Lives with in-laws                           Lives with
                                    contract                                                  children from
                                                                                             previous union
 Dissolution before age 40                      0.077                    0.019                    -0.114
                                               (0.066)                  (0.044)                  (0.083)

 Last dissolution: rural resident             -0.179***                  0.051                   -0.034
                                               (0.056)                  (0.044)                  (0.073)

 No children born in last union                 0.005                    0.027                       .
                                               (0.093)                  (0.065)                      .

 Had a son at widowhood                        -0.080+                   0.003                  0.347***
                                               (0.051)                  (0.035)                  (0.051)

 Number of marital dissolutions                -0.029                   0.074***                 -0.042
                                               (0.065)                  (0.028)                  (0.064)

 Ever been to a French school                   0.077                    0.047                    0.113
                                               (0.060)                  (0.051)                  (0.105)
 Mean of dep. var                                0.11                    0.063                     0.65
 N                                               142                      142                      134
 Pseudo R2                                      0.221                    0.124                    0.204
Note: Logit model, marginal effects shown. Sample of ever widowed women. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, +
p < 0.12.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                       40
Table 10: Type of remarriage for divorcees by other union characteristics
                                    Has a civil    Lives with in-laws       Lives with
                                      contract                             children from
                                                                          previous union
 Dissolution before age 40             0.025             0.156                0.215*
                                      (0.102)           (0.115)               (0.111)

 Last dissolution: rural resident                -0.197***                0.138***             -0.282***
                                                   (0.060)                 (0.053)              (0.065)

 No children born in last union                    -0.072                  0.103**                 .
                                                   (0.066)                 (0.044)                 .

 Had a son at time of divorce                      -0.105*                  -0.045             0.203***
                                                   (0.062)                  (0.069)             (0.077)

 Number of marital dissolutions                    -0.094                   -0.063               0.057
                                                   (0.089)                  (0.062)             (0.074)

 Ever been to a French school                      0.119**                   0.021              -0.125
                                                   (0.052)                  (0.053)             (0.081)
 Mean of dep. Var                                    0.18                     0.13                0.55
 N                                                   227                      227                 177
 Pseudo R2                                          0.171                    0.129               0.119
Note: Logit model, marginal effects shown. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                         41
Table 11: Probability of upward mobility upon remarriage
                                               Prob(upward               Prob(upward
                                                 mobility)                 mobility)
 Married widow                                     0.012                     0.024
                                                  (0.053)                   (0.055)

 Last dissolution: rural resident                -0.199***                 -0.140***
                                                  (0.047)                    (0.051)

 Dissolution before age 40                                                  -0.115*
                                                                            (0.064)
 Ever been to a French school                                               0.208***
                                                                            (0.058)
 Number of marital dissolutions                                              -0.020
                                                                            (0.049)
 Mean of dep. var                                   0.28                       0.28
 N                                                  289                        286
 Pseudo- R2                                        0.045                      0.087
Note: Logit model, marginal effects shown. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12.
Sample: Remarried widows and remarried divorcees
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                         42
Table 12: Descriptive statistics on ever-married women by current marital status, Senegal 2005 DHS
                        % of ever-                                                             DHS asset index
                                                                           % Under-                                      Received most
                         married        Age     H’hold                                       Urban         Rural                          Born rural,   Born urban,
                                                                 BMI       weight (at                                     of husband’s
                       women 15-49               head                                                                                     lives urban    lives rural
                                                                           mean age)                                        property
                             (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)          (7)               (8)            (9)           (10)
  Once-married              75.7        29.7        5.8         22.75         11.6             1.06         -0.54               --            8.3            4.8
  Remarried widow            4.4        38.8       19.9       24.35***        8.50           0.67***        -0.57             16.0            6.1            5.6
  Widow                     1.5         38.5       32.2       25.35***        12.0             1.10         -0.41             30.9          14.1***         2.2*
  Remarried divorcee        13.1        34.3        8.9       24.99***        10.3           0.93***      -0.43***              --          13.1***          6.0
  Divorced                  5.4         32.4       14.6        23.20*         10.3           1.35***      -0.30***              --          12.7***        3.1**

Note: All characteristics are expressed as percentages of the marital status group except for age (years), BMI and the wealth index. All significance tests are
relative to married once women, where *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Underweight is defined as having BMI less than 18.5. Column (6) presents mean
underweight conditional on age and aged squared and evaluated at mean age for the sample as a whole. Differences relative to once-married women are no longer
statistically significant. Pregnant women are omitted from the BMI and underweight means. Divorced includes separated women. The Wealth index is generated
by DHS using principal components analysis on assets; housing construction materials; and type of water access and sanitation facilities. The index places
households on a continuous scale of relative wealth and refers to the household to which the woman belongs.
Sample: ever-married women, aged 15-49
Source: Authors’ calculations using Senegal’s 2005 DHS.




Table 13: Measures of women’s decision-making and access to resources by marital status, Senegal 2005 DHS (%)
                                                                         Constraints on seeking        Own earnings spent                               Never watches
                                     Has no say on:                                                                              Beating justified
                                                                              health care:               on household:                                       TV
                        Own health     Large hh           Visits to                                                                        Refuses
                                                                       Permission        Cost           None         > half    If argue
                           care        purchases           family                                                                            sex
  Once-married             81.5           83.8              66.8            6.0          55.0           33.2        16.4         51.6     49.8             32.3
  Remarried widow        66.7***        67.9***           50.3***         4.5**         70.7***        16.8***     34.0***       56.9      58.8***        43.1***
  Widow                  32.7***        44.4***           31.3***         2.1**         68.1***          33.8      44.3***       40.6        48.1         21.0**
  Remarried divorcee     73.2***        76.7***           62.4***         4.8**         58.9***         31.1       20.7***      50.7**     46.9***        26.7***
  Divorced               46.5***        70.3***           50.9***         4.9***        59.6***        38.1***      21.4*      38.3***     36.4***        15.5***

Note: The table shows the % of women in each marital status answering positively to each question. “Has no say” is defined as answering that each decision is
taken by either the husband/partner alone or by someone else. Divorced includes separated women. Significance tests are relative to once-married women, where
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Sample: ever-married women, aged 15-49
Source: Authors’ calculations using Senegal’s 2005 DHS.



                                                                                        43
Table 14: Cell consumption levels, by current marital status.
                                                 Once          Remarried    Remarried
                                                                                            Widows       Divorcees
                                                married         widows      divorcees

Log of total cell consumption per capita         12.31           12.22        12.33         12.43**       12.55***
(CFA francs per year)
In a leviratic union (N=71)                                     12.06**

In a non-leviratic union (N=70)                                  12.36
N                                                2153            155           247            430           170

Note: 1 dollar = 522.9 CFA francs in 2006. Divorced includes separated women. All significance tests are relative to
once-married women, where *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. For 14 remarried widows, we have no information on
whether the current husband is a relative of the deceased husband. Their mean log consumption is 12.26.
Source: Authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                          44
  Table 15: Regressions of log cell consumption per capita
                                                       Remarried          Remarried
                           Once married                                                      Widows          Divorcees
                                                         widows           divorcees
Age                                 0.010                 0.033+              0.020            -0.008           -0.007
                                  (0.010)                (0.021)            (0.019)           (0.015)          (0.020)
Age squared                        -0.000                -0.0002            -0.000            0.0001          -0.00003
                                  (0.000)               (0.0002)            (0.000)          (0.0001)         (0.0002)
Age at first marriage             0.010**                  0.002              0.008            -0.002           0.011
                                  (0.004)                (0.013)            (0.014)           (0.007)          (0.009)
ln household size                -0.315***                -0.035           -0.331***         -0.213**         -0.233**
                                  (0.059)                (0.147)            (0.094)           (0.087)          (0.111)
ln cell size                     -0.193***                -0.096             -0.084            -0.049         -0.337**
                                  (0.053)                (0.136)            (0.172)           (0.085)          (0.138)
Share of kids in cell            -0.442***             -0.658***           -0.749**          -0.461**        -0.757***
                                  (0.101)                (0.223)            (0.353)           (0.187)          (0.302)
Belongs to head’s cell             0.088                   0.020             -0.126            -0.010           0.194
                                  (0.085)                (0.170)            (0.165)            (0.10)          (0.153)
Cell head                          -0.002                 0.180              0.014             0.031            0.101
                                  (0.052)                (0.135)            (0.209)           (0.102)          (0.151)
French school                     0.308***              0.475***           0.442***         0.460***         0.525***
                                  (0.055)                (0.149)            (0.128)           (0.111)          (0.132)
Koranic school                     0.006                0.469***            0.222+          0.249***            0.071
                                  (0.066)                (0.177)            (0.136)           (0.089)          (0.191)
Fostered before age 15              0.030                  0.176             -0.043            -0.045           -0.153
                                  (0.053)                (0.145)            (0.117)           (0.125)          (0.134)
Has son 18 or older                -0.044                 -0.079             0.065             0.070          0.251**
                                  (0.038)                (0.112)            (0.113)           (0.092)          (0.126)
Husband informal                    0.042                 0.187*            0.269**            -0.079           -0.088
                                  (0.057)                (0.109)            (0.121)           (0.126)          (0.207)
Husband formal/public            0.209***               0.721***            0.355**            0.105             0.30
                                  (0.060)                (0.177)            (0.178)           (0.138)          (0.228)
Husband other                      -0.071                0.399**              0.269            -0.002           0.022
                                  (0.102)                (0.192)            (0.228)           (0.143)          (0.280)
Polygamous marriage                -0.026                 -0.090             -0.013            -0.123           0.110
                                  (0.049)                (0.146)            (0.140)           (0.082)          (0.115)
Urban residence                   0.582***               0.358**            0.223+          0.628***           0.362**
                                  (0.074)                (0.148)            (0.141)           (0.129)          (0.152)
Constant                         12.687***             10.831***           12.579***        12.635***        12.963***
                                  (0.229)                (0.148)            (0.535)           (0.468)          (0.474)
R-squared                            0.37                   0.46              0.35              0.28             0.48
Observations                        2,082                   146                241              394              160

  Note: Robust standard errors are given in parentheses, clustered at the sampling unit level. “Husband” is the current
  one for once-married women, and ex-husband for all other groups. Ditto for polygamous marriage. Husband in
  agriculture is the left out category. + p < 0.12, * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
  Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                            45
Table 16: Estimated log cell consumption per capita differences, evaluated at mean attributes for reference woman at different ages
      Age groups:                                                                          15-40           41-50            51-60                        61 +
      Urban: Remarried widow                                                               11.774          11.874          12.133                       12.302
               Widow                                                                     0.549**         0.536***         0.405**                       0.347+
               Once married                                                              0.783***        0.578***         0.429***                       0.343
               Divorcee                                                                    0.527*         0.492**            0.349                       0.338
  Panel 1




               Remarried divorcee                                                          0.405+           0.315            0.105                      -0.364
      Rural: Remarried widow                                                               11.416          11.516           11.775                      11.944
               Widow                                                                        0.280          0.266+            0.135                       0.077
               Once married                                                              0.559***        0.354***          0.205+                        0.119
               Divorcee                                                                  0.524***         0.489**          0.345+                        0.334
               Remarried divorcee                                                        0.541***         0.450**            0.240                      -0.229
      Urban: Widow                                                                         12.443          12.632           12.681                      12.638
               Remarried widow                                                          -0.766***         -0.544*           -0.409                     -0.532**
               Once married                                                                -0.029           0.091            0.011                      -0.077
               Divorcee                                                                    -0.163          -0.027           -0.117                      -0.246
  Panel 2




               Remarried divorcee                                                          -0.283          -0.388          -0.523*                     -0.820**
      Rural: Widow                                                                         11.816          12.005          12.054                       12.011
               Remarried widow                                                           -0.497**          -0.275           -0.140                      -0.262
               Once married                                                                 0.017           0.137            0.057                      -0.031
               Divorcee                                                                     0.103           0.239            0.149                       0.020
               Remarried divorcee                                                           0.122           0.016           -0.118                      -0.415
      Urban: Once married                                                                  12.451          12.430           12.478                      12.556
               Widow                                                                       −0.098           0.062            0.011                       0.080
               Remarried widow                                                          -0.806***        -0.489***       -0.376***                      -0.259
               Divorcee                                                                   -0.361+          -0.250           -0.095                      -0.087
  Panel 3




               Remarried divorcee                                                        -0.400**          -0.273          -0.311*                     -0.474**
      Rural: Once married                                                                  11.869          11.848          11.896                       11.974
               Widow                                                                       −0.144           0.017          −0.035                        0.035
               Remarried widow                                                          -0.582***         -0.265+           -0.152                      -0.035
               Divorcee                                                                    -0.140          -0.030            0.125                       0.133
               Remarried divorcee                                                          -0.041           0.086            0.048                      -0.115

Note: Women 15 and older. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12. Significance tests refer to differences relative to the reference marital status estimated
consumption. Consumptions are predicted using own parameters and mean attributes of the reference marital status group for the indicated age range.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                                                  46
Table 17: Estimated log cell consumption per capita differences
Table 17A1: Evaluated at mean attributes for reference woman and different age at dissolution groups
 Age at marriage dissolution:          15-30           31-40       41-50            51 +
 Urban: Remarried widow               11.921          11.991      12.073          12.235
           Widow                      0.498**        0.516***    0.489**          0.478**
 Rural: Remarried widow               11.599          11.668      11.751           11.913
           Widow                       0.148           0.166       0.139           0.128
 Urban: Widow                          12.639         12.690      12.719          12.664
           Remarried widow           −0.656***       −0.542**   −0.481*       −0.608**
 Rural: Widow                          11.966         12.017      12.046          11.991
           Remarried widow            −0.305          −0.191      −0.131          −0.258

Table 17A2: Evaluated at mean attributes for reference woman and different age at dissolution groups
  Age at marriage dissolution:                 15-25           26-30         31-40            41 +
  Urban: Remarried divorcee                    12.209         12.323        12.441           12.269
              Divorcee                         −0.256         −0.116         0.136           −0.012
  Rural: Remarried divorcee                    11.920         12.034        12.152           11.980
              Divorcee                         −0.328         −0.188         0.065            0.144
  Urban: Divorcee                              12.827         12.160        12.330           12.715
              Remarried divorcee                0.057          0.084         0.144           −0.451
  Rural: Divorcee                              12.466         11.799        11.969           12.353
              Remarried divorcee                0.129          0.156         0.216           −0.380
Note: Women 15 and older. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12. Significance tests refer to differences relative
to the reference marital status estimated consumption. Consumptions are predicted using own parameters and mean
attributes of the reference marital status at the given age group.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.

Table 17B1: evaluated at mean attributes for reference woman and different durations since dissolution
 Time since widowhood:          < 7 years          8-16         17-25              26 +
 Urban: Remarried widow           11.943          11.905        11.984            12.221
           Widow                0.553***         0.531***      0.518**            0.414*
 Rural: Remarried widow           11.568          11.530        11.609            11.847
           Widow                  0.277+           0.254         0.241             0.138
 Urban: Widow                     12.504          12.759        12.709            12.956
           Remarried widow      −0.439**         −0.459*       −0.549**          −0.662*
 Rural: Widow                     11.853          12.108        12.058            12.305
           Remarried widow        −0.163          −0.182        −0.273            −0.386

Table 17B2: evaluated at mean attributes for reference woman and different durations since dissolution
  Time since divorce:                        < 5 years            6-10                    11 +
  Urban: Remarried divorcee                   12.212           12.260                   12.254
              Divorcee                         0.212           −0.071                   −0.333
  Rural: Remarried divorcee                   11.955           12.004                   12.026
              Divorcee                         0.109           −0.174                  −0.436*
  Urban: Divorcee                             12.675           12.644                   12.705
              Remarried divorcee               0.185           −0.451                   −0.326
  Rural: Divorcee                             12.316           12.284                   12.346
              Remarried divorcee               0.289           −0.347                   −0.222
Note: Women 15 and older. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12. Significance tests refer to differences relative
to the reference marital status estimated consumption. Consumptions are predicted using own parameters and mean
attributes of the reference marital status subgroup.
Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                            47
                             Table A1: Senegal: % of currently separated or divorced women, by age group

                                                                           Age group

Year          [15-19]    [20-24] [25-29] [30-34] [35-39] [40-44] [45-49] [50-54] [55-59] [60-64] [65-69] [70+]               [70-74] [75+]   Sources

1960-1961          1.0       2.5     4.6      3.2       4.3      3.4      6.0        4.5    5.3      3.8      4.1      2.6       2.5    1.3 ED
1970-1971                    1.0     3.1      3.6       3.4      3.1      3.2        4.1    4.5      5.0      3.9      3.0       2.7    3.3 ED
1978                         1.9     4.7      3.8       2.8      4.0      2.8        2.7                                                    WFS
1986                         0.6     2.0      2.8       2.0      2.7      2.4        1.7                                                    DHS
1988               0.1       0.9     1.6      2.0       2.2      2.1      2.1        2.1    2.4      2.5      2.5      2.7       3.3        Census
1992-1993                    0.4     1.8      2.4       2.1      2.4      2.0        1.8                                                    DHS
1997                         0.4     1.6      2.9       3.2      3.3      2.6        1.6                                                    DHS
1999                         0.7     2.3      4.7       4.7      5.6      5.7        4.4                                                    DHS
2000                         0.4     1.2      1.8       2.1      2.3      2.2        1.4    1.5      0.9      0.6      1.0       0.4    0.5 MICS
2002               0.1       0.5     1.5      2.4       3.1      3.1      2.8        2.4    1.8      1.6      1.1      1.0       0.9    0.7 Census
2005                         0.6     1.7      2.3       3.1      3.1      3.7        3.3                                                    DHS
2010-2011          0.0       0.7     1.3      3.0       3.8      3.7      4.2        3.6    4.4      6.0      3.5      3.6       2.2    2.9 DHS-MICS
2012-2013                    0.9     2.8      4.9       5.2      5.3      6.4        6.2    3.0      4.0      1.2      2.0       3.1    0.4 DHS
2012-2014                    0.7     2.7      4.4       4.8      6.7      6.8        6.6    4.2      2.9      3.0      2.1       2.7    0.3 DHS
2014                         0.5     2.6      4.0       4.4      8.0      7.2        7.0    5.4      1.9      4.9      2.2       2.3    0.1 DHS

Note: ED : Enquête Démographique ; WFS : World Fertility Survey ; DHS : Demographic and Health Surveys; MICS: Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys
Source: United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Population Division (2015). World Marriage Data
2015 (POP/DB/Marr/Rev2015).




                                                                                48
                                          Table A2: Senegal: % of current widows, by age group

                                                                           Age group
Year         [10-14] [15-19] [20-24] [25-29] [30-34] [35-39] [40-44] [45-49] [50-54] [55-59] [60-64] [65-69]              [70+]   [70-74]   [75+]   Sources
1960-1961               0.2      1.0      1.6      1.6      3.2      8.1     12.6      24.5    36.6     54.9     63.2              76.2     83.7    ED
1970-1971        0.1    0.1      0.5      0.9      1.7      2.7      5.0     10.4      18.5    28.6     40.2     49.1              63.0     75.9    ED
1978                    0.3      0.5      0.9      1.4      2.4      2.0     1.9                                                                    WFS
1986                    0.3      0.4      1.2      0.8      1.0      4.3     4.1                                                                    DHS
1988             0.0    0.3      0.5      0.9      1.7      3.8      7.2     13.5      19.7    32.0     40.5     54.0     64.1                      Census
1992-1993               0.0      0.8      0.7      0.9      2.4      1.9     3.5                                                                    DHS
1997                    0.4      0.2      0.6      0.7      1.9      2.1     3.6                                                                    DHS
1999                    0.1      0.5      0.8      1.0      1.6      2.9     6.0                                                                    DHS
2000                    0.4      0.9      0.9      1.5      2.7      6.1     7.5       16.5    24.0     39.1     50.2              65.9     80.4    MICS
2002             0.2    0.3      0.5      0.8      1.2      1.7      3.2      5.1      10.1    14.6     24.7     29.6              42.0     51.5    Census
2005                    0.1      0.1      1.2      1.0      1.8      3.8     4.3                                                                    DHS
2010-2011        0.0    0.1      0.2      0.8      1.1      2.3      3.3      5.3      14.0    20.3     38.2     44.6              64.7     80.4    DHS-MICS
2012-2013               0.1      0.1      0.8      1.2      1.9      1.8      7.0      12.6    24.3     35.3     53.0              60.2     77.2    DHS
2012-2014               0.1      0.2      0.7      1.0      2.5      1.7     6.5       12.5    23.0     37.2     53.5              58.2     79.1    DHS
2014                    0.0      0.4      0.5      0.9      3.1      1.7     6.0       12.5    21.8     39.2     54.2              56.0     81.2    DHS

Note: ED : Enquête Démographique ; WFS : World Fertility Survey ; DHS : Demographic and Health Surveys; MICS: Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys
Source : United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Population Division (2015). World Marriage Data 2015
(POP/DB/Marr/Rev2015).




                                                                                    49
 Table A3: Probability of remarriage
                                 Probability      Probability of       Probability of      Probability of
                                      of           remarriage           remarriage          remarriage
                                 remarriage         divorcees             widows             divorcees
                                   widows            - Urban              - Rural             - Rural
                                   - Urban
Ref: dissolution after age 40.
Dissol. before age 25             0.476***           0.386***             0.488***            0.313***
                                  (0.070)            (0.109)              (0.080)             (0.074)
Dissol. btw age 25-39             0.308***           0.249**              0.267***            0.256***
                                  (0.036)            (0.106)              (0.048)             (0.081)
No children born in last           -0.156             0.046                -0.133              0.045
union
                                  (0.104)             (0.101)             (0.103)             (0.083)
Had a son at time of               0.043               0.001              -0.057             -0.200***
dissolution
                                  (0.049)             (0.073)             (0.051)             (0.058)
Number of marital                 -0.043               0.048               0.018              -0.126**
dissolutions
                                  (0.043)             (0.071)             (0.046)             (0.049)
Ever been to a French             -0.012             -0.185***             0.051               0.051
school
                                  (0.057)             (0.063)             (0.080)             (0.082)
Polygamous father                 0.101**              0.058               0.089               0.082
                                  (0.046)             (0.068)             (0.058)             (0.070)
Fostered before age 15             0.037               0.120              0.253***             0.091
                                  (0.064)             (0.083)             (0.072)             (0.096)
Ref: Wolof/Lebou
Serere                             0.033              -0.039               0.042               0.131
                                  (0.055)             (0.097)             (0.088)             (0.090)
Poular                             0.003              -0.154*               0.032              0.088
                                  (0.060)             (0.086)             (0.065)             (0.081)
Other ethnicity                    -0.083              -0.057              -0.026             -0.061
                                  (0.064)             (0.105)             (0.065)             (0.087)
Mean of dep. var                    0.22                0.50                0.32               0.70
N                                   227                 203                  261                150
Pseudo R2                          0.323               0.092                0.227              0.314
 Note: Logit models, marginal effects shown. Col 1 and 3: Sample of ever-widowed women; Col 2 and 4: Sample of
 ever-divorced women. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12.
 Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                       50
Table A4: Marriage quality – women in their first marriage.
                                     Co-resides        Polygamy                                      Husband works in
                                    with husband                                                       formal sector
 Rural area before current marriage    -0.001           0.096***                                         -0.136***
                                       (0.022)          (0.024)                                           (0.022)
 Ever been to French school           -0.061***        -0.148***                                          0.187***
                                       (0.023)          (0.026)                                           (0.022)
 Polygamous father                      0.004           0.088***                                           -0.006
                                       (0.019)          (0.022)                                           (0.022)
 Fostered before age 15                -0.022            -0.023                                           0.061**
                                       (0.026)          (0.031)                                           (0.029)
 Serere                                -0.031           -0.059*                                            0.065*
                                       (0.029)          (0.035)                                           (0.034)
 Poular                                0.051**         -0.100***                                           -0.039
                                       (0.024)          (0.026)                                           (0.026)
 Other ethnicity                        -0.006         -0.079***                                          0.075**
                                       (0.027)          (0.030)                                           (0.029)
 Mean of dep. var                        0.77             0.36                                              0.34
 N                                       1,941            1,936                                             1,826
 Pseudo R2                               0.010            0.048                                             0.085
Note: Logit model. Marginal effects shown. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12.

Type of Marriage- Sample: Women in their first marriage
                                    Has a civil      Lives with in-
                                      contract            laws
 Rural area before current marriage  -0.181***           0.052**
                                      (0.018)            (0.023)
 Ever been to French school           0.143***           -0.016
                                      (0.017)            (0.025)
 Polygamous father                      0.008            -0.012
                                      (0.017)            (0.021)
 Fostered before age 15                -0.003            -0.027
                                      (0.023)            (0.030)
 Serere                                 0.037            -0.064*
                                      (0.027)            (0.034)
 Poular                                -0.014             0.026
                                      (0.021)            (0.024)
 Other ethnicity                        0.024           -0.130***
                                      (0.023)            (0.032)
 Mean of dep. Var                       0.20               0.28
 N                                      1941              1941
 Pseudo R2                              0.147             0.016
                                               ***
Note: Logit model. Marginal effects shown.           p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1, + p < 0.12.
 Source: Authors’ estimations using PSF1.




                                                              51
Table A5: Regressions of measures of women’s decision making and access to resources by marital status with controls, Senegal 2005 DHS (%)

                                                                                                                                              Never
                                                                 Constraints on seeking   Own earnings spent on
                                 Has final say on:                                                                    Beating justified      watches
                                                                      health care:            household:
                                                                                                                                               TV
                    Own health       Large hh        Visits to                                                                   Refuses
                                                                 Permission     Cost        None        > half     If argue
                      care           purchases        family                                                                       sex
  Co-resident
  mother-in-law       -0.021*         -0.002          -0.011      -0.004       -0.016       0.042      -0.038*    0.051***       0.042**      -0.013
                      (-2.47)         (-0.36)         (-1.31)     (-0.68)      (-1.21)      (1.84)      (-2.09)     (3.93)        (3.22)      (-1.11)
  Co-resident
  husband            -0.081***      -0.061***        -0.116***   0.025***     0.075***    -0.078***    -0.013       -0.013       -0.011      0.075***
                      (-11.34)       (-11.42)         (-16.21)     (5.01)       (6.89)      (-4.35)    (-0.87)      (-1.14)      (-1.00)       (7.70)
  Polygamous
  husband               -0.001         0.008           0.014        0.007     -0.039***      0.020    -0.036**     0.034**       0.032**       -0.009
                       (-0.17)         (1.43)          (1.95)       (1.35)      (-3.64)      (1.16)    (-2.63)      (3.16)         (2.92)     (-0.91)
  Age                 0.006***       0.004***        0.007***    -0.001***    0.006***    -0.009***   0.005***      0.0003        0.002*      0.001*
                       (13.99)        (14.85)         (17.63)      (-5.01)       (9.57)     (-9.24)     (6.43)      (0.53)         (2.53)      (2.55)
  Urban               0.053***       0.031***          0.011     -0.027***    -0.177***     -0.003     -0.010     -0.143***     -0.154***   -0.388***
                        (7.50)         (5.92)          (1.52)      (-5.69)     (-16.86)     (-0.15)    (-0.75)     (-13.41)      (-14.38)    (-40.99)
  Constant              -0.011      -0.046***         -0.023     0.086***     0.428***    0.688***      0.029     0.576***      0.527***    0.399***
                       (-0.85)        (-4.94)         (-1.84)       (9.97)      (22.67)    (19.49)      (1.00)     (30.05)        (27.42)     (23.53)
  Observations           9412           9412            9405         9527         9530        3257       3257        9526           9528        9524

Note: The sample consists of all ever-married women (once-married, remarried widows and remarried divorcees). Divorced includes separated women. Whether
a mother in law co-resides is badly measured as it must be estimated from the DHS. For all women aged 15 to 49 whose husbands are heads, we can see from the
roster whether his mother is present. To these we add women whose father in law is household head based on an assumption that his wife (and the husband’s
mother) too is present. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors’ calculations using Senegal’s 2005 DHS.




                                                                              52
Table A6: Individual characteristics of ever-married women, by current marital status.
                                                Once-          Remarried    Remarried
                                                                                             Widows       Divorcees
                                                married         widows      divorcees


Lives in a rural area                             0.54           0.61*        0.47**         0.49**        0.29***

Age                                              34.87         49.02***      40.15***       62.16***       40.29***

Muslim                                            0.96           0.95          0.98            0.95         0.92**

Wolof/Lebou                                       0.42           0.38          0.40          0.36**          0.41

Serere                                            0.12           0.14          0.14            0.13          0.11

Poular                                            0.29           0.26          0.29            0.29          0.26

Other ethnic group                                0.17           0.23*         0.17          0.23***        0.23**

Age at first marriage                            19.09         17.79***      18.27**         18.43**        19.50

Fostered before age 15                            0.14          0.20**         0.19*         0.09**          0.15

Polygamous father                                 0.59          0.68**         0.63            0.59          0.53

Ever been to a French school                      0.30          0.17***        0.32          0.12***       0.45***

Ever been to a Koranic school                     0.16           0.21          0.15            0.19          0.12

Total number of children (alive)                  3.46          4.74***       3.91**         4.47***       2.71***

Has a son 18 or older                             0.49          0.65***        0.45          0.77***         0.52

Log of total household consumption per           12.37           12.24         12.40          12.42        12.60***
capita (CFA francs per year)
Log of total cell consumption per capita         12.31           12.22         12.33         12.43**       12.55***
(CFA francs per year)
In a leviratic union                                             12.06

In a non-leviratic union                                         12.36

Household size                                   11.72           10.88       9.98***        10.67***       10.24**

Number of adults living in household              6.74           6.25        5.91***           6.61          6.54

Cell size                                         4.23          3.70***      3.86***           4.07        3.71***

Share of kids in cell                             0.44          0.28***        0.42          0.19***       0.31***

Household head                                    0.05          0.25***      0.11***         0.34***       0.26***

Cell head                                         0.76          0.85**       0.89***         0.52***         0.72
Belongs to head’s cell                            0.08          0.36***      0.14***         0.75***       0.48***
N                                                2153            155            247            430           170

Note: All characteristics are expressed as percentages of the marital status group except for ages (years), number of
children, consumption aggregates, household and cell sizes and number of adults living in the household. 1 dollar =
522.9 CFA francs in 2006. Divorced includes separated women. All significance tests are relative to once-married
women, where *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                          53
Table A7: Marriage characteristics of currently married women, by current marital status.
                                                                   Once married        Remarried          Remarried
                                                                                        widows            divorcees

Polygamous marriage                                                     0.36            0.72***            0.47***
Is the first rank spouse                                                0.53            0.15***            0.19***
Co-resident husband                                                     0.78            0.54***              0.73
Number of children from current union                                   3.51            1.53***            2.75***
Civil marriage                                                          0.20             0.12**              0.18
In-laws living in household                                             0.28            0.07***            0.13***
Husband works in the agricultural sector                                0.27              0.31              0.19**
Husband works in the informal (non-agri.) sector                        0.37              0.33              0.45**
Husband works in the formal sector                                      0.32              0.32               0.34
% of woman's cell expenditures financed by her husband                  0.48            0.25***            0.38***

N                                                                      2153               155                247

Note: All characteristics are expressed as shares of the marital status group except for the number of children and the
husband's contributions to expenditures (shares). Divorced includes separated women. All significance tests are
relative to once-married women, where *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors’ calculations using PSF1.




                                                         54
Table A8: Previous union characteristics, by current marital status.
                                                Remarried      Remarried
                                                                                Widows        Divorcees
                                                 widows        divorcees

 Age at last dissolution                           34.1           24.8         50.39***       32.53***
 Number of dissolutions                            1.19           1.23          1.32**         1.42***
 Rural area at time of dissolution                 0.63           0.51           0.5**         0.3***
 Polygamous previous union                         0.49           0.37            0.53           0.33
 First rank spouse in previous union               0.31           0.16          0.47**           0.2
 Number of children from previous union             4.1            1.6            4.58         2.02**
 Had no children from previous union               0.06           0.22             0.1           0.16
 Had a son at time of dissolution                  0.53           0.24          0.69***        0.47***
 At least one child from previous union is
                                                   0.65           0.56          0.74**         0.78***
 living in the household
 Ex-husband works in the agricultural
                                                   0.39           0.37            0.35           0.21
 sector
 Ex-husband works in the informal (non-
                                                   0.36           0.40          0.23***        0.45***
 agri.) sector
 Ex-husband works in the formal sector             0.15           0.15           0.21*         0.27***

 N                                                 155             247            430            170


 Note: All characteristics are expressed as shares of the marital status group except for ages, the number
 of dissolutions and the number of children. Divorced includes separated women. Significance tests are
 relative to remarried widows for non-remarried widows and to remarried divorcees for non-remarried
 divorcees, where *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
 Source: Authors’ calculations using PSF1




                                                          55
