                                                     WPS8179


Policy Research Working Paper                       8179




             The Many Faces of Deprivation
     A Multidimensional Approach to Poverty in Armenia

                                Diana Martirosova
                                Osman Kaan Inan
                                  Moritz Meyer
                                  Nistha Sinha




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8179


  Abstract
 This note describes a new measure of multidimensional pov-                         to Armenia in the areas of education, health, labor, housing
 erty developed for Armenia. In 2013, the National Statistical                      conditions, and basic needs. The approach offers insights
 Service of the Republic of Armenia and the World Bank                              into the complexity, depth, and persistence of poverty in
 began work on a national measure of multidimensional pov-                          the country; tailoring it specifically to the country context
 erty to supplement the consumption poverty indicator. This                         enhances its relevance for policy. This note uses the new
 measure, which was identified through consultations with                           measure to describe national trends and regional patterns.
 many stakeholders in Armenia, reflects deprivations specific




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to
  provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  mmeyer3@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    The Many Faces of Deprivation: A multidimensional approach to poverty in
                                   Armenia1
                      Diana Martirosova                       Osman Kaan Inan, Moritz Meyer and Nistha Sinha

    National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia   World Bank, Poverty and Equity Global Practice




Keywords: measurement and analysis of poverty, multidimensional poverty, development economics,
Armenia
JEL classification: I3, O1, R2



1This paper was prepared by Osman Kaan Inan, analyst, Poverty and Equity Global Practice, Europe and Central Asia
(ECA); Diana Martirosova, of the National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia; Moritz Meyer, economist,
Poverty and Equity GP, ECA; and Nistha Sinha, senior economist, Poverty and Equity GP, ECA. Corresponding
author: Moritz Meyer (mmeyer3 [at] worldbank.org). This draft builds gratefully on work done by the South Caucasus
Poverty team in FY14, FY 15 and FY 16 and on information provided by Josefina Posadas. We are also thankful for
comments received during a Quality Enhancement Review in which Maria Davalos, Maria Ana Lugo, Luis Felipe
Lopez Calva, and Nobuo Yoshida participated. Any errors are ours.
Contents

1.         Introduction                                                            3
2.         Armenia’s National Poverty Measurement Methodology                      4
3.         Multidimensional Poverty: A New Indicator                               5
4.         Data and Summary Statistics                                             13
5.         Results                                                                 18
6.         Conclusion                                                              28


Bibliography                                                                       30
Annex 2. Summary Statistics                                                        32
Annex 3. Construction of Deprivations                                              36
Annex 4. Program Codes for the Measure of Multidimensional Poverty (sample 2015)   39




Acronyms



CBN            Cost of Basic Needs
FAO            Food and Agriculture Organization
ECA            Europe and Central Asia region
ILCS           Integrated Living Conditions Survey
MPI            Multidimensional Poverty Index
NSSRA          National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia
UNDP           United Nations Development Program
WB             World Bank




                                                                                        2
    1. Introduction
The most recent estimate of monetary poverty in Armenia found that nearly 30 percent of the population
lives below the national poverty threshold. However, because the Armenian social protection system
provides some, though limited, basic support, monetary measures provide only a partial picture of the
negative effects of poverty on well-being and the lack of positive capabilities. A multidimensional approach
is therefore necessary to capture the complexity, depth, and persistence of deprivations people experience
that may not be reflected in their consumption or incomes. The World Bank (WB) and the National
Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia (NSSRA) have formulated a measure of multidimensional
poverty tailored to the country that uses the methodology introduced by Alkire and Foster (2007) and
elaborated in Alkire and Foster (2011 a and 2011 b). Monetary measures of welfare and poverty reflect the
monetary value of goods and services consumed by individuals and households. Because welfare increases
with the monetary value of the items consumed, those who consume less fall to the bottom of the welfare
distribution. But monetary measures of welfare rarely capture household consumption of goods and services
that are not bought and sold in the market.2 There are important dimensions of well-being that are not
acquired in the market, and even for those that could be acquired through market mechanisms, often such
markets are either nonexistent or not accessible for the poor. Moreover, consumption poverty measures
cannot account for the monetary value of such aspects of household well-being as employment, health,
housing conditions, or the quality of basic services, such as water supply.
Researchers in several social sciences have identified a multitude of ways to measure well-being and
welfare: asking individuals about their subjective well-being, evaluating welfare through monetary
measures beyond just consumption and income, and constructing often overlapping indices to account for
multiple dimensions of nonmonetary welfare. Even though the methodology differs, for all measures at
least two criteria must be satisfied, especially if the goal is to design evidence-based policies. The first is
objectivity, which can be achieved when it is possible to compare individual situations. The second is
universality within a given data set, which can be achieved by accounting for all households in the target
population. Since each measure has its own strengths and weaknesses, it is widely recommended that both
monetary and nonmonetary measures of poverty be used to clarify the picture of a country’s well-being and
welfare (WB 2017).

Nonmonetary measures approximate the experience of poverty. They are chosen to capture quality of life
and identify deprivations in specific dimensions of well-being. Based on the theory of capabilities
introduced by Sen and Honderich (1985), the underlying welfare measurement reflects how individuals
function and how much effective freedom they have to perform these functions. Limits on access to certain
goods and services, such as health care, education, labor markets, sanitation, quality housing, and public
and private services, and empowerment count directly in assessment of well-being and welfare to the extent
that the capabilities of individuals are affected.
A multidimensional measure of welfare is composed of factors that constitute how people experience
deprivations. It incorporates a range of indicators that capture the complexity, depth, and persistence of
poverty. The approach focuses on deprivations in more than one dimension that overlap, and highlights
gaps in the endowment of individuals and households that make it difficult to reduce poverty. Furthermore,
the fact that the measure of multidimensional poverty is based on dimensions that link to the persistence of
poverty, it helps to identify barriers to inclusive and sustainable poverty reduction, which can impact future
generations. For instance, dimensions often found in a multidimensional measure are poor health, lack of
education, inadequate living standards, lack of employment, poor quality of work, and the threat of
violence. Among the many measures available, the most widely used is the Multidimensional Poverty Index
(MPI). For example, the Human Development Report of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP

2
 More recent approaches to welfare measurement attempt to use indirect approaches to measure the monetary value
of goods and services that are not exchanged in the market, such as health and education.


                                                                                                             3
2010) uses this approach and several countries, such as Mexico, the Philippines, and Bhutan, have made
the MPI part of their national development strategies.

The national measure of multidimensional poverty for Armenia uses the Alkire-Foster approach. It was
formulated in consultation with domestic stakeholders on what indicators would reflect the experience of
poverty or deprivation. This tailored measure is not intended to be used in international comparisons; it is
simply representative of the country and its specific development challenges. For every multidimensional
measure, the dimensions, weights, and a method for aggregation must be selected. That is why from
September 2014 through August 2015 stakeholders were consulted to facilitate the identification of
deprivations that reflect how Armenian households experience poverty. For example, higher gas and
electricity prices required many households to allocate a larger share of their resources to heating. For the
same reason, there has also been a jump in the share of households using wood or coal to heat their homes,
intensifying the health risks of indoor air pollution. Where these circumstances help shape the experience
of poverty, one of the deprivations measured relates to the lack of a healthy source of heating.

The national measure of multidimensional poverty for Armenia looks closely at overlapping deprivations
related to basic needs, housing, education, health, and labor markets, and several findings have emerged:
The 2015 national household survey found that between 2010 and 2015 (NSSRA 2016), the share of the
population living in households that were multidimensionally poor dropped from 41.2 to 29.1 percent as
access to physical infrastructure and labor markets improved. However, regional patterns illustrate that in
rural areas, limited access to decent housing and infrastructure and high levels of informal employment in
agriculture continue to shape the experience of poverty. In urban areas, such as the capital city Yerevan,
labor market problems, particularly low labor force participation and high unemployment, contributed the
most to poverty. Multidimensional poverty does overlap with monetary poverty as measured by the national
consumption poverty line (29.8 percent in 2015): in 2015, 12.8 percent of the population was both
multidimensionally and consumption poor.



    2. Armenia’s National Poverty Measurement Methodology
The measure of national poverty uses a monetary approach. The NSSRA draws its poverty statistics from
its annual national Integrated Living Conditions Survey (ILCS). Poverty is estimated based on consumption
expenditures using a poverty line obtained using the Cost of Basic Needs (CBN) approach. Application of
the approach can vary with data availability; Armenia adopted its current specification in 2009. The CBN
approach determines three different poverty lines: (1) the food poverty line, based on the minimum required
number of calories; (2) a lower poverty line; and (3) the upper poverty line. Poverty lines are reported in
Armenian drams (AMD) per adult equivalent per month.
In 2015, the monetary poverty rate was estimated to be 29.8 percent. Compared to 2004–08, when poverty
in Armenia was substantially reduced, the 2015 rate was higher, poverty reduction was slower, prosperity
was not as well shared, and inequality was rising. As growth resumed after the 2009 recession, at first the
share of those living below the national poverty line declined, but the slowing of the economy in 2013–15
has meant that poverty has barely budged. The poor and those in the bottom 40 percent are more likely to
(1) live in urban areas outside the capital; (2) have larger households with more children; (3) have less
education; (4) be out of the labor force or unemployed; (5) live in households headed by women; and (6)
be more dependent on income from agriculture.




                                                                                                           4
    Figure 1. Poverty Rates, 2008–15, Percent of                Figure 2. Poverty Rates by Location, Percent of
    Population                                                  Population

     40                 35.8                                     50
                 34.1          35.0
     35                               32.4   32.0
                                                    30.0 29.8    40
     30   27.6
     25                                                          30

     20                                                          20
     15
                                                                 10
     10
      5                                                           0
                                                                      2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
      0
          2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                         Yerevan         Other Urban        Rural


    Source: ILCS data. Note: All calculations are based on      Source: ILCS data. Note: All calculations are based
    the upper poverty line (2009 methodology).                  on the upper poverty line (2009 methodology).

Between 2008 and 2009, poverty in Yerevan shot up from 20.1 to 26.7 percent of the population, but then
eased slightly, to 25.0 percent in 2015. In 2015 living conditions in Armenia, notably access to economic
opportunities, differ substantially by location, from 25.0 percent in Yerevan to 30.4 percent in rural areas
and 34.4 percent in other urban areas. Regional disparities are linked to structural differences related to
employment patterns and economic activity. Households in rural areas have benefited from increasing
agricultural sales but except in Yerevan urban households continue to suffer from weak domestic labor
markets and limited job creation.

Although the most recent decline in poverty allowed a significant number of households to escape economic
poverty, patterns of economic mobility demonstrate that a large number of households are still vulnerable
to economic shocks and at risk of falling back into poverty. In these circumstances, nonmonetary measures
of poverty are useful for monitoring well-being. For example, the measure of multidimensional poverty
looks into the endowment of households and describes their capacity to participate in society beyond simply
generating income.



       3. Multidimensional Poverty: A New Indicator
The NSSRA and the WB collaborated closely in formulating the new measure, consulting national line
ministries, international organizations, and civil society to identify dimensions and indicators that describe
functioning, well-being, and endowments.3 These consultations allowed the team to customize the
components of the measure of multidimensional poverty in order to raise its policy relevance as a robust
indicator of well-being in Armenia.

The national measure indicates whether people face deprivations related to education, health, labor,
housing, and basic needs (details below). It also counts the typical number of household deprivations and
examines overlaps of deprivations. The multidimensional poverty index (MPI) then aggregates this
information into a single measure that combines deprivation incidence and intensity. Incidence shows the



3
    A summary of the national consultations is available upon request.


                                                                                                                      5
number of people who are multidimensionally poor, suffering deprivations in more than 25 percent of
weighted indicators. Intensity relates to the depth of poverty for the sub-group characterized as deprived.

The MPI is constructed based on the Alkire-Foster methodology, which requires a series of normative
choices and technical decisions: (1) Focus groups of policy makers and representatives of civil society
anchor the selection of achievements and deprivations, which describe multiple dimensions of nonmonetary
poverty. (2) The technical team selects a source of household survey data, which often narrows the set of
deprivations to be assessed as factors in multidimensional poverty. (3) Once a comprehensive list of
deprivations has been selected, the analyst introduces a deprivation cut-off, which determines if a household
is deprived in a specific area. (4) The binary variables are aggregated into a measure that reflects the overlap
of all deprivations for each household. Aggregation requires that weights be selected for each deprivation,
and calculation of the multidimensional poverty rate requires a decision about the poverty cut-off.
Defining Achievements and Deprivations

The first step in constructing the measure of multidimensional poverty is to select dimensions that reflect
achievements or deprivations. These indicators complement the national monetary poverty measure with
information that better captures nonmonetary aspects of well-being. The primary dimensions of the measure
are basic needs, housing, education, labor, and health. For example, while health and education can be
partly accounted for in household purchases, it is difficult to price the value of public services. Thus, a
consumption-based poverty measure would not fully account for deprivations in these areas. Furthermore,
both health and education have an intrinsic value that might not be reflected in the cost of the goods
consumed. Similarly, labor—having a job—has an intrinsic value beyond the salary earned; it gives a sense
of accomplishment and belonging to the community and society. Finally, having adequate and affordable
housing is both important for the standard of living and related to human dignity. Overlap of these
dimensions enables individuals to reach their capabilities. The relationship between an individual and his
or her capabilities is the value the multidimensional poverty measure adds to monetary measures.

The selection of indicators and dimensions was facilitated by the roundtables with stakeholders. The
decision to use the national ILCS survey to calculate the measure also had important implications for
selecting deprivations: Because ILCS surveys go back to 2001, they could be used to construct a nationally
representative time series that could be clearly linked to the estimation of consumption poverty. However,
use of the ILCS data limited the selection of deprivations to the data available. With this in mind, the
dimensions and indicators selected reflect subjective evaluations and focus on access, affordability, and the
quality of public services and goods (see Tables 1 to 5).

A.       Basic needs goals: End extreme poverty and allow each household to lead an independent life in
dignity.

Even though Armenia has seen a substantial drop in the number of households living below the upper
national poverty line, more than 2 percent of the population still lives in extreme poverty, which means that
daily consumption does not go far beyond the basic nutritional inputs defined by the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO).

The interpretation of deprivations in this dimension goes beyond financial means to describe the ability of
every single individual and household to participate in and contribute to society. The indicator on “living
life in dignity” evaluates welfare status at a subjective level and thus combines an absolute measure with
the perception of being poor. A household is deprived if it does not have enough funds to buy very basic
items like food or clothing that are crucial to personal dignity and functioning in society.

A primary purpose of any poverty alleviation strategy is to ensure that individuals who are marginally above
the poverty threshold (often labelled as vulnerable) do not have to depend too much on external sources to
sustain their living standards. Otherwise, any progress on poverty reduction can be swiftly lost because of


                                                                                                              6
external shocks beyond the control of individual households or even national governments. Households that
depend on humanitarian aid are considered vulnerable and might even fall below the extreme poverty line
if the aid stops. When considering the policy implications in this case, it is important to bear in mind that
being deprived in this indicator does not suggest that humanitarian aid is itself risky but rather that it is
crucial to be aware of how many depend on humanitarian aid to sustain a life above the poverty line.

Remittances are equivalent to 20 percent of GDP and are important to Armenia’s economic development
and poverty reduction. Nevertheless, besides the positive effect on household incomes, high dependence
on remittances is also a source of vulnerability because without these private transfers, households risk
falling below even the extreme poverty line. In addition, the remittances received from seasonal migration
exemplify migrant subsistence activity. Even though migration gives households access to a larger labor
market and additional employment opportunities, it can also be an indication that domestic labor markets
are not offering adequate opportunities. Moreover, a purely monetary interpretation of remittances neglects
the fact that households suffer from the geographical separation, which matters considerably for a nation
that both historically and recently has been drawn into complicated regional conflicts.

Table 1. Dimensions of Basic Needs

 Deprivation measured as:                          Dimensions of achievement

 Extreme poverty: lack of access to minimum        Eradicate extreme food poverty in Armenia.
 food needed (according to national poverty
 measurement methodology and FAO
 recommendations).

 Life in dignity: lack of funds to buy             Sustain a life in dignity (subjectively) with sufficient
 necessary food or clothing.                       funds to buy basic commodities

 Humanitarian aid: being dependent on              Sustain an independent life with sufficient funds to
 outside assistance to ensure basic living         buy basic commodities
 functions.

 Remittance-dependent: needing remittances         Reduce vulnerability to fall into extreme poverty in
 to ensure basic functioning of living or being    response to external shocks that cause remittances to
 in extreme (food) poverty.                        drop.

Note: For each indicator and dimension, a household is classified as deprived if the underlying index takes
the value 1; the household is not deprived if the index takes the value 0.



B.      Housing goal: Promote decent housing and living conditions while enhancing access to and the
quality of utilities.

Decent housing and living conditions are a fundamental component of the capabilities approach because
they relate to living in dignity and with proper sanitary conditions. Earning a living income has a
substantially less meaningful impact on welfare for a person living in a house that does not have access to
hot water or sewage and waste disposal. Moreover, some housing conditions, such as having adequate
flooring or walls, are crucial for comfortable living in a country where winter is harsh. By accounting for
these deprivations in the housing dimension, the measure of multidimensional poverty attempts to capture
humane living conditions that can significantly enhance the quality of everyday life for individuals.




                                                                                                              7
Table 2. Dimensions of Decent Housing and Living Conditions

 Deprivation measured as:                           Dimensions of achievement

 Satisfaction with housing conditions:              Enable households to live in dignity in a decent
 housing conditions are evaluated as poor or        environment.
 very poor.

 Adequate housing: lack of access to                Enable households to live in dignity in a decent
 adequate housing: housing requires major           environment.
 repairs; is in a dump or slum or is old;
 flooring and walls are substandard.

 Overcrowding: available housing floor space        Enable households to live in dignity in a decent
 is less than 20 square meters per household        environment without severe overcrowding.
 adult equivalent.

 Healthy heating: household uses wood,              Facilitate access to and strengthen affordability of
 carbon, or other heating means as primary          government-provided utilities and access to adequate
 source for heating.                                heating.

 Centralized water system: lack of access to        Facilitate access to and strengthen affordability of
 use of a centralized water system.                 government-provided utilities.

 Centralized sanitation and garbage                 Facilitate access to and strengthen affordability of
 disposal: lack of access to use of a centralized   government-provided utilities.
 sanitation or garbage disposal system.

 Hot running water: lack of access to hot           Facilitate access and strengthen affordability of
 running water.                                     government-provided utilities.

 Quality of paid public services:                   Enhance quality of paid public services.
 dissatisfaction with one-third or more paid
 services used: water supply, sanitation,
 garbage collection, telephone, electric supply,
 post, banking, irrigation, public
 transportation.

 Access to transportation: lack of access to        Facilitate access to mobility.
 opportunities: poor or no transportation and
 road networks, especially all-year roads.

Note: For each indicator and dimension, a household is classified as deprived if the underlying index takes
the value 1; the household is not deprived if the index takes the value 0.



C.       Education: Enhance human capital endowment to promote participation in employment and
social life.

High educational attainment has always been a feature of human capital endowment in Armenia, primarily
for two reasons: During the Soviet Union period, Armenia was a powerhouse for engineering, research, and
development. Moreover, high levels of emigration have raised awareness of the importance of education



                                                                                                           8
(especially in certain languages) for obtaining sound employment opportunities abroad. The two indicators
on education identify households currently deprived in this dimension, either because working-age
individuals lack adequate educational attainment or because the next generation is at risk of missing out on
human capital formation. Even though a separate, self-assessed, indicator of the quality of educational
services is incorporated into the analysis to account for factors affecting the quality of schooling, there is
no readily available indicator for the skills and abilities actually acquired while being educated.

Table 3. Indicators for Education

 Deprivation measured as:                           Dimensions of achievement

 No secondary education: no household               Enhance human capital endowment; promote
 member aged 15 to 75 years has any                 sufficient education to find a decent job; ensure
 secondary education, vocational or                 participation in economic growth.
 professional.

 Enrollment in schooling: at least one child        Enhance human capital endowment; promote
 of compulsory school age, 6 to 17 years, is        sufficient education to find a decent job; ensure
 not attending school.                              participation in economic growth.

 Access to education: lack of nearby access to      Ensure access to public education.
 kindergarten, complete secondary school, or
 primary (general) school.

 Quality of education services: dissatisfaction     Enhance the quality of paid public services.
 with education services.

Note: For each indicator and dimension, a household is classified as deprived if the underlying index takes
the value 1; the household is not deprived if the index takes the value 0.



D.      Labor Markets: Improve access to labor markets and productive employment in quality jobs.

Employment generates income for households and hence helps escape poverty. Employment in decent jobs
also makes full use of individuals’ endowments and raises their participation in social life. Long term
unemployment and underemployment reflect the capacity (or lack thereof) of the labor market to provide
opportunities that match the skillset of the workforce while displaying the untapped potential in the working
age population.

Table 4. Indicators for Participation in the Labor Market

 Deprivation measured as:                           Dimensions of achievements

 Labor market participation: more than half         Improve access to labor markets (participation and
 of household members of working age do not         employment) and productive employment.
 participate in the labor market.

 Long term unemployment: at least one               Improve access to labor markets (participation and
 household member is not working due to             employment) and productive employment.
 long-term (structural) unemployment.




                                                                                                            9
 Decent jobs: lack of access to decent jobs;        Enhance quality of employment (improve status of
 works as an entrepreneur or otherwise              employment, address informal employment).
 informally.

 Underemployment: lack of access to a full-         Enhance quality of employment (improve status of
 time position in the labor market                  employment, address underemployment and
                                                    seasonal/occasional employment).



Note: For each indicator and dimension, a household is classified as deprived if the underlying index takes
the value 1; the household is not deprived if the index takes the value 0.



E.      Health: Ensure access to quality health services.

If any individual cannot complete daily activities because of poor health, that affects all other aspects of
life. The achievement of health is measured by the accessibility, affordability, and quality of health services.

Table 5. Indicators of Health

 Deprivation measured as:                           Dimensions of achievement

 Termination of usual activity: at least one        Satisfactory health condition to participate in life
 household member has ceased to perform
 daily activities because of illness, injury, or
 poor health.

 Affordability of health services: lack of          Ensure access to public health services through
 funds to pay for required health services          measures addressing affordability.
 (excluding dentistry) in a health care facility
 (i.e., access to free services is difficult or
 nonexistent), tests, examinations, and
 procedures prescribed by a doctor.

 Access to health services: lack of                 Ensure access to public health services through
 neighborhood access to health care facility,       improved physical access.
 emergency ambulance services, pharmacies.

 Quality of health services: dissatisfied with      Improve conditions in the health sector to reach
 health services.                                   increased patient satisfaction

Note: For each indicator and dimension, a household is classified as deprived if the underlying index takes
the value 1; the household is not deprived if the index takes the value 0.



Constructing a Measure of Multidimensional Poverty

The next step in constructing multidimensional poverty indicators is to find a way to aggregate all the
dimensions identified. A dashboard approach with a separate discussion on each deprivation is valuable to
illustrate the national trend and variations by location and region (see Annex 1 for interactive dashboards).
However, aggregation into a single measure is useful to summarize information and present an aggregate


                                                                                                             10
MPI that accounts for the incidence and intensity of multidimensional poverty. Weights are typically used
to aggregate the multiple deprivations. The weighting scheme builds on a nested structure that assigns equal
weights of 1/5 to each dimension (see Figure 3). Equal weighting is widely used (Alkire and Foster, 2007,
2011 a and 2011 b)—the method implies that the dimensions are equally important. Even though the results
of this weighting scheme can be simply interpreted, its drawback is in assuming that there is no
discrimination of dimensions or items. Within each dimension, the set of indicators links to the subjective
evaluation, affordability, access, and quality of goods and services (Table 6).

Table 6. Weights for Indicators by Dimension

 Basic needs    Each indicator has an equal weight of 1/4.

 Housing        Indicators “subjective housing conditions,” “adequate housing,” and “overcrowding”
                proxy for the subjective evaluation of housing conditions; each individually has a weight
                of 1/6, which adds up to 1/2. “Quality of paid public services” and “access to
                transportation” each have a weight of 1/6. The other indicators – “healthy heating,”
                “centralized water system,” “centralized sanitation and garbage disposal,” and “hot
                running water” – describe access and affordability and together have a weight of 1/6, with
                each separately weighted at 1/24.

 Education      Each indicator has an equal weight of 1/4.

 Labor          Each indicator has an equal weight of 1/4.

 Health         The indicator “Termination of usual activities” links to a subjective evaluation of health
                status and has a weight of 1/2. The three remaining indicators, for affordability, access,
                and quality, have weights of 1/6 each.




                                                                                                         11
 Figure 3. Weighted Breakdown of Indicators by Dimension




 Note: The measure of multidimensional poverty has five dimensions: Basic needs (blue), Education
 (orange), Health (green), Housing (red), and Labor (violet).



A household is characterized as deprived if the weighted sum of indicators is above 0.25. The threshold of
0.25 requires that such households be deprived in more than one indicator, and when constructing an
aggregate measure, in more than one dimension. Where a dimension is constructed from several indicators,
first the weighted sum (also referred to as the count index) of all deprivations for this dimension is calculated
to see if the result is above 0.25. Consider the following possible situation for the dimension of education:
No working-age member of a household has more than secondary education (e.g., the indicator is coded 1,
weight of 1/4), but all other education indicators are 0. The weighted count index of these four indicators
is therefore 0.25, which is not above the cut-off, so the household is not deprived in the education
dimension. However, in another household, in addition to a deprivation of “no secondary education,” one
child of compulsory schooling age does not attend school, so the weight is another 1/4. The weighted count
index of 0.5 is thus above the cut-off of 0.25, making the household deprived. The same rule applies to the
definition of multidimensional poverty that aggregates information on all indicators: a household is
multidimensionally poor if the weighted count index is above 0.25.

Though the multidimensional poverty indicators use the household as the unit of analysis, many indicators
are calculated using individual household member characteristics such as level of education or labor force
status. Estimates of multidimensional poverty thus relate to the share of the population living in households
deprived in certain indicators or dimensions.

Because the indicators are constructed using household survey data, data may be missing for some sub-
group due either to nonresponse or to skip patterns in the survey. These are the two most common Armenian
contexts in which data may be missing and the working assumptions made to compensate:

1. No household member falls into the critical age group where deprivations are defined. For instance, a
   household that has no household members of working age (15 to 75 years) cannot experience any


                                                                                                              12
    deprivations related to long-term unemployment or low labor market participation. A similar situation
    can be observed for households with no school age children in terms of enrollment in schooling. This
    analysis therefore assumes that households where there are no values for a specific indicator or
    dimension are not deprived.

2. Information on some indicators is not collected for certain sub-groups. For instance, households in
   urban areas do not answer questions on how long it takes them to reach the closest provider of such
   public services as education and health. Here, the threshold for rural areas is reasonably high and it is
   assumed that households in Yerevan and other cities would be able to access these services much faster
   due to agglomeration effects, and consequently are not deprived.

    The implications of these working assumptions are that (a) estimates of the share of Armenian
    households being deprived in a certain indicator or dimension establish a lower bound of deprivations;
    and (b) the method of dealing with missing data for some sub-groups (in particular urban) may again
    bias downward the share of the population being deprived.



    4. Data and Summary Statistics
The previous section outlined the normative foundations for identification of indicators and dimensions
that reflect the full experience of poverty in Armenia. This section draws on ILCS data to detail how each
indicator was constructed and presents summary statistics for 2015. 4

Each year the ILCS interviews more than 5,000 households; is representative at the regional level (marz
level, which corresponds to the NUTS 3 regions 5); and provides comparable data starting from the early
2000s. The ILCS asks about education, labor market outcomes, health behavior, and living conditions of
households and individuals. It also collects detailed data on consumption behavior and is used to calculate
Armenia’s official poverty rate. Since the measure of multidimensional poverty is meant to complement
the analysis of consumption poverty, using the same survey instrument is crucial. On the other hand—a
serious drawback of using existing rather than new data—constructing the measure on multidimensional
poverty is limited by the ILCS information available.

Summary Statistics for All Indicators

The dimension on basic needs captures vulnerability to economic shocks, especially the heavy dependence
on remittances, that helps to shape the experience of poverty in Armenia. A large fraction of households
across the entire welfare distribution receive money from abroad, and 8 percent of individuals would fall
below the extreme poverty line if remittances were removed from their disposable household income
(Figure 4). Dependence on remittances is most prevalent in urban areas other than Yerevan, where 11
percent of individuals rely on them to avoid extreme poverty (Figure 5).




4
  Further information on the construction of each indicator is presented in Annexes 2 and 3. Annex 4 also
provides a sample STATA code to replicate the calculations for 2015.
5
  Marz refers to the first-level administrative entities in Armenia. NUTS refers to the Classification of
Territorial Units for Statistics developed by Eurostat.


                                                                                                         13
 Figure 4. Deprivations in Basic Needs, 2015,                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 5. Deprivations in Basic Needs by
 Percent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Location, 2015, Percent

  60%                                                                             56%                                                                                                                                                                  70%
  50%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50%
  40%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40%
  30%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20%
  20%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10%
                                                                                                                                                                                             8%
  10%                        2%                                                                                                          2%                                                                                                             0%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Remittance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Life in Dignity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Extreme Poverty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Humanitarian




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dependent
   0%




                                                                                                                                                                                        Remittance
                                                                                  Life in Dignity
                              Extreme Poverty




                                                                                                                                           Humanitarian Aid




                                                                                                                                                                                        Dependent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Aid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yerevan city                                                     Other urban areas                                                                                          Rural areas


 Source: ILCS data.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Source: ILCS data.

Indicators related to the dimension on housing describe living conditions in Armenia (Figure 6). There is a
substantial divide between urban and rural areas linked to agglomeration effects in the provision of public
services and to differences in their cost (Figure 7). Unsatisfactory services not only affect individual well-
being, but also reduce willingness to pay for goods and services provided by the government.

 Figure 6. Housing-Related, 2015, Percent                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 7. Housing-Related Deprivations by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Location, 2015, Percent

  50%                                                                               45%                                                                                                                                                                 90%
  45%                                                                                                       40% 40%                                                                                                                                     80%
  40%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   70%
  35%                                                              32%                                                                                                                                                                                  60%
  30%                                                                                                                                                                                                                      27%                          50%
  25%    20%                                                                                                                                                        22%                                                                                 40%
  20%                                 16%                                                                                                                                                                                                               30%
  15%                                                                                                                                                                                   11%                                                             20%
  10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10%
   5%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Centralized water system




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Access to transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Overcrowding

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Healthy heating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Adequate housing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Centralized sanitation and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hot running water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Satisfactionwith housing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Quality of paid public services


   0%
                                                                   Overcrowding

                                                                                          Healthy heating




                                                                                                                                                                    Hot running water
        Satisfaction with housing




                                                                                                            Centralized water system




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Access to transportation
                                                Adequate housing




                                                                                                                                       Centralized sanitation and




                                                                                                                                                                                         Quality of paid public services




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                garbage disposal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       conditions
                                                                                                                                           garbage disposal
                conditions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Yerevan city                                                          Other urban areas                                                                                        Rural areas



 Source: ILCS data.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Source: ILCS data.

The indicator on healthy heating is especially important in Armenia; rising electricity and gas tariffs have
led an increased share of the poor, especially the rural poor, to turn to wood to heat their homes (WB 2014).
However, a solely monetary measure, such as consumption poverty, does not take into account the extent
to which some households will switch to wood, which is often linked to worsening health conditions and


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             14
environmental degradation. In 2015, about 45 percent of the population used wood or carbon for heating or
cooking, though urban households are less likely than rural to do so.

Overcrowding is the only housing indicator that clearly shows a reverse regional trend: too many people
living in a too small a space is more prevalent in urban than in rural areas. This result is to be expected,
given the higher population density in urban areas.

Educational attainment for the current working-age population is generally high; only 4.4 percent of
households have no a member with more than secondary education (Figure 8). Similarly, school enrollment
of children aged 6–17 is high. However, responses on quality of education (measured for households where
at least one member is attending school) reveal significant dissatisfaction with public services.
    Figure 8. Education-Related Deprivations, 2015,                                              Figure 9. Education-Related Deprivations by
    Percent                                                                                      Location, 2015, Percent

     20%                                                                                          20%
                                                     16%
     15%                                                                                          15%
                                                                                                  10%
     10%
                4%               4%                                                                5%
      5%                                                                      3%
                                                                                                   0%
      0%

                                                                                                            No secondary




                                                                                                                           enrollment rate



                                                                                                                                             education services



                                                                                                                                                                     education services
                                                                                                             education


                                                                                                                             Schooling
                                                                           Access to education
              No secondary




                                                    Quality of education
                             Schooling enrollment




                                                                                                                                                Quality of



                                                                                                                                                                         Access to
               education




                                                                                services
                                                          services
                                     rate




                                                                                                        Yerevan city       Other urban areas                      Rural areas


    Source: ILCS data.                                                                           Source: ILCS data.

Over 20 percent of households report that more than half of their working-age members are not working
(Figure 10). Armenia has one of the lowest labor force participation rates in the ECA region. Low labor
market participation, especially when 14.6 percent of households have at least one member who is long-
term unemployed, reflects structural problems in the domestic labor market. Limited work opportunities in
rural areas translate into a significant share of households being unable to benefit from decent jobs and a
large share working informally (Figure 11).6




6
 The decent-jobs indicator is constructed to capture deprivation in terms of labor market participation and long-term
unemployment. This intentional “double-counting” ensures that the measure captures the labor issues that inform
major policy goals in Armenia.


                                                                                                                                                                                          15
 Figure 10. Labor-Related Deprivations, 2015,                               Figure 11. Labor-Related Deprivations by
 Percent                                                                    Location, 2015, Percent

  60%                                     52%                                60%
  50%                                                    46%                 50%
                                                                             40%
  40%                                                                        30%
  30%       22%                                                              20%
  20%                      15%                                               10%
                                                                              0%
  10%




                                                                                                                         Decent jobs
                                                                                       Labor market




                                                                                                                                           Underemployment
                                                                                                        unemployment
                                                                                       participation



                                                                                                          Long-term
   0%
                           unemployment



                                           Decent jobs
           Labor market




                                                          Underemployment
           participation


                             Long-term




                                                                                   Yerevan city        Other urban areas               Rural areas


 Source: ILCS data.                                                         Source: ILCS data.



About 10 percent of households either cannot afford health services or lacks access to them (Figure 12).
The regional breakdown demonstrates the persistence of greater deprivations in affordability in urban areas
and in access in rural areas (Figure 13). Beyond affordability and access, there is also considerable need to
improve health care quality. Finally, 16.5 percent of Armenians have had to terminate daily activities for
health reasons.

 Figure 12. Health-Related Deprivations, 2015,                               Figure 13. Health-Related Deprivations by
 Percent                                                                     Locations, 2015, Percent.


  30%                                                                         35%
                                                                26%
                                                                              30%
  25%
                                                                              25%
  20%                                                                         20%
                              16%
             14%                                                              15%
  15%
                                             12%
                                                                              10%
  10%
                                                                               5%
   5%                                                                          0%
                                                                                      Affordability Termination        Access to         Quality of
                                                                                       of health      of usual          health             health
   0%
         Affordability Termination        Access to      Quality of                     services      activity         services           services
          of health      of usual          health          health
           services      activity         services        services                  Yerevan city        Other urban areas              Rural areas


 Source: ILCS data.                                                          Source: ILCS data.




                                                                                                                                                             16
From Indicators to Overlapping Deprivations
The ability to analyze overlapping deprivations—the number of indicators and dimensions in which
households are simultaneously deprived—is one of the main advantages of multidimensional poverty
measures (Ferreira and Lugo 2013). Figure 14 illustrates the overlap of deprivations as defined by the
indicators and shows the percentage of the population by number of deprivations. In 2015 only 2 percent
of the population was completely free of deprivation. At the other end of the distribution, about 25 percent
of households were deprived in eight or more indicators simultaneously.

 Figure 14. Armenian Experience of 0 to 12 or More Deprivations, 2015, Percent



                                               12 plus
                                              11 3% 0        1
                                           10
                                           5% 3%     2%     7%
                                       9                             2
                                      5%                            8%

                                 8
                                9%                                        3
                                                                         10%


                                 7
                                11%                                    4
                                                                      12%

                                            6
                                                           5
                                           13%
                                                          12%




 Source: ILCS data.




                                                                                                         17
      5. Results
Five Dimensions of Poverty

The divergent trends for five different dimensions of poverty illustrate that the progress of development in
Armenia has been uneven.7 Between 2010 and 2015, the share of the population deprived of labor
decreased, and between 2010 and 2012 the share deprived of basic needs went up but then fell back (Figure
15). Both trends track slight improvements in Armenia’s economic situation, which is also reflected in a
decline in the number living below the upper national poverty line, from 35.8 percent in 2010 to 29.8 percent
in 2015. For the health dimension, it appears that individuals experienced improvements in their health
status in 2011 and 2012, but thereafter their status worsened. As for housing, the percentage of Armenians
deprived of adequate housing continuously decreased until 2013 and then increased again in 2014.

    Figure 15. Nonmonetary Dimensions of Poverty, 2010–15, Percent of Population

     60%



     50%



     40%
                                                                                                         Labor
                                                                                                         Housing
     30%
                                                                                                         Health
                                                                                                         Basic Needs
                                                                                                         Education
     20%



     10%



      0%
              2010          2011           2012          2013           2014           2015


    Source: ILCS data.




Improvements in housing were mostly driven by better access to public services and goods, such as hot
running water. The indicators for subjective housing conditions and adequate housing have both been
relatively stable over time (Figure 16), though the percentage deprived of healthy heating (those who use
wood rather than electricity or gas for heating) has gone up, tracking the rise in utility prices. Whereas

7
  As discussed in Section 2, because deprivations are determined at the household level, calculated shares
correspond to “the share of the population living in deprived households,” shortened for simplicity to “the share of
the population”.


                                                                                                                     18
affordability became a concern throughout the country, it is mainly households in rural areas who are able
to adjust their heating mix to mitigate price increases (Figure 17). Even though observed gaps are small,
differences in access to gas and electricity connections do put rural households at a disadvantage; a
monetary measure of poverty would capture very differently price increases for gas and electricity and their
potential implications for welfare. Higher prices could be associated with higher consumption spending,
which in certain circumstances could be measured as a reduction in monetary poverty, since if the rise in
prices is not recognized, higher spending could be interpreted as an increase in household energy
consumption.

 Figure 16. Deprivations for the Housing Dimension, 2010–15, Percent of Population

  60%



  50%


                                                                                       Adequate housing
  40%

                                                                                       Healthy heating
  30%
                                                                                       Hot running water

  20%
                                                                                       Subjective housing
                                                                                       conditions
  10%



   0%
            2010       2011        2012        2013        2014        2015


 Source: ILCS data.




                                                                                                         19
 Figure 17. Deprivation in Three Indicators of Affordability and Access, 2010–15, Percent of Population


     Hot Running Water                                  Healthy Heating                                    Centralized Sanitation/Garbage
                                                                                                                      Disposal
  90%                                             90%                                              90%
  80%                                             80%                                              80%                                             Other Urban
  70%                                             70%                                              70%
  60%                                             60%                                              60%
  50%                                             50%                                              50%
                                                                                                                                                   Rural
  40%                                             40%                                              40%
  30%                                             30%                                              30%
  20%                                             20%                                              20%
                                                                                                                                                   Yerevan
  10%                                             10%                                              10%
   0%                                             0%                                               0%




                                                                                                         2010
                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                       2012
                                                                                                                              2013
                                                                                                                                     2014
                                                                                                                                            2015
        2010
               2011
                      2012
                             2013
                                    2014
                                           2015




                                                         2010
                                                                2011
                                                                       2012
                                                                              2013
                                                                                     2014
                                                                                            2015

 Source: ILCS data.




Regional Differences in Multidimensional Poverty

Disaggregation by location offers a more nuanced picture of multidimensional poverty and describes
geographic differences in the complexity, depth, and persistence of poverty. Regional disparities are largest
on the housing dimension, although recent investments in physical assets have reduced the gaps between
urban and rural areas. Most countries show differences in the availability of public infrastructure and
housing conditions, related not only to disparities in climate and geography, but also to the much higher
costs of providing public goods and services in rural areas (and even generally outside the capital city) and
are often rationalized in terms of cost-benefit analysis. Yet unavailability or limited access, combined with
unaffordability, heavily influences the experience of poverty in Armenia and illustrates how identification
of the dimension of nonmonetary poverty complements the analysis of monetary poverty.

Between 2010 and 2015, the share of the population with hot running water and access to centralized
sanitation and waste disposal consistently rose (see Figure 17). Recent infrastructure improvements seem
to have had a positive influence on nonmonetary poverty. A similar situation can be observed for
deprivation of centralized sanitation and waste disposal, where the share of the population deprived in this
indicator is now lower for other urban areas than for Yerevan (Figure 18).




                                                                                                                                                                 20
    Figure 18. Deprivation in Poverty Dimensions by Location, 2010 – 15, Percent of Population
                  Yerevan                                   Other urban                                                                Rural

     80%                                             80%                                             80%                                             Basic
                                                                                                                                                     Needs
     70%                                             70%                                             70%
                                                                                                                                                     Education
     60%                                             60%                                             60%

     50%                                             50%                                             50%
                                                                                                                                                     Health
     40%                                             40%                                             40%

     30%                                             30%                                             30%
                                                                                                                                                     Housing
     20%                                             20%                                             20%

     10%                                             10%                                             10%                                             Labor

      0%                                             0%                                              0%
           2010
                  2011
                         2012
                                2013
                                       2014
                                              2015




                                                           2010
                                                                  2011
                                                                         2012
                                                                                2013
                                                                                       2014
                                                                                              2015




                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                  2011
                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                2013
                                                                                                                                       2014
                                                                                                                                              2015
    Source: ILCS 2010-2015 data.



For rural and urban populations, assets for the health and education dimensions and assets for the labor
dimension differ systematically. Even though educational attainment improved between 2010 and 2015,
regional disparities still disadvantage rural households. The analysis of labor deprivations (Figure 19)
illustrates that low labor force participation and high structural unemployment are more common in
Yerevan and other urban areas than in rural areas. Deprivations on the other two labor indicators—decent
jobs, which links to employment status, and underemployment—suggest that quality of employment as
reported by rural households is lower than in urban areas. This reflects the large number of self-employed
and contributing workers and those in agriculture.8




8
 Contributing family workers are those individuals who have jobs in an establishment operated by related
persons living in the same household. (OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms).


                                                                                                                                                                 21
 Figure 19. Deprivations in Three Labor-related Indicators, 2010–15, Percent of Population

         Labor Force                                     Long-Term                                              Remittance-Dependent
         Participation                                  Unemployment                              18%
  40%                                             25%                                             16%                                             Other
                                                                                                                                                  Urban
  35%                                                                                             14%
                                                  20%
  30%                                                                                             12%
  25%                                             15%                                             10%                                             Rural
  20%                                                                                             8%
  15%                                             10%                                             6%
  10%                                                                                             4%                                              Yerevan
                                                  5%
   5%                                                                                             2%

   0%                                             0%                                              0%




                                                                                                        2010
                                                                                                               2011
                                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                                             2013
                                                                                                                                    2014
                                                                                                                                           2015
        2010
               2011
                      2012
                             2013
                                    2014
                                           2015




                                                        2010
                                                               2011
                                                                      2012
                                                                             2013
                                                                                    2014
                                                                                           2015

 Source: ILCS 2010-15 data.



Recognizing the magnitude of emigration is necessary to understand labor market dynamics in Armenia
and the experience of poverty there. Migration extends the labor market beyond national borders and helps
households to mitigate idiosyncratic shocks that could otherwise lower incomes and raise unemployment.
The high dependence on remittances heightens vulnerabilities to external shocks. Because a relatively large
number of households in urban areas other than Yerevan receive remittances, those areas also have a larger
number of households that could fall into extreme poverty if remittances were to dry up.

Overlap of Poverty Dimensions

The overlap of deprivations illuminates the complexity and intensity of poverty. Despite the positive trend
between 2010 and 2015, the large majority of households still experienced deprivations in many
dimensions. In 2015, only 27.8 percent of Armenians did not show any deprivations, but about 7.7 percent
was deprived in three or more dimensions—although compared to 2010, the incidence and intensity of
nonmonetary poverty have declined with recovery from the global economic crisis that hit Armenia in 2009.




                                                                                                                                                            22
 Figure 20. Number of Dimensional Deprivations, 2010–15, Percent



  2010          20.0                        36.7                            29.3                11.6       2.4

  2011            25.5                                38.3                     24.5              10.1      1.7

  2012             27.3                                38.0                        25.2           8.4      1.2
  2013             27.8                                 38.9                       23.7           8.2      1.4

  2014            26.3                                38.6                         26.3            7.5     1.3

  2015             27.8                                  41.1                         23.4         6.6 1.1

           0               20                    40                60                 80                 100
                          0           1                  2           3             4 and more

 Source: ILCS data.

The overlap of deprivations highlights the association between several dimensions of nonmonetary poverty:
(1) A large number of households is deprived in at least one dimension. However, deprivations in one
dimension do not imply that households are automatically deprived in all poverty dimensions. (2) There is
a close association between deprivations in one dimension and those in other dimensions captured by the
measure of multidimensional poverty (see Table 7). Assuming a random distribution of household
deprivations, 2.39 percent of the population would have been deprived in basic needs and housing
simultaneously. As the actual number is 3.5 percent (something also true for any pairwise comparison),
deprivations in one dimension increase the probability of being deprived in another.

 Table 7. Two-dimensional Overlap of Deprivations, 2015, Percent

                                                                                             Population
                           Basic                                                             Deprived in
                           Needs      Housing          Education   Labor      Health         Dimension

  Basic needs               100.0                                                                6.4

  Housing                       3.5    100.0                                                    37.3

  Education                     0.2       1.1            100.0                                   1.7

  Labor                         4.4       16.5               0.7    100.0                       42.7

  Health                        1.8       10.1               0.5    11.1      100.0             24.0
  Population Deprived
  in dimension                  6.4       37.3               1.7    42.7       24.0
 Source: ILCS 2015 data.




                                                                                                               23
Combination of Incidence and Intensity: The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)

Using a single measure of multidimensional poverty based on the five dimensions specified, in 2015 the
incidence of multidimensional poverty (the proportion of the population that experiences multiple
overlapping deprivations) was estimated at 29.1 percent. This is quite similar to the incidence of monetary
poverty. In addition to the incidence of multidimensional poverty, the intensity of deprivations reflects its
severity. The intensity, calculated as the average proportion of deprivations that multidimensionally poor
households report, held more or less constant over the entire time period. Finally, the MPI, defined as the
product of incidence and intensity, shows a slightly decreasing trend as the incidence of multidimensional
poverty has declined.

 Figure 21. Armenia’s MPI: A Combination of Incidence and Intensity, 2015, Percent

  50%
  45%
  40%             41%

  35%                             34%
                                                  31%               31%            32%
  30%                                                                                              29%
  25%
  20%
  15%
  10%
   5%
   0%
              2010            2011            2012               2013          2014            2015

                                        MPI          Intensity     Headcount


 Source: ILCS data.



Breaking down the MPI by location of residence shows significant variations. On the horizontal axis, Figure
22 shows the share of the population considered multidimensionally poor (head count, incidence) for each
of the eleven marzes in Armenia. Both dimensions show considerable heterogeneity: headcount ranges
from 0.21 percent in Vayots Dzor to almost 50 percent in Shirak; intensity is lowest for Armavir and highest
for Shirak. However, the figure also illustrates that Yerevan has the largest number of multidimensionally
poor households (almost 270,000 individuals). In combination with Kotayk, north of the capital, this
regional view suggests that multidimensionally poor households are concentrated in urban areas in the
center of the country.




                                                                                                          24
    Figure 22. Incidence and Intensity of Multidimensional Poverty by Marz, 2014




    Source: ILCS data.

    Note: The vertical axis shows the number of household deprivations suffered (intensity). The size of the
    circles is proportional to the total number of multidimensionally poor households in each marz.

In addition to headcount and intensity, the types of deprivations differ systematically by location. Rural
households, as in Shirak, Tavush, or Lori, have more deprivations related to basic needs and inadequate
housing conditions and infrastructure.9 Urban households, as in Kotayk and Yerevan, suffer more from
deprivations related to labor and health. The slope of the trend line in Figure 22 indicates the correlation
between incidence and intensity by region.

Decomposition of Multidimensional Poverty

Each indicator described contributes to the experience of multidimensional poverty in Armenia. If it is
assumed that all deprivations contribute equally, their average contribution would coincide with their
weight in the MPI. Yet Figure 23 clearly demonstrates that certain factors are more important than others,
with substantial differences by location.




9
 The NSSRA Social Snapshot and Poverty in Armenia, and previous Poverty Assessments (e.g., World Bank 2014)
describe welfare patterns and trends of welfare for different locations.


                                                                                                          25
 Figure 23. Contribution of Indicators to Multidimensional Poverty by Location. 2015, Percent




 Source: ILCS data.



Independent of location, deprivations related to the labor dimension are a major contributor to
multidimensional poverty in Armenia, and housing deprivations help to explain nonmonetary poverty, with
major differences by location. Overcrowding reduces well-being in urban areas, and limited access to
transportation; lack of adequate housing and worse access to public services and goods are more serious
problems for rural households. However, deprivations in basic needs, especially those related to education,
have less impact on the MPI in all locations. Indeed, for every location the impact of the decent jobs
indicator alone is larger than that of the entire education dimension.

Correlation between the MPI and Other Measures of Welfare

Although the indicators and dimensions on which Armenia’s MPI is based capture deprivations related to
nonmonetary aspects of poverty, some indicators can be expected to correlate closely with welfare measures
based on consumption spending. Figure 24 shows that the share of the population being deprived is highest
for the 1st quintile of the (monetary) welfare distribution and decreases consumption (Figure 24). This
relationship is by design more pronounced for basic needs and can also be observed for housing. On the
other hand, descriptive statistics for the dimensions of education, labor, and health make it clear that the
consumption gradient is far less pronounced. For labor, this links to the idea that having a job most certainly
translates into higher income but does not necessarily allow individuals to work where they are fully
employed in a decent job.




                                                                                                            26
 Figure 24. Population Deprived in Each Dimension, by Welfare Quintile, 2015, Percent

  60%

  50%

  40%

  30%

  20%

  10%

   0%
          Aggregate MPI        Basic Needs            Housing           Education           Labor            Health

                           1                    2                  3                  4                5


 Source: ILCS data.

 Note: Quintile 1 is the poorest; 5 is the richest.




 Figure 25. Percent of Armenians who Are Multidimensionally                         For all dimensions, the share of
 and Consumption Poor, 2015                                                         households being deprived in any
                                                                                    dimension is higher among poor
                                                                                    than nonpoor households (with a
                                              53.92                                 poverty rate of 29.8 percent, the first
                                                                                    quintile and half of the second are
                                                                                    considered monetarily poor). Even
                                                                                    among nonpoor households, a large
                                                                                    share report deprivations in one of
                                                                                    the five dimensions. Clearly, many
                          16.27                                                     Armenians are still vulnerable to
                                                                                    poverty because their insufficient
                 12.83                16.98                                         endowment limits their functioning
                                                                Consumption         and capabilities.
                                                                  nonpoor
                                                          Consumption
                                                             poor
             MPI poor
                                  MPI nonpoor


 Source: ILCS data.

A comparison with subjective measures of well-being illustrates that the MPI is also highly correlated with
household perception of living conditions (Figure 26). For most dimensions, the share of deprived
households increases as households consider themselves to be relatively poorer. The starkest difference can
be observed in the housing and basic needs dimensions; the disparity is much lower for labor and health


                                                                                                                       27
and almost nonexistent for education. One way of interpreting the differences depending on dimensions
could be that people suffering from housing and basic needs deprivations feel that there are living a poorer
life. Although there is need to analyze this relationship further to draw sound conclusions statements, one
can expect that, e.g., living in a damaged house or receiving humanitarian assistance, is more evidently
associated with “feeling poor.”
 Figure 26, Percent of Armenians Who Consider Themselves Deprived in Each Dimension, 2015

     70%

     60%

     50%

     40%

     30%

     20%

     10%

     0%
           Basic Needs       Housing         Education         Labor            Health        Aggregate MPI

                Very Poor         Poor          Below Middle           Middle            Over Middle


 Source: ILCS data.
 Note: Only nine households considered themselves to be rich in 2015.




      6. Conclusion
An MPI is a useful complement to the monetary measure used to monitor deprivations in Armenia. The
absolute number of individuals living in households deprived in each dimension of nonmonetary poverty
is large: e.g., almost 1.2 million experience deprivations in the labor dimension—the biggest contributor to
multidimensional poverty in Armenia. The second most important deprivation is housing, where more than
1 million individuals report multiple deprivations. For health 0.7 million and for education 0.05 million
individuals suffer from overlapping nonmonetary deprivations. More than 0.18 million individuals in
Armenia fall below the national food poverty line, are vulnerable to major shocks such as a decline in
remittances, or report that either in absolute or relative terms they are materially deprived.

In 2015 12.83 percent of Armenians is both multidimensionally poor and lives below the upper national
poverty line10 (Figure 25). For this group, a better understanding of what underlies the persistence of poverty
can enable policy makers to target interventions to the specific deprivations these households experience.
A second group of households is multidimensionally poor but lives above the upper national poverty line
(16.27 percent); deprivations make them more vulnerable to shocks and decrease their quality of life. The
third group does not experience multiple deprivations but currently lives below the upper national poverty

10
  The upper national poverty line is officially used to measure consumption poverty in Armenia. In 2014 the
corresponding threshold was 40,264 Armenia drams per adult equivalent per month.


                                                                                                              28
line (16.98 percent). In contrast to the first and second groups, these households have adequate education,
health, and housing but often work in low-productivity sectors. Policies to improve their living conditions
and programs to move them out of monetary poverty would differ from interventions for the first and second
groups. Like the analysis of consumption poverty, the measure of multidimensional poverty can be
deconstructed by region, location, and other factors as well as by the dimensions identified.

In addition to a more nuanced picture of the experience of poverty in a country, the combined analysis of
multidimensional and consumption poverty offers the possibility of better targeting poverty reduction
policies, especially to groups for whom poverty is most intense. Combined analysis can be an invaluable
analytical tool to identify the most vulnerable people—the poorest of the poor—and identify poverty
patterns over time. Thus, the MPI can be central to designing poverty alleviation programs and policies in
Armenia. Moreover, as has been the experience in countries like Mexico, the indicators and the composite
MPI itself can be used to coordinate the poverty reduction efforts of multiple agencies or ministries.




                                                                                                        29
Bibliography


Alkire, S., and J. Foster. 2007. “Choosing Dimensions: The Capability Approach and Multidimensional Poverty.”
         OPHI Working Paper Series No. 88. Oxford University. Department of International Development. Oxford
         Poverty and Human Development Initiative. Oxford. U.K.

——. 2011a, “Counting and Multidimensional Poverty Measurement.” Journal of Public Economics, 95 (7-8): 476-
      87.

——. 2011b, “Understandings and Misunderstandings of Multidimensional Poverty Measurement.” Journal of
      Economic Inequality. 9 (2): 289-314.

Decancq, K., and M. A. Lugo. 2013. “Weights in Multidimensional Indices of Well-being: An Overview.”
       Econometric Reviews. vol. 32, issue 1, 7-34

Ferreira, F., and Maria Ana Lugo, 2013. “Multidimensional Poverty Analysis: Looking for a Middle Ground.” World
          Bank Research Observer. 28 (2): 220-235

Krishnan, N., T. Vishwanath, and N. Yoshida, 2012, “Need for a Modified Alkire-Foster Multidimensional Poverty
        Index.” Mimeo.

NSSRA (National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia). 2016. “Social Snapshot and Poverty in Armenia
      2015.” Yerevan: NSSRA.

OECD. 1998, “Principles and Recommendations for Population and Housing Censuses, Revision 1”, United Nations,
       New York.

Ravallion, M. 2011. “On Multidimensional Indices of Poverty.” Journal of Economic Inequality, 9: 235-48.

——. 2012. “Poor, or Just Feeling Poor?” Policy Research Working Paper No. WPS 5968, World Bank, Washington,
      DC.

Sen, A., and T. Honderich. 1985. “Rights and Capabilities, Morality and Objectivity.” London: Routledge.

UNDP (U.N. Development Programme). 2010. Human Development Report 2010: The Real Wealth of Nations:
      Pathways to Human Development. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

World Bank. 2014, “Armenia Poverty Assessment: Promoting Shared Prosperity in Armenia.” World Bank.
       Washington DC.

——. 2017. Monitoring Global Poverty: Report of the Commission on Global Poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                            30
Annex 1. Interactive Dashboards on Multidimensional Poverty in Armenia
The Multidimensional Poverty dashboard allows users both to quickly browse through the time trends of poverty and
the incidence of deprivation for subpopulation groups across dimensions and to investigate changes across indicators
in each dimension. The user can select from five subpopulation categories (monetary poverty, consumption quintiles,
marz, urban-rural divide, and subjective poverty) and click on an individual dimension line to populate the figure in
the bottom section with the indicators of the selected dimension. If the bottom chart gets crowded with too many
indicators, the user can also select any given indicator.
LINK: http://tab.worldbank.org/#/site/WBG/views/MPI_armenia_allyears_contribution/MPIoverview
SHORT LINK: https://goo.gl/fyhKfJ




                                                                                                                  31
Annex 2. Summary Statistics
Table A1. Multidimensional Poverty in Armenia, by Location, 2010–15, Percent

                    Indicator                                 National                    Yerevan     Other Urban         Rural

                                              2010 2011 2012       2013   2014 2015     2010   2015   2010   2015   2010     2015

Extreme poverty                               3.0    3.7    2.8    2.7    2.3    2.0    2.2    2.0    6.1    2.4    1.1       1.7

Life in dignity                               50.1   50.3   50.8   49.5   50.3   55.7   50.9   63.5   40.6   52.7   57.4      51.2

Humanitarian aid                              4.0    4.6    9.5    7.3    5.1    2.2    1.7    3.4    2.5    1.3    7.4       2.0

Remittance-dependent                          9.6    10.6   9.3    8.6    9.5    8.0    8.0    5.6    14.6   11.1   6.8       7.6

Subjective housing conditions                 23.7   22.5   22.8   20.2   22.2   19.6   25.1   15.3   19.8   20.4   25.6      22.6

Hot running water                             53.3   45.0   36.6   28.3   25.0   21.5   28.3   7.9    50.3   19.7   79.6      34.9

Adequate housing                              25.2   22.1   18.6   18.8   21.0   16.3   26.8   15.0   19.2   16.3   28.6      17.5

Quality of paid public services               21.6   11.6   11.1   10.8   14.0   11.1   19.1   1.3    12.6   8.6    31.6      21.6

Access to transportation                      25.0   23.7   23.7   25.2   26.4   27.1   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   70.1      71.7

Overcrowding                                  42.6   38.6   36.7   37.1   36.4   32.1   54.5   42.4   40.4   34.0   33.0      21.8

Healthy heating                               32.9   38.8   35.6   37.9   41.9   44.9   9.1    10.8   20.4   30.8   66.3      85.6

Centralized water system                      59.8   51.4   45.2   45.8   42.3   40.2   39.5   14.0   77.6   45.5   64.3      58.7

Centralized sanitation and garbage disposal   52.6   46.8   43.8   40.2   40.8   40.0   23.5   18.2   40.6   9.4    90.5      82.7

No secondary education                        4.1    3.7    3.9    4.3    4.0    4.4    2.3    4.1    4.1    4.9    5.8       4.4

Schooling rate                                7.7    4.4    4.7    4.4    4.6    4.4    5.3    3.4    6.4    3.8    11.2      5.7

Quality of education services                 18.6   16.5   11.7   15.0   17.2   15.9   18.6   16.9   22.3   18.1   15.4      13.4

Access to education services                  3.9    2.0    3.2    1.8    2.0    2.6    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   11.0      7.0

Labor market participation                    26.3   21.5   22.0   25.2   23.6   21.7   26.6   23.4   36.5   28.5   17.3      14.9

Long-term unemployment                        16.4   15.6   14.9   13.8   13.3   14.6   22.7   22.1   20.5   17.1   6.9       6.1

Decent jobs                                   57.1   54.8   53.6   53.6   52.9   52.3   49.9   48.0   58.7   51.7   62.6      56.3

Underemployment                               55.0   50.9   49.9   49.3   48.0   46.1   50.3   47.6   59.0   50.3   56.1      41.5

Termination of usual activity                 21.1   18.1   13.5   14.7   17.0   16.5   19.1   19.6   18.1   15.5   25.5      14.6

Access to health services                     13.0   12.1   9.6    7.6    8.6    11.5   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   36.5      30.5

Quality of health services                    28.1   26.7   25.4   29.9   28.9   25.8   26.0   33.3   30.3   26.7   28.2      18.7

Affordability of health services              15.3   11.4   11.8   13.2   13.2   14.1   21.1   18.1   9.1    12.9   15.0      11.4




Source: ILCS data.



                                                                                                                                  32
Table A2. Multidimensional Poverty in Armenia Yerevan and Marzes, 2015




                                                                                   Gegharkunik




                                                                                                                                                  Vayots dzor
                                                Aragatsotn




                                                                        Armavir




                                                                                                                                                                 Yerevan
                                                                                                                                        Tavush
                                                                                                  Kotayk
                                                              Ararat




                                                                                                                    Shirak


                                                                                                                              Sjunik
                                                                                                            Lori
 Indicator

 Extreme poverty                               0.4           1.3       2.1        1.3            2.3       2.8     3.9       0.7       2.0       1.0            2.0

 Life in dignity                               90.8          9.5       77.8       51.8           35.5      46.8    67.1      67.9      63.2      27.9           63.5

 Humanitarian aid                              6.9           0.9       0.3        0.5            1.0       1.8     0.9       0.1       7.4       1.7            3.4
 Remittance-dependent
                                               20.0          4.3       8.5        7.2            9.8       9.1     16.4      7.2       3.2       6.3            5.6

 Subjective housing conditions                 30.3          20.1      5.6        19.1           28.6      28.2    16.9      5.7       48.0      20.8           15.3

 Hot running water                             30.8          22.6      22.5       31.4           21.4      32.6    43.0      3.7       45.1      35.0           7.9

 Adequate housing                              12.6          14.3      7.1        12.9           15.5      27.0    27.8      1.6       27.5      23.9           15.0

 Quality of paid public services               40.0          17.9      6.4        32.2           10.7      0.2     28.6      3.4       24.6      7.1            1.3

 Access to transportation                      61.9          50.5      60.6       45.2           32.1      30.6    35.0      17.9      16.4      55.2           n.a

 Overcrowding                                  4.2           25.1      16.5       25.0           37.3      32.1    34.2      27.2      31.2      25.7           42.4

 Healthy heating                               87.3          64.5      63.4       76.7           38.1      59.5    54.0      51.5      81.4      72.2           10.8

 Centralized water system                      65.3          92.4      36.1       42.7           48.0      65.3    57.9      2.0       60.8      9.8            14.0

 Centralized sanitation and garbage disposal   74.7          66.0      61.4       71.9           19.3      43.2    40.4      30.8      64.3      58.6           18.2

 No secondary education                        6.8           7.2       3.6        3.4            2.6       5.4     4.4       4.5       6.6       2.0            4.1

 Schooling rate                                0.5           6.2       7.3        3.7            4.2       6.3     2.5       1.9       7.7       6.2            3.4

 Quality of education services                 25.9          15.2      0.9        23.1           5.5       9.7     13.9      59.7      22.2      4.7            16.9

 Access to education services                  5.4           0.0       2.6        3.0            4.3       8.6     0.2       2.5       10.4      6.3            n.a.

 Labor market participation                    11.2          13.0      18.9       23.6           23.8      29.9    31.2      14.1      12.4      10.4           23.4

 Long-term unemployment                        1.9           11.0      3.6        0.0            8.7       12.3    30.5      22.9      6.7       11.9           22.1

 Decent jobs                                   56.4          48.2      54.8       57.6           44.3      61.5    72.4      43.7      49.2      46.2           48.0

 Underemployment                               31.3          36.6      43.3       66.1           38.1      48.7    61.8      39.4      38.7      35.7           47.6

 Termination of usual activity                 23.4          22.2      7.2        11.8           18.6      22.0    11.1      7.4       8.1       9.5            19.6

 Access to health services                     16.8          2.0       23.8       24.4           11.4      13.8    21.5      20.1      20.4      43.4           n.a.

 Quality of health services                    28.9          28.2      0.2        29.8           14.6      22.2    24.9      52.2      24.9      12.0           33.3

 Affordability of health services              0.0           17.2      5.2        4.6            11.4      28.3    4.7       16.7      11.4      17.0           18.1
Source: ILCS data.




                                                                                                                                                                   33
Table A3. Multidimensional Poverty in Armenia by Consumption Quintiles, 2010 and 2015, Percent)


 Indicator                                                   2010                                2015

                                               Q1     Q2      Q3    Q4     Q5     Q1      Q2        Q3     Q4        Q5

 Extreme poverty                               15.0   0.0     0.0   0.0    0.0    12.5     0.0      0.0    0.0       0.0

 Life in dignity                               61.1   55.4   53.1   48.2   32.7   64.7    52.0      50.9   39.7      39.9

 Humanitarian aid                              2.7    3.1     4.6   5.1    4.5    8.4      5.5      4.3    4.8       2.8
 Remittance-dependent
                                               22.8   6.3     7.2   6.8    4.7    21.8     8.9      6.4    8.0       4.4

 Subjective housing conditions                 36.9   28.2   22.3   18.2   13.0   39.0    26.6      20.5   14.9      13.5

 Hot running water                             75.4   57.6   53.0   43.7   36.6   43.3    27.9      22.3   16.5      10.8

 Adequate housing                              39.1   29.6   26.2   18.2   12.8   40.3    25.8      19.4   12.6      11.9

 Quality of paid public services               22.8   23.8   23.3   21.5   16.8   20.4    14.1      16.6   11.8      8.5

 Access to transportation                      22.3   25.9   26.4   27.9   22.6   26.2    28.0      30.5   32.6      25.1

 Overcrowding                                  58.4   48.1   40.7   34.0   31.6   59.1    53.0      39.5   39.8      30.2

 Healthy heating                               44.2   41.0   32.5   27.4   19.5   55.8    52.0      48.8   39.7      24.6

 Centralized water system                      68.6   63.9   62.7   53.7   50.3   47.0    45.8      45.8   42.3      34.7

 Centralized sanitation and garbage disposal   59.0   59.8   53.7   49.1   41.3   41.8    41.4      46.3   43.9      38.2

 No secondary education                        5.0    3.9     3.8   4.8    2.8    3.2      1.8      1.9    2.0       1.0

 Schooling rate                                12.6   10.7    7.3   5.3    2.8    12.7     6.7      4.4    2.1       3.3

 Quality of education services                 21.3   22.7   16.3   18.8   13.6   16.4    16.3      18.5   17.8      17.8

 Access to education services                  3.5    4.2     5.1   4.1    2.7    3.6      2.5      1.6    1.8       0.4

 Labor market participation                    31.3   28.0   24.9   23.1   23.9   30.8    22.3      21.4   22.7      23.8

 Long-term unemployment                        24.9   15.4   16.7   13.7   11.3   17.2    15.6      14.7   11.8      12.2

 Decent jobs                                   66.1   57.7   59.6   52.4   49.6   61.9    55.3      53.5   53.3      47.2

 Underemployment                               68.3   55.0   56.7   49.1   45.9   60.4    48.5      46.2   47.0      43.9

 Termination of usual activity                 18.8   19.4   22.6   21.7   22.9   13.1    20.0      16.6   16.2      22.2

 Access to health services                     13.7   14.5   12.8   14.3   10.0   9.4      8.9      10.1   8.4       5.5

 Quality of health services                    32.4   30.3   28.1   27.2   22.3   25.3    27.3      33.8   28.3      27.1

 Affordability of health services              20.2   21.3   15.0   11.2   8.7    21.5    20.3      9.8    9.7       7.9
Source: ILCS data.
Note: Q stands for quintile of the welfare distribution. In 2010 the national poverty rate was 35.8 percent and in
2015 29.8 percent.



                                                                                                                        34
Table A4. Multidimensional Poverty in Armenia by Subjective Well-being, 2010 and 2015, Percent

                                                             2010                                2015
                    Indicator
                                               VP*    P      BM      M      OM     VP      P       BM    M      OM
 Extreme poverty                               11.5    7.7     2.6    1.6    0.0   16.7   6.3      1.1   0.5    0.2

 Life in dignity                               88.5   70.7    61.0   33.4   15.5   74.7   69.1    59.8   46.1   17.4

 Humanitarian aid                              10.7    6.9     4.0    3.1    0.4   18.8   4.0      2.1   0.9    0.6

 Remittance-dependent                          15.4   12.3     8.6    9.5    8.0   17.1   12.3     6.9   6.9    8.9

 Subjective housing conditions                 56.2   40.7    29.8   12.2    1.0   71.3   37.1    23.1   5.7    2.9

 Hot running water                             89.8   77.9    52.9   45.7   27.4   56.8   38.0    20.6   14.9   5.6

 Adequate housing                              52.7   41.5    28.1   17.4    2.8   40.4   25.7    18.0   9.6    3.9

 Quality of paid public services               32.9   31.9    24.5   15.9    8.8   9.1    17.2    12.8   7.1    3.1

 Access to transportation                      35.5   39.4    25.3   19.7   20.7   24.2   22.0    26.9   30.6   14.7

 Overcrowding                                  49.0   43.0    45.0   40.8   29.4   45.5   41.0    32.9   26.9   27.1

 Healthy heating                               59.0   48.6    34.5   26.6   12.8   65.5   49.1    44.7   43.9   22.5

 Centralized water system                      75.5   75.0    56.4   57.8   53.0   28.3   39.0    41.1   41.3   24.7

 Centralized sanitation and garbage disposal   57.5   63.3    52.3   49.3   45.3   32.0   36.2    38.6   45.1   23.5

 No secondary education                        15.2    7.2     4.0    2.7    0.9   13.5   8.8      4.1   2.9    0.6

 Schooling rate                                13.4   11.5     7.4    6.5    6.3   15.7   4.9      4.1   4.0    1.1

 Quality of education services                 13.8   18.5    21.6   16.6    9.7   6.6    13.2    18.5   14.8   7.3

 Access to education services                   2.7    3.0     4.5    3.4    6.8   4.2    2.3      2.3   3.3    1.5

 Labor market participation                    30.8   27.6    24.8   26.6   30.3   34.6   26.0    20.8   19.7   25.9

 Long-term unemployment                        17.0   15.3    18.9   14.6   11.3   13.2   18.3    15.5   12.0   14.8

 Decent jobs                                   67.1   66.3    58.0   53.5   46.3   54.9   59.6    53.5   47.4   48.0

 Underemployment                               70.6   65.9    56.9   49.6   43.0   59.9   56.9    46.4   40.3   44.3

 Termination of usual activity                 31.4   21.3    23.7   18.4   17.2   25.0   19.5    17.3   13.8   12.2

 Access to health services                     23.1   12.3    12.8   12.7   15.7   14.2   15.1    11.1   11.1   2.8

 Quality of health services                    57.8   38.3    34.1   18.7    9.5   31.6   37.0    30.3   16.4   7.2

 Affordability of health services              25.6   27.4    19.2    7.9    0.6   33.7   16.8    16.3   9.5    3.8

Source: ILCS data.
Note: * VP = Very poor, P = Poor, BM = Below middle, M = Middle, and OM = Over Middle. Rich is not presented
because not enough households defined themselves in this category.



                                                                                                                   35
Annex 3. Construction of Deprivations


Basic Needs Dimension

          Extreme (Food) Poverty (DEP_a1): Identifies whether adult equivalent consumption is more or less than
           the national food poverty line. A household is deprived if adult equivalent consumption is below the line.
           Original variable name in dataset: aec_r, foodln
           Values used for the food poverty line are as follows (in Armenian drams):
                                        2010           2011          2012           2013         2014         2015

            Food poverty line         19,126         21,306         21,732        22,993        23,384        24,109



           Life in Dignity (DEP_a3): Identifies whether household can afford to buy food or clothes. Household is
           deprived if respondent states that there is not enough money for everyday meals or clothes. Original
           variable name in dataset: k1_1

          Humanitarian Aid (DEP_a4): Identifies households that receive humanitarian aid. Household is deprived
           if it has received such aid during the last 12 months. Original variable name in dataset: m13 (2010, 2011,
           2012, 2015) or m14 (2013, 2014).

          Remittance-Dependent (DEP_a6): Identifies households that have lower consumption levels than the
           food poverty line after discounting for any remittances received; such households are considered deprived.
           Households that do not receive remittances but consume less than the food poverty line are also considered
           deprived. Original variable names in dataset: y1_2 (identifies remittances), y1_3drm (amount of
           remittance), aec_r (consumption), foodln (food poverty line)



Housing Dimension

          Subjective Housing Conditions (DEP_b1): Identifies households that evaluate their housing conditions as
           bad or very bad. Original variable names in dataset: c19 (2010), c17 (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015)

          Adequate Housing (DEP_b2): Identifies households that have a complaint about housing and
           environment conditions in terms of floor area, noise from neighbor or outside, lighting, heating , humidity,
           leaking roof, dilapidated walls and floor, dilapidated window frames and doors, heavy traffic, industrial
           pollution, elevator functioning, water quality, garbage removal, services for common areas and yards.
           Households that have a complaint about at least a third of the conditions are considered deprived. Original
           variable names in dataset: c16_1, c16_2, c16_3, c16_4, c16_5, c16_6, c16_7, c16_8, c16_9, c16_10,
           c16_11, c16_12, c16_13, c16_14 (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015), c18_1, c18_2, c18_3, c18_4, c18_5,
           c18_6, c18_7, c18_8, c18_9, c18_10, c18_11, c18_12, c18_13, c18_14 (2010).

          Overcrowding (DEP_b3): Identifies households whose members live in overcrowded conditions
           according to the Eurostat definition.11 The household is considered to be overcrowded if any of the
           following conditions are not met:
                 one room for the household;
                 one room per couple in the household;
                 one room for each single person aged 18 or more;
                 one room per pair of single people of the same gender between 12 and 17 years of age;
                 one room for each single person between 12 and 17 not included in the previous category;

11
     http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Glossary:Overcrowding_rate


                                                                                                                       36
               one room per pair of children under 12.

       Households that have any individuals that live in overcrowded conditions are considered to be deprived.
       The rooms do not include bathroom, toilet. or kitchen. Original variable names in dataset: a1_1 (gender),
       a1_5 (marital status), age, c4 (number of rooms, excluding bathroom, toilet, kitchen).

      Healthy Heating (DEP_b4): Identifies households whose main source of heating is considered to be
       detrimental to health. Households heating with oil and diesel, wood, or any source other than central
       heating, electricity, natural gas, or liquefied gas are considered deprived. Original variable names in
       dataset: c14_1 (2010), c12_1 (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015).

      Continuous Access to Centralized Water System (DEP_b5): Identifies household access to centralized
       water and the quality of access. Households that do not have access to centralized water for every day of
       the month and each hour of the day are considered deprived. Original variable names in dataset: c9 (sources
       of water), c10 (location of water source), c11_1 (access days in month), c11_2 (access hours in the day) for
       2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015. c10, c11, c12_1 and c12_2 for 2010.

      Centralized Sanitation and Garbage Disposal (DEP_b7): Identifies households that do not have a
       centralized sanitation compound or disposal of household garbage using either a rubbish evacuation system
       or dust-cart collection. Households that use other means of garbage disposal and either do not have a
       functioning centralized sanitation compound are considered deprived. Original variable names in dataset:
       c8_3 (sanitation), c15 (garbage disposal) for 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015. c9_3 (sanitation), c10
       (garbage disposal) for 2010.

      Hot Running Water (DEP_b10): Identifies households that do not have access to functional hot running
       water. Original variable names in dataset: c8_2 (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015), c9_2 (2010).

      Quality of Public Services (DEP_b27): Measures how satisfied households are with nine different public
       services: water supply, sanitation, garbage collection, telephone, electricity supply, post, banking,
       irrigation, and public transportation. Households that are not satisfied with more than a third of the public
       services they rate are considered deprived. Original variable names in dataset: l1_row, l1_1 (2012, 2013,
       2014, 2015), l3_row, l3_1 (2010, 2011).

      Access to Transportation (DEP_b28): Identifies households that rate as poor roads within their
       settlements or to regional towns or markets. Households in urban areas are usually not asked this question,
       and are assumed not to be deprived. Original variable names in dataset: c30_1_1, c30_2_1 (2011, 2012,
       2013, 2014, 2015), c31_1_1, c31_2_1 (2010)


Education Dimension

       Secondary Education (DEP_d1): Identifies household in which no member aged 15 or more has
       completed secondary education. Original variable names in dataset: a1_9, age

      Compulsory Schooling (DEP_d2): Identifies households that have at least one child of compulsory
       schooling age (6–17 years) is not attending school. Households with no children of that age are deemed to
       be not deprived. Original variable names in dataset: e2_7, age.

      Quality of Education Services (DEP_d3): Identifies households that are not satisfied with education
       services. Original variable names in dataset: l1_row, l1_1 (2012, 2013, 2014, 2015), l3_row, l3_1 (2010,
       2011).

      Access to Education (DEP_d6): Identifies households that do not have adequate access to education
       services. If any child spends more than over 20 minutes walking or riding a bicycle to attend kindergarten,
       primary, or secondary school the household is considered deprived. Households in which any child spends
       over an hour using other means of transportation in commuting to school are also considered deprived.



                                                                                                                   37
         Urban households are usually not asked this question, and are assumed not to be deprived. Original variable
         names in dataset: c29_5_3, c29_6_3, c29_7_3 (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015), c30_5_3, c30_6_3,
         c30_7_3 (2010).

Labor Dimension

Indicators in the labor dimension use two constructed variables, wap (working age population) and lfs (labor force
status). The former is a binary variable that equals 1 for all individuals between the ages of 15 and 75; the latter
categorizes individuals as either out of the labor force, employed, or unemployed using the following original
variables: d2_5 (all years), d1_4 (2014, 2015), d1_4a (2010, 2011, 2012, 2013), d2_9, d2_10 (2013, 2014), d2_10,
d2_11 (2010, 2011, 2012).

        Labor Market Participation (DEP_e1): Identifies households in which more than half of working age
         (15-75) individuals are not in the labor force. Households that do not have any person of working age are
         considered not deprived. Original variable names in dataset: wap, lfs (all years)

        Long-Term Unemployment (DEP_e2): A household is considered deprived if any working-age member
         has been unemployed for one year or more and is actively looking for a job. Households that have no
         members of working age are considered not deprived. Original variable names in dataset: wap, lfs (all
         years), d2_8 (2013, 2014, 2015), d2_9 (2010, 2011, 2012).

        Decent Jobs (DEP_e8): Identifies households with individuals that are self-employed or contribute to a
         family business. Household is deprived if all employed members are in those categories. Households that
         were deprived in either DEP_e1 or DEP_e2 are automatically considered deprived. Households with no
         members of working age are considered not deprived. Original variable names in dataset: wap, lfs (all
         years), d1_5 (2014, 2015), d1_7a (2010, 2011, 2012, 2013).

        Underemployment (DEP_e9): A household is deprived if all employed individuals either work less than
         30 hours a week or are seasonal workers. Households deprived in either DEP_e1 or DEP_e2 are
         automatically considered deprived. Households with no members of working age are considered not
         deprived. Original variable names in dataset: wap, lfs (all years), d1_9, d1_11 (2014, 2015), d1_18a,
         d1_22a (2011, 2012, 2013), d1_17a, d1_21a (2010).

Health Dimension

        Affordability of Health Services (DEP_f4): Identifies households that lack the funds to pay for required
         health services (excluding dentist) in a health care facility, such as tests, examinations, and procedures
         prescribed by a doctor. Households with any members not able to afford such services in the 30 days
         previous to being surveyed are considered deprived; those with no member who has recently sought
         medical attention are considered not deprived. Original variable names in dataset: i1_18 (2012, 2013,
         2014, 2015), i1_16 (2010, 2011).

        Termination of Usual Activities (DEP_f13): Identifies households where at least one member terminated
         usual activities because of illness, injury, or bad health. Original variable names in dataset: i1_3 (all years).

        Access to Health Services (DEP_f14): Identifies households in rural areas that have no access to health
         care facility (1), emergency ambulance services (2), or pharmacies (3) in the neighborhood. Households
         that cannot reach the nearest of these within 20 minutes or less by any available mean of transportation are
         considered deprived. Urban households are considered not deprived. Original variable names in dataset:
         c29_1_3, c29_2_3, c29_3_3 (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015), c30_1_3, c30_2_3, c30_3_3 (2010).

        Quality of Health Services (DEP_f15): Identifies households that are not satisfied with health services.
         Original variable names in dataset: l1_row, l1_1 (2012, 2013, 2014, 2015), l3_row, l3_1 (2010, 2011)




                                                                                                                       38
Annex 4. Data Files and Program Codes for the Measure of Multidimensional
Poverty (sample 2015)
Household Level Data Files for the Calculation of Multidimensional Poverty in Armenia (2015 example):




Datasets with information about deprivations at the indicator and dimension levels are available for years 2010 to
2015. In the example shown above, each row represents a household, identified by variable “recno”.

The datasets display whether the household is deprived on any given indicator (not shown above), dimension
(shown above, e.g. poorMD_DIa corresponds to Basic Needs) or is multi-dimensionally poor (poorMD_AI). The
datasets also include information on the locality of the household (typev) and the corresponding population weight
(popw).

The datasets and a sample (2015) program code on the construction of the multidimensional poverty index from the
raw data can be accessed through the following link:




                                                                                                                     39
