                                                     WPS8114


Policy Research Working Paper                       8114




         The Heterogeneous Growth Effects
           of the Business Environment
      Firm-Level Evidence for a Global Sample of Cities

                                José-Daniel Reyes
                                  Mark Roberts
                                 Lixin Colin Xu




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8114


  Abstract
 Using firm-level data covering 709 cities in 128 countries,                        variables related to labor regulations, tax, and land access
 this paper examines the role of a comprehensive list of                            are found to be relatively unimportant. The analysis also
 business environment variables at the subnational level                            finds that the effects of the business environment vary
 in explaining firm employment and productivity growth.                             according to firm size, age, sector affiliation, and the host
 The analysis finds basic protection, access to finance and                         country’s level of development. The research suggests that
 infrastructure, and the existence of a strong agglomera-                           it pays to be comprehensive about the business environ-
 tion environment to be critically important. By contrast,                          ment and that attention to heterogeneity is important.
 human capital and a list of refined business environment




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at lxu1@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                The Heterogeneous Growth Effects of the Business Environment:
                         Firm-Level Evidence for a Global Sample of Cities1


                                               José-Daniel Reyes
                                                  Mark Roberts
                                                 Lixin Colin Xu




JEL codes: D9, G3, H1, H2, H7, L5, O1.




1
  This paper has been prepared, in part, as input into the LCR “Cities and Productivity” Flagship Report (P158837),
which is a product of the World Bank’s LCR Chief Economist’s Office working in collaboration with its Social, Urban,
Rural and Resilience Global Practice (GSURR). The authors would like to thank Gilles Duranton, Carlos Vegh, and
Daniel Xu for comments/discussions on an earlier draft of this paper, as well as participants at Authors’ workshops
for the LCR “Cities and Productivity” Flagship Report that took place in July 2016 and May 2017. They would also
like to thank Daniel Lederman and Christine Qiang for encouragement in preparing this paper. Financial support from
the World Bank’s “Global Research Program on Spatial Development” (P143985), which is funded by UK DFID and
the World Bank’s Multi-Donor Trust Fund, is also gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed in this paper are
the authors own, and do not necessarily reflect those of the World Bank or its member countries. All three authors are
affiliated with the World Bank. Corresponding author: L. Colin Xu (lxu1@worldbank.org).
1. Introduction
There are many alternative views about how a country develops. Some authors view institutions
as the key determinant (North, 1990; Knack and Keefer, 1995; La Porta et al. 1998; Acemoglu et
al. 2001; Engerman and Sololoff, 1997; Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi, 2004), while others
emphasize the critical importance of human capital (Lucas, 1986, 1988; Romer, 1990; Gennioli et
al., 2013). Still other authors highlight the importance of basic infrastructure (World Bank, 1994;
Roller and Waverman, 2001), while international organizations such as the World Bank have
argued for the critical importance of improving the overall business environment (BE) in which
firms operate (Stern, 2002; World Bank, 2005, 2010). Finally, a more recent strand of the literature
has emphasized the importance of agglomeration economies as a source of innovation and,
therefore, long-term growth (World Bank, 2008; Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2009; Jones and Romer,
2010; Clarke, Li and Xu, 2015; Li, Long and Xu, 2017).
       What, however, is the relative explanatory power of these alternative, though not
necessarily mutually exclusive, views? And are their effects specific to the context such as the
level of development, the sector in which a firm operates, firm size and age? Answering these
questions is important because governments only have limited resources with which to deal with
key challenges. If there are bottlenecks to a country’s development, it is important to diagnose
these in order to provide a sounder basis for policy (Kremer 1993; Hausman, Rodrik and Velasco,
2005; Li et al., 2011).
       In recent decades, there has been an extensive cross-country literature that seeks to explore
the determinants of long-run growth. However, a consensus has emerged that it is difficult to
distinguish between different determinants using cross-country data alone. To see this, consider
the debate over whether institutions or human capital are the key for long term development. The
influential study of Acemoglu et al. (2001) uses settler mortality in early colonial periods as the
instrument for current institutions, and, based on this, finds that institutions significantly and
importantly affect current development. However, this interpretation has been challenged by
Glaeser et al. (2004) on two grounds. First, there is potential reverse causality, that is, the outcome
variable of income can reverse-cause institutions. Second, settler mortality lacks validity as an
instrument since it captures the ratio of colonists to the indigenous population, which is correlated
with human capital (in the error term). If we have trouble distinguishing between the importance
of human capital and institutions for long-term development, how are we supposed to distinguish

                                                                                                     2
between the relative impacts on growth of institutions, human capital, and infrastructure, not to
mention a country’s business and agglomeration environments? Indeed, using sub-national
regional data for a global sample of 110 countries, Gennaioli et al. (2013) show that human capital
tends to out-perform institutions in accounting for regional development. In contrast, also using
sub-national regional data, albeit limited to the Americas, Acemoglu and Dell (2010) offer
evidence that institutions are likely key reasons for sub-national disparities that cannot be
explained by observed human capital.
       To complicate matters further, firms within countries at different stages of development
may also differ in the constraints, or development “bottlenecks,” that they face. Similarly,
different types of firms – e.g. old versus young firms – may differ in the factors that are
constraining them. Kremer (1993) describes development bottlenecks most vividly by invoking
the image of the failure of the space shuttle Challenger: with tens of thousands of components, it
“exploded because it was launched at a temperature that caused one of those components, the O-
rings, to malfunction”. Indeed, when production technologies feature strong complementarities
between different inputs or elements of the operating environment, a bottleneck such as power
supply or government corruption could make other factors much less useful, which, in turn, further
dampens the incentives for investment and innovation, resulting in a low-growth equilibrium. In
India, for instance, empirical evidence suggests that infrastructure and labor inflexibility are both
key bottlenecks (Li, Mengistae and Xu, 2011). Do countries at different levels of development
face distinct development bottlenecks? Do different types of firms (i.e., in terms of size, age, and
sector) face unique bottlenecks? Do high-performing firms face constraints which differ from
those experienced by other firms?
       In order to overcome the difficulties associated with purely cross-country data and better
distinguish between different potential determinants of growth, we follow Acemoglu and Dell
(2010) and Gennaioli et al. (2013) by relying on sub-national variations across countries. In
particular, we draw on World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES) data for a sample which consists
of up to 80,000 firm-year observations covering 709 cities in 128 different countries. We use these
data to investigate how variations in the business environment (BE) across cities within countries
are associated with both firm employment and productivity growth. In doing so, we adopt a broad
category of the BE which encompasses many of the alternative explanations of long-run
development that we mentioned at the outset of the paper.

                                                                                                   3
         Figure 1 shows the specific types of BE we examine. First, we examine Basic BE, that is,
those aspects often viewed as basic and fundamental for development. It includes basic functions
of government protection, which include containing corruption and providing basic safety
(“Government Protection”). It also includes a good supply of human capital and the availability of
infrastructure (e.g. power supply and internet technology), as well as access to finance, which is
widely viewed as a key BE element by a large literature (Levine, 1997; Demirguc-Kunt and
Maksimovic, 1998; La Porta et al., 2000; Beck et al., 2005; Bloom et al., 2010). Second, we
investigate the Refined BE, which includes, inter alia, the barriers to entry and exit (such as access
to land) and labor regulations that firms face, as well as the tax environment within which firms
operate. The third, and final, dimension that we examine is the Agglomeration Environment. This
incorporates whether or not a firm is located in a large city, defined here as a city which is either
a national capital or which has in excess of a million residents. It also includes what we refer to
as “capacity agglomeration,” which refers to the extent to which a firm is surrounded by “capable”
firms.
         The firms within the WBES data that we use are randomly selected and are representative
of the non-agricultural private sector in each economy. Unlike purely cross-country studies, the
size of our sample is such that we are able to more confidently disentangle the role of the different
elements of the BE in driving firm growth. Unlike the Doing Business (DB) project in which the
indicators are de jure measures based on the answers of a few mid-sized firms (with the same firm
size across the world), the BE measures in our data set are de facto, measuring actual experiences
of firms. Since enforcement is a big issue in developing countries, de facto BE measures are likely
to be more relevant for understanding the relationship between the BE and firm performance.
Because the sample is random, there are plenty of small and young firms, to which we shall pay
particular attention.
         There are further advantages of using our micro data to answer questions of how the
broadly-defined BE affects development. First, a key endogeneity issue that faces cross-country
studies is that of reverse causality from growth and other development outcomes to the factors,
such as institutions, being investigated. Using firm-level data mitigates these concerns because it
is less likely that an individual firm’s growth influences the overall BE. Second, by exploiting the
extensive city-industry-level variation in the BE measures that exists in our data, we are able to
vastly alleviate the multicollinearity concerns that would have existed had we instead chosen to

                                                                                                    4
focus on cross-country variations in the BE. Third, and even more importantly, in focusing on the
city-industry level BE, we are able to control for both country and industry fixed effects. This
allows us to hold constant all time-invariant country-specific and industry-specific heterogeneity
which arises from, for example, differences in legal systems, culture and so forth at the national
level, or differences in technology and market structure at the industry level. Our identification of
the impacts of the various dimensions of the BE thus comes from comparing firm performance
across city-industry cells within countries. Fourth, and finally, the GDP per capita levels (in 2000
constant U.S. dollars) of our sample countries range from less than US$ 500 to more than
US$ 24,000. This allows us to investigate how the marginal impacts of various BE elements differ
with a country’s level of development.
       Our empirical investigation yields many new findings. First, Basic BE  such as the
availability of modern infrastructure (internet), access to finance, and government protection  and
the agglomeration environment are especially important BE determinants for firm growth. Second,
we document novel evidence of significant heterogeneity of BE effects across different types of
firms. To begin with, the environment which is amenable to the growth of high-growth firms is
quite different to that for other firms. While, for the latter group, basic government protection and
capacity agglomeration are important, high-growth firms benefit relatively more from modern
infrastructure, access to finance, lower Land Access Obstacle and lower Tax Burden Obstacle, and
from being located in big cities. High-productivity-growth firms benefit significantly more from
the trade credit network.
       We also find that the BE effects depend on firm size, age and sector. To begin with, with a
few exceptions, small firms tend to need a stronger Basic and Refined BE than large and medium
enterprises (LMEs). For example, in terms of effects on employment growth, LMEs benefit
relatively more from the existence of labor flexibility and a strong environment in terms of both
linkages between firms (e.g., access to trade credit finance) and agglomeration. Furthermore,
mature firms benefit relatively more when corruption is contained, while young firms benefit more
from modern infrastructure and Refined BE (i.e., ease in entry, labor flexibility). Interestingly,
relative to those in manufacturing, firms in the service sector are much more sensitive to most
elements of the BE. An exception is that manufacturing firms benefit relatively more from access
to bank finance.



                                                                                                   5
        A novel finding is that the key ingredients for a good BE also differ according to the level
of development of the country in which a firm is located. Access to bank financing and capacity
agglomeration are more important for facilitating firm productivity growth in lower-income
countries. Interestingly, trade credit access plays a positive role only in middle and lower-middle-
income countries. However, most BE elements prove to be income-invariant in terms of facilitating
both employment and labor productivity growth.
        Our paper is closely related to two literatures. The first related literature examines how the
institutional and business environments affect firm performance. 2 Early studies use smaller
samples and focus on a few specific factors such as infrastructure, including the internet (Clarke
et al., 2015), property rights, and corruption (see, for example, Dollar et al., 2005, 2006; Hallward-
Driemeier et al., 2006; Cai et al. 2011, Clarke and Xu, 2004; Cull and Xu, 2005).3 Some recent
studies, including an urban economics literature, investigate how various aspects of the
agglomeration environment – i.e., capacity agglomeration, as in this paper, or the size and/or
density of the city in which a firm is located – matter for job creation (Clarke et al. 2016) or levels
of sub-national productivity within specific countries (Li et al., 2015; Combes and Gobillon, 2015).
The second related literature uses sub-national regional data to shed light on key determinants of
economic development. Acemoglu and Dell (2010) show that institutions are likely key reasons
for sub-national disparities in earnings in the Americas that cannot be explained by observed
variations in human capital. Gennaioli et al. (2013) provide evidence that human capital plays a
prominent role in accounting for sub-national differences in development and firm performance.
        We differ from the above literature in many aspects. Most importantly, we employ a
comprehensive list of key factors that encompass basic institutions, quality of human capital,
infrastructure, access to finance, access to land, labor regulation, tax burdens, and agglomeration.
As a consequence, we are able to reduce possible omitted variable bias and, thereby, more
convincingly identify the relative impacts of different BE elements on firm performance. The
literature on key determinants of development has focused heavily on the importance of
institutions (Knack and Keefer, 1995; Acemoglu et al., 2001; Rodrik et all, 2004), finance (Levine,
1997; Rajan and Zingales, 1998; Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; King and Levine, 1998),


2
 See Xu (2011) for a recent survey of this literature.
3
 See also Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2006) for a study of the impacts of BE variables on incorporation decisions.
Fernandes (2008), meanwhile, studies the impacts of the BE in Bangladesh using WBES data.

                                                                                                          6
the relative importance of human capital versus institutions (Glaeser et al., 2004; Acemoglu and
Dell, 2010; Gennaioli et al., 2013), and the relative importance of finance versus property rights
(Johnson et al., 2002; Cull and Xu, 2005). By controlling for all of these factors, our research
suggests that access to finance and infrastructure could be more important than institutions and
human capital, and that it is important to add the category of the agglomeration environment. The
large global sample on which our results are based adds to the credibility of our study. To our
knowledge, our paper is also the first that allows the BE effects to differ by income categories.
        The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data and our
empirical methodology. Section 3 presents our baseline results based on the full global sample of
firms. Section 4 analyzes differences between high-growth and other firms. Section 5 examines
the heterogeneous effects of the BE across firm types, country income levels and industries. Finally,
Section 6 concludes.


2. Data and Methodology
The main data sources for this paper are the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys (WBES) in 709
cities of 128 countries. 4 The WBES data are collected by the World Bank to benchmark the
business climate in developing (and a few developed) countries across the world and to understand
the determinants of firm performance. The richest country in the sample is Sweden with a GDP
per capita of 46,000 U.S. dollars, and the poorest countries (i.e., Burundi, Liberia, Malawi,
Ethiopia) have a GDP per capita around 200 U.S. dollars. The country population ranges from 52
thousand in St. Kitts and Nevis to 1.3 billion in China. In each country, the survey is based on the
universe of eligible firms obtained from the country’s statistical office with stratified random
sampling with replacement, and the result is a representative sample of the non-agricultural private
economy in the country.5 Stratification is based on two criteria: the sector of activity and firm size.
Typically, the stratified sampling yields between 100 and 1,000 firms per country, with 108 firms
for the median city. Industries range from manufacturing and construction to services and retail
and wholesale trade. 6 Each survey is largely a cross-sectional data set. However, firms are asked




4
  The number of cities with BE information is around 650.
5
  Thus wholly state-owned firms are not in the sample.
6
  See http:\\www.enterprisesurveys.org for a more detailed description of the WBES.

                                                                                                     7
about their sales and employment for both the survey year and three years prior to it, which allows
us to construct annualized growth rates.
        We include data collected after 2006, although some WBES were conducted earlier. Prior
to that year, there was considerable heterogeneity across countries in terms of the questionnaire
format, sectors covered, and sampling methodology. Moreover, the samples for surveys conducted
before 2006 were not generally representative. A complete list of variables and data sources is
shown in Table 1; the summary statistics for our key variables are in Table 2. Our final sample
consists of up to approximately 80,000 firms covering 709 cities in 128 countries.7


Empirical specification and estimation strategy
We focus on firm growth, including both employment and labor productivity growth, for two
reasons. First, individual firm growth provides a key source of overall national economic growth,
and a country in which firms are failing to grow is unlikely to develop. Second, focusing on firm
growth allows us to more cleanly identify the contribution of the BE to growth. Static measures of
performance such as labor productivity or total factor productivity (TFP) are more likely to be
subject to persistent sources of measurement error and to be influenced by firm-specific market
power than are measures of firm growth. By using firm growth and taking a difference of static
firm performance, we essentially filter out time-invariant measurement errors. Our base estimation
equation is:
                           =                +          +     +	     +     +               (1)

Here, i, c, k, j, and t index firms, countries, cities, industries, and year respectively. We examine
two different outcome variables (               ) , namely, a firm’s employment growth and its labor
productivity growth, where labor productivity is measured as sales over the number of employees
expressed in constant U.S. dollars. Since growth rates are heavily influenced by outlier issues,8
we follow Davis and Haltiwanger (1999) by calculating mid-point growth rates by dividing the
change in employment (or labor productivity) between the survey year and three years earlier by


7
  For each dependent variable, the number of observations differs, and the figure of 80,000 is for the dependent
variable of employment growth which has fewer missing observations. The 709 cities in 128 countries refers to the
sample where the missing data issue does not arise.
8
  To see this, consider a firm whose employment grows from 10 to 100 workers compared to one whose
employment grows from 100 to 200 workers. Both firms increase employment by 100 workers. However, whereas
the former shows a growth rate of 900 percent, the latter shows a growth rate of only 100 percent.

                                                                                                                8
the simple average of employment (or labor productivity) in the beginning and ending years. This
bounds the resulting growth rate between – 2 and +2, thereby significantly reducing the influence
of outliers.9 We cluster the heteroskedasticity-corrected errors at the city level.
         Among the control variables, FIRM is a vector of firm-level controls, including the share
of foreign ownership, the ownership share of the largest shareholder, and dummies for both the
size and age of the firm.10 One function of these dummy variables is to help control for the sorting
of firms across cities based on their observable characteristics – the possibility that firms with
characteristics that are favorable to fast growth may systematically sort into, for example, big
cities.11
         Ekt is a vector of the underlying BE at the city level. While firm-level BE indicators are
available from WBES, we do not directly use individual answers because they reflect choices made
by firms and that are, therefore, endogenous. We instead follow the literature by using the local
average across firms of the BE indicators at the city-industry level as a proxy for the local BE
(Dollar et al. 2005; Hallward-Dreimeier et al. 2006; Aterido et al., 2011; Xu 2011).12 In total,
there are slightly more than 6,000 unique city-industry cells. This approach of constructing the BE




9
  Since the dependent variables are bound between -2 and +2, non-linear Tobit estimation of equation (1) may be used.
However, it is not necessary when one is mainly interested in the marginal effect. The Tobit model requires
“commitment to functional form and distributional assumptions, about which we do not usually feel strongly” (p 197-
198, Angrist and Pischke, 2009), while the OLS has the virtue of “simplicity, automation, and comparability across
studies” (p197, Angrist and Pischke, 2009). We have experimented with estimation using the Tobit model, finding
qualitatively similar results to those which are based on OLS.
10
   We include two firm-size dummies. The first is for firms which initially employ between 20 and 100 workers, and
the second for firms that initially employ more than 100 workers. We also employ two firm-age dummies – one for
firms aged between 6 and 10 years, and the other for firms that are older than 10 years.
11
   A concern in the urban economics literature is that firms with good unobservable characteristics may sort into big
cities. That is, there is a sorting of, say, more capable firms, or more technologically-advantaged firms, into large
cities. To investigate whether this may be the case, we use the affiliation of high-tech industries by firms as a proxy
of firm quality or technology, and see if firms located in big cities are more likely to be in high-tech industries. High-
tech industries are those in metals and machinery, electronics, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, non-metallic and plastic
materials, auto and auto components. The remaining manufacturing firms are engaged in relatively low-tech activities,
such as textiles, leather, garments, food, wood and furniture, and other manufacturing. This exercise is only feasible
for manufacturing firms, and for this exercise we thus only use the manufacturing firms. The regression results that
relate the high-tech dummy with the In Big City dummy while controlling for country dummies show clearly there is
no statistically significant correlation between a firm’s tech status and whether or not it is located in a big city; and
the magnitude is small. We thus proceed to interpret the In Big City as likely representing the benefits of agglomeration.
12
   In computing the mean for a firm, the observation for the firm itself is excluded to avoid endogeneity. We allow
the BE to vary at the industry level since, for instance, regulatory harassment and entry/exit barriers tend to differ
across industries as well as across cities. In terms of the number of firms, the median city-industry cell has eight
firms.

                                                                                                                       9
is similar to that of cross-country indicators, which are often based on survey averages at the
country-year level.
       For some aspects of the local BE, there are no good objective measures, and researchers
rely on subjective assessment of various BE aspects. Typically, the survey asks, “to what extent is
XX (i.e., a generic name for a specific BE area) an obstacle to the development of the firm?” and
the answer is scaled from 0 to 4, where a higher number implies a more severe constraint. To aid
interpretation, for each obstacle question, we construct the dummy variable of moderate or severe
obstacles for that area (i.e., the values of 3 and 4), and call it XX Obstacles. We then calculate the
city-average of XX Obstacles, and view it as the local BE indicator on this XX aspect.
       We control for country fixed effects, which capture unobservable differences across
countries that are important for firm performance. Therefore, our identification derives from
linking differences in firm performances across different city-industry cells to the city-industry-
level BE, while holding country-, industry- and year-level factors constant. Though we have gone
perhaps further than others in the BE literature in controlling for omitted factors while employing
a global sample, we still face the issue of potential city-industry-level omitted variables. It is
conceivable that firms with favorable omitted characteristics may be sorted into cities with
particular types of BE, which, as a result, may cause inconsistent estimates.
       By relying on observational data, we acknowledge that endogeneity concerns—especially
in the context of a horse race between various alternative explanations—can never be completely
eliminated. Since many conventional instruments proposed for a particular variable (such as
institutions) are often correlated with other channels in the residual of the performance equation
(Bazzi and Clemens 2010; Morck and Yeung 2011), and in our context, we try to run a horse race
between a long list of potential factors in determining firm performance, we do not believe the
instrumental variable approach is feasible here. We thus instead aim to offer a coherent story to tie
various findings together (Rosenbaum 2010).


Classifying Key Indicators
As discussed earlier, we classify our key BE indicators into three distinct categories for ease of
interpretation: Basic BE, Refined BE, and Agglomeration Environment (see Figure 1).




                                                                                                   10
           Basic BE includes several subcategories: Basic Protection (i.e., protection against
government expropriation and against crime), human capital, infrastructure, and access to finance.
Often thought to be essential government responsibilities for a productive BE, Basic Protection is
measured by Corruption Obstacle (i.e. the extent to which corruption is viewed as an obstacle by
firms in the city-industry cell) 13 and Security Cost (i.e., city-industry average of a firm’s
expenditure on security as a share of its sales).14 Human capital is measured using Skill Obstacles
(i.e., the extent to which skill shortage is viewed as an obstacle by firms in a city-industry cell).
Infrastructure is captured by two indicators: one for traditional infrastructure, Power Outage (i.e.,
city-industry share of firms that experienced a power outage in the survey year), and another for
modern infrastructure, Web Intensity (i.e., city-industry share of firms that answer that they use
websites to conduct business). Access to finance, widely viewed as a key element of the BE by a
large literature (Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; Levine, 1997; La Porta et al., 2000; Beck
et al., 2005; Bloom et al., 2010), is measured by Overdraft Facility (i.e. city-industry share of firms
with overdraft facility), which captures access to formal finance, and Trade Credit (i.e. city-
industry average of the proportion of total annual sales of goods and services that are paid for after
delivery), which captures access to informal finance. Trade Credit is also a useful measure of the
strength of a firm’s production network linkages with other firms.
           Refined BE includes, inter alia, the barriers to entry and exit (such as access to land) and
labor regulations that firms face, as well as the tax environment. Entry and exit regulations are
proxied by Land Access Obstacle. Labor regulation is captured by Labor Regulation Obstacle. The
tax environment is measured by Tax Rate Obstacles.
           Agglomeration Environment includes In Big City, Informal Competition, and Capacity
Agglomeration. In Big City is a binary dummy variable which takes the value 1 if a firm is located
in a city which had a population in excess of one million in the survey year and/or is located in a
national capital. The underlying rationale for the inclusion of this variable is that large cities are
more likely to benefit from dynamic agglomeration economies generated by spillovers of
knowledge between firms, either in the same industry or in different industries (see, for example,
Rosenthal and Strange, 2004, and Combes and Gobillon, 2015, on this point).



13
     Other “Obstacles” variables are similarly defined.
14
     See Table 1 for definitions and sources of all key variables.

                                                                                                    11
           The data allow us to potentially delve more deeply into how city size affects firm growth.
In particular, we are able to identify whether a firm is located in a “town” (population less than
50,000), a small city (i.e., population between 50,000 and 250,000), a medium-sized city (i.e.
population between 250,000 and one million), a large city (population in excess of one million),
and/or a capital city. In empirical explorations, we found that being located in a medium-sized city
or a small city does not have statistically significant different effects from being located in a town.
We thus kept only being located in a big city and being located in a capital city, and tested whether
the coefficients are the same for these two groups of cities. Since we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that these two coefficients are identical for both employment and labor productivity
growth,15 and given that capital cities tend to be relatively large in any case, we bundle these two
categories together in our final specification to be parsimonious.
           Informal Competition, meanwhile, is measured by the share of firms in a city that self-
report as competing with informal firms. Since informal firms tend to unproductive and have lower
managerial skills along with little organizational complexity and related know-how (La Porta and
Shleifer, 2014), firms facing higher informal competition are likely to benefit less from positive
spillover effects from their industry.
           Finally, Capacity Agglomeration is defined as the concentration of firms within a city that
possess high capacity either in terms of technology, management or their ability to adapt to a
changing competitive environment. Following Li et al. (2017) and Clarke et al. (2015), we proxy
Capacity Agglomeration by the share of firms in a city that employ more than 50 workers. The use
of this proxy is consistent with evidence from many studies which have shown that (reasonably)
large firms have stronger capacity than other firms in developing countries. For example, large
firms are more productive and export more (Bernard and others, 2007; Melitz and Ottaviano, 2008),
conduct R&D more efficiently (Cohen and Klepper, 1996), and, very much related, are also more
innovative (Cohen and Levin, 1989). Perhaps because the R&D centers of large firms provide key
spillovers for small firms (Acs et al., 1994), large firms are associated with higher industrial
agglomeration (Barrios et al., 2006; Holmes and Stevens, 2002). Indeed, exogenous re-location
of a large firm positively affects incumbent firms’ TFP (Greenstone et al., 2010), while firms are
more likely to become large when they are co-located with other large firms (Li et al., 2012). Using


15
     The t-value for the null are 1.26 and 0.7 for employment and labor productivity growth, respectively.

                                                                                                             12
the same proxy for Capacity Agglomeration, Li et al. (2017) find that this measure helps explain
China’s productivity advantage over India in a quantitatively important way, while Clarke et al.
(2015) find that it has predictive power for firm-level job growth using WBES data similar to that
on which we rely.


3. Baseline Results
We present our baseline results for both the growth of employment (Lgrowth) and the growth of
labor productivity (LPgrowth) in Table 3. As can be seen, the firm level controls tend to perform
as we might expect a priori. To begin with, foreign ownership is strongly associated with better
firm performance. Based on the estimate, a one standard deviation (SD) increase in the share of
foreign ownership (0.25) is associated with increases in Lgrowth and LPgrowth of 0.5 percentage
points and 1.3 percentage points, respectively. In addition, firms whose ownership is more
dominated by a single owner (as reflected in a higher ownership share for the largest shareholder)
suffer from both lower Lgrowth and LPgrowth. This likely reflects the effect of family ownership
of firms, which tends to result in a lower quality of management, and perhaps worse aspects in
other areas as well, such as lower levels of investment in the human capital of employees. A one-
SD increase in family ownership is associated with reductions of 0.3 and 0.7 percentage points in
Lgrowth and LPgrowth, respectively.
       Relative to firms with the smallest initial size (i.e., employing 20 or fewer workers), those
firms that initially employ 20-100 workers have higher Lgrowth (by 2.6 percentage points) and
LPgrowth (by 3.6 percentage points). Those employing more than 100 workers grow even faster:
Lgrowth by 8.7 percentage points and LPgrowth by 4.6 percentage points.
       Consistent with the literature (Ayyagari et al., 2011), older firms experience slower
Lgrowth as reflected by the negative coefficient on the variables Age 6-10 and Age 10+. However,
accompanying this, older firms do experience faster LPgrowth.
       Turning to the main variables of interest, the critical importance of Basic Protection is
evident. First, Corruption Obstacle proves to be damaging for employment, but not LP, growth. A
one SD increase in this variable is associated with a drop in Lgrowth of 0.4 percentage points. By
contrast, it has no significant impact on LPgrowth. The negative estimated impact on Lgrowth is
consistent with Freund et al.’s (2016) finding that heightened corruption promotes increased
management harassment, which should contribute to lower firm growth. Second, a lack of basic
                                                                                                 13
safety, as measured by the city average of share of sales that firms spend on security staff, is
negatively (though statistically insignificantly) associated with Lgrowth (with a t-statistic of 1.59).
         Perhaps surprisingly, Human Capital, as captured by Skill Obstacles, proves to be un-
important for either Lgrowth or LPgrowth: the estimated coefficients on this variable are both
statistically insignificant and small. This finding differs from Gennaioli et al. (2013), who provide
evidence that human capital plays a prominent role in accounting for variations in sub-national
regional development for a large sample of countries.16
         The two measures of infrastructure  Power Outage and Web Intensity  have quite distinct
effects. Power Outage is not associated with firm growth. Thus, conditional on other variables,
power outages within a city do not matter much for either Lgrowth or LPgrowth in our pooled
sample. In contrast, our measure of modern technology, Web, proves to be much more important.
Hence, a one SD increase in Web is associated with an increase in Lgrowth of 0.4 percentage
points, and an increase in LP growth of 0.8 percentage points. This finding is consistent with the
notion that the internet is a general-purpose technology with widespread impacts for many facets
of the economy (Roller and Waveman, 2001; Basu and Fernald, 2008; Clarke et al., 2015).
Electricity, the old general-purpose technology, has lost its importance in our pooled sample in
this modern era.
         Access to both formal and informal finance matters. Increasing access to formal finance
(i.e., Overdraft Facility) by one SD (0.26) is associated with raising Lgrowth by 0.4 percentage
points, and LPgrowth by 0.9 percentage points. Similarly, increasing access to informal finance
(i.e., Trade Credit) by one SD (0.2) is associated with raising LPgrowth by 0.7 percentage points.
         Turing to Refined BEs, we find that Land Access Obstacle, which we use as a proxy for
entry and exit regulations more generally, does not matter at all.17 Likewise, there is no significant
association between Labor Regulation Obstacles and growth. Thus, labor regulation in general
entails neither great benefits nor grave dangers across our global sample of, mainly, developing-


16
   One possibility is that our measure of human capital is not as good as that which Gennaiola et al use in their
paper. Another possibility, at least for the firm performance part, is that we have a much larger sample of WBES
data: while they only have thousands of observations, we have almost 60,000 observations for our baseline
regression of Lgrowth. We also control for many more aspects of the BE than do Gennaiola et al.
17
   This is consistent with Bruhn and McKenzie’s (2014) survey of literature on the effects of entry reforms and related
policy actions to promote firm formalization in developing countries. In particular, they report that there is little
evidence in the literature that entry reforms impact on micro firms’formalization decisions.


                                                                                                                    14
country cities. Similarly, onerous tax burdens and procedures are not significantly associated with
firm growth.
         In stark contrast to Refined BEs, Agglomeration Environment matters greatly for Lgrowth.
First, being located in a one-million-plus-population city or a national capital (“big city”), is
associated with an Lgrowth increase of 0.6 percentage points. Second, Capacity Agglomeration is
also associated with faster employment growth – a one SD increase in Capacity Agglomeration
(0.15) is associated with Lgrowth that is 0.7 percentage points higher. Third, reducing Informal
Competition, which can also be taken as an indication of higher capacity agglomeration, by one
SD is associated with increased Lgrowth of 0.2 percentage points. Interestingly, however, while
the positive association of Agglomeration Environment with Lgrowth is strong, its association
with LPgrowth is weak. Hence, for our global sample of cities, whether or not a firm is located in
a big city seems not to matter for its labor productivity growth. Prima facie, this would seem to
suggest a general absence of dynamic agglomeration economies, although it may be the case that
our simple binary dummy variable is too crude a measure of city size to pick-up such effects. The
absence of evidence of dynamic agglomeration economies also does not rule out the possible
presence of static agglomeration economies, which would tend to manifest themselves in levels,
rather than growth rates, of productivity. 18
         As a robustness check, and to shed light on the extent to which each category of BE
variables explains the observed variations in outcomes, we re-do the analysis of Table 3 in Table
4, but using the city-industry level observations only. In other words, we aggregate both the
outcome and the explanatory variables into their city-industry means.19 This specification has the
added advantage of being unlikely to over-state estimation precision. Moreover, we can report the
additional contribution of a specific BE category to explaining the within and the between R
squared to indicate the relative importance of that category for explaining the outcome (Gennaioli
et al., 2013): the larger is the change in the R squared, the more important a category is.
         Overall, the qualitative results tend to be quite similar with a couple of exceptions. First,
Security Costs, previously insignificant for explaining Lgrowth, become highly significant and

18
   In exploratory runs, we have also examined the association between a firm’s level of total factor productivity and
the agglomeration environment, and we find positive associations with both Capacity Agglomeration (significant at
the X percent level) and In Big City (significantly at 10 percent level).
19
   We tried both the unweighted (as reported here) and the weighted (using firm employment) version, and the
qualitative results on estimates tend to be similar. However, with not many observations for each cell, the weighted
results can easily be overwhelmed by the presence of a single large firm, and is therefore probably less meaningful.

                                                                                                                   15
with a slightly larger magnitude (and the same sign). Second, In Big City becomes insignificant
(with the same sign) for explaining Lgrowth.
       In terms of explaining both within and between variations for both Lgrowth and LPgrowth,
and focusing on the three big categories (i.e., Basic BE, Refined BE, and Agglomeration
Environment), Basic BE emerges as the most important, especially in terms of explaining within
variations. Agglomeration Environment explains relatively more within variations than Refined
BE, while Refined BE explains more between variations than Agglomeration Environment.
       Looking into specific components of the Basic BE, both in terms of explaining the within
and the between variations, access to finance emerges as the most important, followed by
infrastructure. The order of importance between human capital and Basic Protection (roughly
corresponding to “institutions” in the literature) depends on if it is within or between variations:
Basic Protection is slightly more effective in explaining the within variations, while human capital
is more effective in explaining the between variations.
       To state briefly, Basic Protection, modern infrastructure (i.e., internet), and access to
finance are all important for firm growth, so too, at least for employment growth, is the
Agglomeration Environment. Less important are electricity, human capital, and Refined BE.


4. High-Growth Firms
Recent research has shown that high-growth firms account for a disproportionate share of jobs,
productivity, and output growth in most countries (Haltiwanger et al., 2013, 2016; Coad et al.,
2014). From a policy point of view, it is thus critically important to understand the drivers of high-
growth firms. To this end, we examine how the BE affects firm performance for both high- and
non-high growth firms. In examining high-growth firms, we differ from the existing literature in
this area in two main ways (Coad and Tamvada, 2008; Gupta et al.; 2013; Hampel-Milagrosa et
al., 2015; Haltiwanger et al., 2016). First, we make use of a much more comprehensive list of BE
variables than the previous literature. Second, we examine both employment growth and
productivity growth by quantile regressions systematically. In particular, we estimate
simultaneous-quantile regressions for 5, 25, 50, 75, 95 percentiles, with bootstrapped standard
errors (based on 100 replications). The differences in results (in Table 5) across quantiles sheds
light on how the BE effects differ between high- (i.e., top quantiles) and non-high growth firms


                                                                                                   16
(i.e., low quantiles). For exposition convenience, we call the 75th percentile high-growth firms; the
95th percentile very-high-growth firms.20
        Higher growth firms behave differently from other firms in relation to Basic Protection and
to human capital. Corruption obstacle, for instance, is negatively associated with Lgrowth for firms
in the bottom half of the Lgrowth distribution, but positively associated with LPgrowth for high-
growth firms and especially very-high-growth firms, perhaps indicating the importance of
politically connected firms in developing countries. This is consistent with the notion that
privileged (high- and very-high growth) firms are able to evade normal constraints imposed by the
government (Hallward-Dreimeier and Pritchett, 2015), or even benefit from such constraints
because they, in effect, act as entry barriers for non-privileged firms (Acemoglu, 2010). Similarly,
higher Security Costs tend to be associated with lower Lgrowth and LPgrowth for non-high-growth
firms (for the bottom quartile), but higher LPgrowth for high-growth firms.
        Neither human capital (i.e., Skill Obstacle) nor electricity outage have a distinct and
significant association with growth at the specified percentiles. In contrast, modern infrastructure
(i.e. Web) has an increasingly positive association with both Lgrowth and LPgrowth at higher
percentiles. The positive association of Web with growth begins at the 25th percentile for Lgrowth,
with a coefficient of 0.006, and the magnitude increases 7-fold for very high-growth firms. In
contrast, the positive and significant association of Web with LPgrowth is observed only for high-
growth firms with a coefficient of 0.017, and though the coefficient increases to 0.026 for very-
high-growth firms, it is no longer statistically significant. Modern infrastructure is thus crucial for
job creation for all but the lowest growth firms, while it is also important to the productivity growth
of high, although not necessarily very-high, growth firms.
        Overall, access to finance seems to benefit higher-growth firms more than it does other
firms. Bank finance (i.e., Overdraft Facility) tends to benefit faster-growth firms more in Lgrowth.
Its positive association with Lgrowth kicks in at the 25th percentile with a coefficient of 0.002, and
it rises to 0.006 at the median, 0.017 for high-growth firms, and 0.024 for very-high-growth firms.
Interestingly, access to bank finance benefits tail firms more than firms in the middle in terms of
effects on LPgrowth: the co-efficient on Overdraft Facility is roughly twice as large at the 5th and
95th percentiles as it is for the percentiles in-between. Trade credit, meanwhile, is associated with

20
  When summarizing the overall results, we sometimes bundle these two categories as higher growth firms just to
simplify.

                                                                                                            17
lower Lgrowth at the 5th and 25th percentiles, and higher LPgrowth at above median percentiles,
with an especially large magnitude for very-high-growth firms—its magnitude is five-fold that at
the median.
       Among Refined BE, tax burdens and land access seem to matter much more for higher-
growth firms. While Labor Regulation Obstacle does not seem to matter at any percentile, Land
Access Obstacle is associated with lower Lgrowth and LPgrowth for high-growth firms. Thus,
land access difficulties hurt high- but not very-high-growth firms. In contrast, Tax Obstacles
clearly hurt both high-, and especially very-high-, growth firms. While not systematically
associated with Lgrowth for the majority of low-percentile firms, it is negative and significant for
high-growth firms (i.e., -0.008) but especially so (i.e., -0.022) for very-high-growth firms.
       The effects of Agglomeration Environment also differ greatly by quantiles. In Big City is
associated with higher Lgrowth for all firms at the 25th percentile or above, with the coefficient
rising from 0.001 (25th) to 0.004 (50th), 0.007 (75th), and ending up at 0.008 (95th). Thus higher-
growth firms gain more momentum in expansion from being located in big cities. Somewhat
surprisingly, In Big City is associated with lower LPgrowth (by 0.5 percentage points) for high-
growth firms (but not other firms). In sharp contrast, the results of both Capacity Agglomeration
and Informal Competition indicate that low-growth firms benefit the most from capacity
agglomeration. For instance, Capacity Agglomeration is associated with higher Lgrowth only for
the bottom 25 percentile firms (with a coefficient of 0.005), but especially for the bottom 5th
percentile (with a coefficient of 0.086). Similarly, informal competition is associated with less
negative effect on Lgrowth, and more positive effects on LPgrowth for bottom-percentile firms.
       To summarize, non-high-growth firms benefit more from Basic Protection and capacity
agglomeration. High- and very-high-growth firms benefit more from modern infrastructure, access
to finance, lower Land Access Obstacle and lower Tax Burden Obstacle, and affiliation with big
cities. High-productivity-growth firms benefit significantly more from the trade credit network.


5. Heterogeneous Effects across Firm Types, Industries and Income Levels
We now explore how the effects of cross-city variations in the BE differ depending on the size of
the firm, the age of the firm, whether the firm is operating in the manufacturing or service sector,
and the level of development of the country in which the firm is located.


                                                                                                 18
Small vs Large and Medium Firms
Of particular interest to researchers and policy makers is how small firms differ from large and
medium enterprises (LMEs) in terms of the BE that can best facilitate their performance. Since
small firms are typically defined to be those with fewer than 50 employees (Beck et al., 2008), we
classify firms into small firms (i.e., those hiring fewer than 50 employees, “SMALL”) and LMEs
(i.e., those with 50 or more employees, LMEs), and interact SMALL with our key BE variables.21
As before, in our final specification, we do not include those interaction terms that are never
statistically significant (at the five percent level) in any of the outcome regressions. Table 6 reports
the results. Since those BE elements without significant interaction terms tend to have very similar
coefficients to those reported in earlier tables, we do not report such BE elements in this table in
order to simplify presentation.22
        Different elements of Basic Protection have differential relative benefits for small firms.
Corruption obstacles are particularly taxing for small firms in terms of Lgrowth,23 but do not seem
to hinder LMEs. This is perhaps because small firms do not have sufficient resources to facilitate
relationships with regulators and tax collectors, and thus are more vulnerable to government
expropriation (Cai et al., 2011). Relatedly, Security Cost has a negative effect on Lgrowth for
small firms (but not for other firms). Thus, lack of basic safety is particularly taxing for small firms,
while LMEs are better able to circumvent such challenges using their own resources.
        There is evidence that obstacles to acquiring skilled workers favor LMEs in terms of
Lgrowth. The obstacle on skilled workers has a positive association with Lgrowth for LMEs,
perhaps reflecting a change in labor strategy of using more unskilled workers and thus a higher
Lgrowth. Alternatively, LMEs might be able to capture a larger share of skilled workers in local
labor markets where skilled workers are scarce, thereby allowing them to gain a competitive
advantage over small firms, which, in turn, allows them to grow faster. In contrast, the net effect
of Skill Obstacle on Lgrowth is essentially zero for small firms.




21
   Since we have a large number of variables, we only interact SMALL with the key business and agglomeration
environmental variables.
22
   We follow these presentation principles for the interaction exercises in the remainder of this paper.
23
   Cai et al. (2011) find similar results for firms in China.

                                                                                                               19
       Infrastructure issues hurt both types of firms, but especially small firms. First, Outage has
a negative association with Lgrowth for small firms (but not for LMEs). Second, a lower Web is
associated with lower Lgrowth for both types of firms. For LMEs, reducing Web by one SD (0.24)
is associated with lower Lgrowth of 0.9 percentage points, but it is not significantly associated
with LPgrowth. For small firms, reducing Web by one SD (0.24) is associated with lower Lgrowth
by 0.2 percentage points, and LPgrowth by 1.2 percentage points. For small firms, the lack of
modern infrastructure is thus particularly damaging for productivity improvement; while the lack
of traditional electricity infrastructure is particularly damaging for employment growth.
       Land Access Obstacle has a negative association with Lgrowth for small firms, whereas
the association for LMEs is statistically insignificant. This could be because small firms find the
fixed costs of accessing land (i.e., licensing, legal procedures, and so on) significantly less
affordable than LMEs, which, as a result, constrains their ability to expand over time.
       Access to trade credit seems to benefit LMEs more than small firms. First, trade credit
access (Trade Credit) seems to shift the competitive balance and dynamic potential within cities
to LMEs at the expense of small firms. Hence, in the LPgrowth regression, Trade Credit has a
positive coefficient on LPgrowth for LMEs that is around twice as large as that for small firms.
Moreover, in cities with better trade credit access, small firms have lower Lgrowth. Our
interpretation is that the reliance on trade credit reflects the existence of more intricate production
network structures among firms, and small firms are ill-equipped to benefit from such complex
relationships. As a result, they suffer in their size expansion.
       Tax Rate Obstacles has no significant association with either Lgrowth or LPgrowth for
LMEs. By contrast, for small firms, it is negatively associated with Lgrowth, while simultaneously
positively associated with LPgrowth.
       Labor regulation seems to hurt LMEs more than small firms. Labor regulation obstacles
have a negative association with Lgrowth, but only for LMEs. A one SD (0.2) increase in this
variable is associated with a 0.7 percentage point reduction in Lgrowth for LMEs. In contrast, for
small firms, labor regulation obstacle has no meaningful association with LPgrowth, and a slight
positive association with Lgrowth. For small firms, a one SD increase in labor regulation obstacle
is associated with a 0.3 percentage point increase in Lgrowth. This likely reflects small firms’
comparative advantage in evading labor regulation, and they grow relatively faster as a result.
Labor inflexibility implies lower Lgrowth for relatively large firms, perhaps because small firms

                                                                                                    20
are more likely to operate below the employment threshold for labor regulation, as is often
observed in developing countries such as India (Li, Long and Xu, 2017), which, in turn, allows
small firms to acquire market share at the expense of larger firms, indicating a general equilibrium
composition effect (Acemoglu, 2010).
         At least in terms of Lgrowth, LMEs benefit significantly more from agglomeration. First,
the Lgrowth benefits for a small firm of being in a big city are much smaller than for a LME. The
effect on Lgrowth for small firms of being in such a city is only a quarter of that for LMEs. Second,
the net effect of Capacity Agglomeration on Lgrowth is negative for small firms, but positive for
LMEs, indicating a general equilibrium size composition effect (Acemoglu 2010). However,
Capacity Agglomeration is positively and significantly associated with LPgrowth only for small
firms. Finally, the prevalence of informal competition (Informal Competition) hurts Lgrowth for
small firms, but not for LMEs. This is not surprising since informal firms tend to be closer
competitors for small formal firms than do for LMEs. Interestingly, competition from informal
firms is statistically significantly associated with higher LPgrowth for LMEs.
         To summarize, small firms benefit in Lgrowth relatively more than LMEs when there are:
better Basic Protection, adequate human capital, good basic infrastructure (i.e., electricity), better
Refined BE (i.e., land access obstacles, tax obstacles). In LPgrowth, small firms benefit more from
modern infrastructure (i.e., web) and capacity agglomeration. However, in terms of effects on
Lgrowth, LMEs benefit more from labor flexibility, access to trade credit finance, and
agglomeration.


Young vs. Old Firms
Young firms may benefit from the BE differently relative to older, more established, firms in many
ways. For instance, they may have a shorter credit history and worse access to finance. They may
also have less well-developed relationships with government officials, thereby making them more
vulnerable to various regulations. To investigate how the employment and productivity growth of
young and old firms differ in their relationships with the BE, we create a dummy variable, YOUNG,
which takes the value 1 if a firm was established less than 10 years ago. Table 7 suggests that the
effects of the underlying BE on young firms differ in several areas from those on more mature
firms.


                                                                                                   21
         Corruption Obstacle is taxing for both old and young firms, but especially for old firms.
Based on our estimates, a one SD increase in Corruption Obstacle is associated with a 0.5
percentage point reduction in Lgrowth for old firms, but only a 0.2 percentage point reduction for
young firms. The stronger detrimental effect on old firms is perhaps because the performance of
such firms is subject to less uncertainty than is the performance of young firms and their higher
available rents expose them to more regulatory or bureaucratic harassment (Clarke and Xu, 2014).
         Modern technology (i.e., Web) proves to be a means for young firms to catch-up with older
firms. This follows from the finding on Lgrowth that Web has a significantly stronger effect on
young firms than on old firms. Moreover, in terms of magnitude, the estimated effect is more than
twice as strong for young firms than it is for old firms.24 The effect of Web on LPgrowth is also
stronger for young firms than it is for old firms without the difference being statistically significant.
         Young firms benefit from Skill Obstacle in terms of Lgrowth. This is not surprising since
young firms are likely better positioned to take advantage of skill shortages.25
         Young firms benefit more from lower Land Access Obstacle. For these firms, a one SD
(0.21) reduction in Land Access Obstacle is associated with an increase in Lgrowth of 0.4
percentage points. This result is intuitive: the acquisition of land tends to be concentrated in the
early years of a firm.
         Access to bank finance is associated with higher Lgrowth and LPgrowth for both old and
young firms, with an effect that is slightly more muted in LPgrowth for young firms. For old firms,
a one SD increase in access to bank finance is associated with a 0.4 percentage points increase in
Lgrowth and 1 percentage point increase in LPgrowth. For young firms, the effects on Lgrowth
and LPgrowth are roughly half those for old firms. Access to trade credit is positively associated
with LPgrowth (but not Lgrowth) for both old and young firms.
         Labor Regulation Obstacle is negatively and statistically significantly associated with
Lgrowth only for the young. This is not surprising since young firms grow much faster and adjust
their labor more often, and labor regulations thus hurts them more.
         Interestingly, in terms of Lgrowth, young firms seem to benefit less from capacity
agglomeration than old firms, although both benefit significantly. Based on the regression, a one

24
  The result on Lgrowth is significant at the 10-5% level.
25
  It is perhaps useful to point that being young and being small is not strongly correlated. The correlation
coefficient of being young and being SMEs is only 0.16.

                                                                                                               22
SD increase in capacity agglomeration is associated with higher Lgrowth of 0.9 percentage points
for old firms, but only 0.3 percentage points for young firms. Relatedly, young firms suffer in
terms of LPgrowth from being located in a “big city.” This could be because such firms particularly
feel the impacts of the severe congestion costs that are often a characteristic feature of larger cities.
In contrast, they benefit more than old firms from capacity agglomeration in terms of LPgrowth.
        To summarize, old firms benefit more from containing corruption, while young firms
benefit more from Refined BE (i.e., ease of entry and exit, and labor flexibility) and modern web
technology. Both young and old firms benefit from capacity agglomeration, but young firms
benefit more from capacity agglomeration in LPgrowth, while old firms benefit more in Lgrowth.


Manufacturing vs Service Sector Firms
How does the effectiveness of various BE variables hinge on the sector affiliation of the firm?
Answering this question may allow us to offer policy insights based on a location’s sector structure.
A first step towards answering this question can be made by examining how the BE effects differ
between manufacturing and service firms, which differ fundamentally with regards to, for example,
the tradability of their products. We thus interact SERVICE, a dummy variable indicating that a
firm belongs to the service sector, with our key BE variables in Table 8.
        Corruption Obstacles and reliable power supply affect manufacturing and service firms
very differently. Corruption Obstacles has no strong relationship with growth outcomes for
manufacturing. By contrast, for service-sector firms, a higher value of Corruption Obstacle is
associated with lower Lgrowth. Corruption thus has a stronger deterrent effect for firm growth in
the service than in the manufacturing sector. Similarly, reliable power supply is more important
for service firms: reducing Power Outage by one SD (0.27) is associated with increasing LPgrowth
by 1.1 percentage points.
        Land access is also more important for service firms. A one SD drop in Land Access
Obstacle (0.21) is associated with increasing Lgrowth by 0.5 percentage points for service firms
(but not for manufacturing firms). This is not surprising since entry and exits tend to be more
prevalent for services than for manufacturing, causing stronger demand for land access and sales.
        Manufacturing firms benefit relatively more from bank financing, while service firms
benefit relatively more from trade credit. Local access to bank finance is important for both


                                                                                                      23
manufacturing and service firms, but especially for manufacturing firms. For manufacturing
(service) firms, its one-SD increase of 0.26 is associated with raising LPgrowth by 1 (0.3)
percentage points. In contrast, service (but not manufacturing) firms benefit from a local
environment that allows for better access to trade credit. Increasing it by one SD (0.2) is associated
with an increase in LPgrowth of 1.2 percentage points.
       Labor Regulation Obstacle, in contrast, is positively associated with Lgrowth—only for
service firms. This could reflect the general equilibrium composition effect: service firms are likely
better able to evade labor regulation, and thus able to grow relatively faster.
       Service firms benefit more from being located in a big city. While being located in such a
city confers no growth benefits for manufacturing firms, for service firms it is associated with
raising Lgrowth by 0.9 percentage points and LPgrowth by 1.4 percentage points, both large effects.
       To summarize, service-industry firms benefit more from Basic Protection, ease of land
access, availability of trade credit, labor regulation, and being in a big city. Manufacturing firms
benefit more from bank financing.


By the Stage of Development
It is plausible that the BE that is most conducive to strong firm performance differs according to
the stage of development of the country in which a firm is located. For instance, some argue that
formal finance is not needed when a country is at a relatively early stage of development. This is
because, at such a stage, alternative mechanisms such as reputation and trade credit may suffice
for development (Allen, Qian and Qian 2015). One may also imagine that some elements of the
BE, such as protection of intellectual property rights, may be best complemented with legal
enforcement, which is better in richer countries (McMillan and Woodruff, 2002). Financial
constraints may be particularly relevant for countries when they reach the stage of development
that, for example, allows them to graduate from International Development Assistance (IDA)
status – i.e. as they pass from low to lower middle-income status (Galiani et al., 2017). To aim for
policy prescriptions specific to countries at various stages of development, we interact our key BE
variables with two dummy variables. The first dummy, POOR, adopts a value of one when a
country’s level of GDP per capita in the survey year is less than 1000 constant U.S. dollars (in
2005 value). Meanwhile, the second dummy, UPPER MIDDLE, is set equal to one when a
country’s GDP per capita exceeds 3500 U.S. dollars in the survey year. These thresholds roughly
                                                                                                   24
correspond to the transition from low to lower middle and then to upper middle income status by
World Bank classification. The results are in Table 9. To show the results compactly, we do not
explicitly report those BE elements that do not have significant interactions with either of our two
income threshold dummies. But since those income-invariant elements are also relevant in this
story of the stage of development, we still discuss those results.
The income-category-invariant BE factors include Basic Protection, human capital, entry and exit
barriers (i.e., land access obstacles), labor regulation obstacles, tax rate burden obstacles, and two
indicators of agglomeration including Being In Big City and Informal Competition. In contrast,
the income-dependence properties of basic and modern infrastructure are quite different. Basic
power supply (i.e., Power Outage) is not significantly associated with firm growth in non-poor (i.e.
upper middle-income or above) countries. However, in low-income countries, power outage is,
counter-intuitively, actually positively and significantly associated with LPgrowth (but not
Lgrowth). In sharp contrast, the effect of internet technology prevalence (Web) is income-invariant.
       Access to bank finance (i.e. Overdraft Facility) is positively associated with higher
Lgrowth for sample countries of all income levels. However, while it is positively associated with
LPgrowth for low- and lower-middle countries, it has an effect that is close to zero in upper-
middle-and-above income countries. Access to bank finance thus has the most positive effect in
lower-income countries.
       The effect of access to trade credit proves to be income-dependent. Trade Credit Access
has a positive association with LPgrowth in lower-middle-income countries. By contrast, the
effects are close to zero for low- and upper-middle-and-high-income countries. These results make
sense: when income is too low, inter-firm linkages may not be important; when it is sufficiently
high, reliance on informal financing may be less critical to firms in meeting their financing needs.
       Also income-invariant are various forces of economic agglomeration, with one exception.
The effect of being in a big city is income invariant, as is the effect of informal competition. The
effect of Capacity Agglomeration, however, proves to be income dependent. In middle-income
countries, Capacity Agglomeration is positively associated with Lgrowth. However, it is only in
low-income countries that we find a positive and significant relationship with LPgrowth with a
one-SD increase (0.15) being associated with raising LPgrowth by 2.2 percentage points, a huge
effect. Thus (and assuming causality), for poor countries, it is critically important to facilitate
clustering of reasonably sized firms for productivity growth to take place.

                                                                                                   25
       To summarize, the effects of Basic Protection, human capital, modern infrastructure,
Refined BE, some aspects of the agglomeration environment (i.e., being in a big city, informal
competition) tend to have effects on firm growth that are invariant to a country’s level of
development. The effect of bank financing on Lgrowth is also income-invariant. Some BE
elements work better in lower-income countries: access to bank financing has a positive
association with LPgrowth, but only in low- and lower-middle-income countries; capacity
agglomeration has a pronounced effect on LPgrowth only in low-income countries. Interestingly,
trade credit access plays a positive role only in lower-middle-income countries.


6. Conclusions
In this paper we have used comprehensive firm-level data which cover 709 cities in 128 countries
to investigate the association between the business environment (BE) and firm growth, both in
terms of employment growth and labor productivity growth. Unlike previous literature, we mainly
focus on the city-industry-level BE with the advantage of being able to control for country and
industry fixed effects. We examine a relatively comprehensive list of factors, including Basic BE
(consisting of Basic Protection, human capital, infrastructure, and access to finance), Refined BE
(consisting of entry and exit barriers, labor regulation, and tax burdens), and the agglomeration
environment, which has been largely ignored by the BE literature.
       When assuming homogeneous effects using the globally pooled data, Basic Protection,
modern infrastructure (i.e., the internet), and access to finance prove to be important for firm
growth, as does the agglomeration environment. Less important are electricity and Refined BE.
Further investigations, however, reveal strong heterogeneity of the BE effects.
       To begin with, the environment which is amenable to the growth of high-growth firms is
dramatically different to that for other firms. For the latter group, Basic Protection and capacity
agglomeration are important. In contrast, high-growth firms benefit relatively more from modern
infrastructure, access to finance, lower Land Access Obstacle and lower Tax Burden Obstacle, and
from being in big cities. High-productivity-growth firms also benefit significantly more from trade
credit networks.
       Small firms tend to need a stronger Basic and Refined BE than large and medium-sized
enterprises, with some exceptions. Small firms benefit relatively more in terms of employment
growth than larger firms when there are better Basic Protection, adequate availability of human
                                                                                                26
capital, good basic infrastructure (i.e., electricity), and better Refined BE (i.e., few land access and
tax obstacles). With respect to labor productivity growth, small firms benefit more from modern
infrastructure (i.e., the internet) and capacity agglomeration. However, in terms of effects on
employment growth, large and medium enterprises (LMEs) benefit from both stronger labor
flexibility and a more developed inter-firm-linkage environment (i.e., access to trade credit finance,
and agglomeration).
        The key environments required for young and old firms to thrive also differ. Old firms
benefit more from containing corruption. Young firms benefit more from modern infrastructure
and Refined BE (i.e., ease of entry, labor flexibility). Both types of firms benefit from capacity
agglomeration: the young in labor productivity growth, and the mature in employment growth.
        The key ingredients for a good BE also differ by a country’s income level. Access to bank
financing and capacity agglomeration are more important for facilitating firm labor productivity
growth in lower-income countries.26 Interestingly, trade credit access uniquely plays a positive
role only in lower-middle-income countries. However, most typical elements of the BE prove to
be income-invariant in terms of facilitating growth: Basic Protection, human capital, modern
infrastructure, Refined BE, and some aspects of agglomeration (i.e., being in a big city, and
informal competition). The effect of bank financing on Lgrowth is also income-invariant.
        Relative to manufacturing firms, service-industry firms are much more sensitive to the BE:
they benefit more from Basic Protection, ease of land access, availability of trade credit, labor
regulation, and being located in a big city. Manufacturing firms, in contrast, benefit more from
bank financing.
        Our research yields several key implications. First, it is important to consider
heterogeneous effects of the BE. Small firms (vs. LMEs) and services firms (vs. manufacturing
firms) tend to be more sensitive to the soundness of the Basic BE and the Refined BE. Larger firms
and high-growth firms tend to require stronger labor flexibility. Manufacturing firms (vs. service
firms) tend to benefit more from access to bank financing. Small firms (vs. LMEs) and low-growth
firms benefit more from a good agglomeration environment. Young firms (vs. old firms) benefit
more from modern infrastructure and Other Refined BE (i.e., ease in entry, labor flexibility). For
lower-income countries, access to bank financing and capacity agglomeration are more important

26
  In particular, access to bank financing has a positive association with LPgrowth only for low- and lower-middle-
income countries; capacity agglomeration has a pronounced effect on LPgrowth only in low-income countries.

                                                                                                               27
for facilitating firm labor productivity growth. Second, though we observe important heterogeneity
of the BE effects, we do find several key elements to be critically important in most contexts:
access to bank finance, modern infrastructure, and agglomeration (especially capacity
agglomeration and being located in a big city). Thus, it is important to add the agglomeration
environment to the list of key BE ingredients. This category has emerged as a key determinant of
firm growth across countries, perhaps as important as many of the traditional BE elements that we
emphasize such as human capital, institutions, access to finance, and so on; moreover, it is a key
element that facilitates productivity growth in low-income countries, thus allowing them to catch
up.




References
Angrist, Jushua, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton: Princeton
        University Press.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2010. “Theory, General Equilibrium, and Political Economy in Developing
     Economics.” Journal of Economic Perspective 24(3), 17-32.
Acemouglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. 2005. "Unbundling Institutions." Journal of Political
     Economy 113(5), 949–95.
Acemouglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91,
     1369–401.
Acs, Z. J., Audretsch, D. B., and Feldman, M. P. (1994). R&d spillovers and recipient firm size.
        Review of Economics and Statistics, 76, 336-340.
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, A.V. Chari, and Siddharth Sharma. 2010. “Firing Costs and Flexibility:
      Evidence from Firms’ Employment Responses to Shocks in India.” Processed. World Bank.
Aghion, P., R. Bundell, R. Griffith, P. Howitt, and S. Prantl. 2009. “The Effects of Entry on
       Incumbent Innovation and Productivity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1), 20–32.
Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. Redding, F. Zilibotti. 2008. “The Unequal Effects of Liberalization:
       Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India.” American Economic Review 94(4):
       1397–412.
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, Peter Howitt. 2005. “Competition and Innovation:
       An Inverted-U Relationship.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(2), 701-728.
Almeida, Rita. 2005. "Enforcement of Regulation, Informal Labor and Firm Performance." IZA
      (Institute for the study of labor) Discussion Paper 1759.


                                                                                                   28
Almeida, Rita, and Pedro Carneiro. 2009. “Enforcement of Labor Regulation and Firm Size.” Journal
      of Comparative Economics 37, 28–46.
Amin, Muhammad. 2009a. “Labor Regulation and Employment in India’s Retail Stores.” Journal of
      Comparative Economics 37, 47–61.
———. 2009b. “Are Labor Regulations Driving Computer Usage in India’s Retail Stores?”
    Economics Letter 102, 45–8.
Aterido, R. Hallward-Driemeier, M., and Pages, C. 2011. “Big Constraints to Small Firms’
       Growth.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 59(3), 609-647.
Ayyagari, Meghana, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Vojislav Maksimovic. 2011. “Small vs. Young Firms
      across the World: Contribution to Employment, Job Creation, and Growth.” Policy Research
      Working Paper 5631, World Bank.
Barrios, S., Bertinelli, L., and Strobl, E. (2006). Geographic concentration and establishment scale:
        An extension using panel data. Journal of Regional Science, 46, 733-746.
Basu, S., and Fernald, J. (2008). Information and communication technology as a general purpose
       technology: Evidence from U.S. Industry data. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
       Economic Review, 2008, 1-15.
Bazzi, Samuel, and Michael Clemens (2010). “Blunt Instruments: A Cautionary Note on Establishing
        the Causes of Economic Growth.” Center for Global Development, Working Paper 171.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2005. "Financial and Legal
      Constraints to Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?" Journal of Finance LX, 137–77.
Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., Redding, S. J., and Schott, P. K. (2007). Firms in international trade.
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 105-130.
Bloom, Nicholas, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2010. “Why Do Firms in
       Developing Countries Have Low Productivity?” American Economic Review 100(2), 619-
       623.
Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
       2004. "The Regulation of Labor." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4), 1339–82.
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie, 2014. "Entry Regulation and the Formalization of
       Microenterprises in Developing Countries," World Bank Research Observer 29(2), 186-201.
Cai, Hongbin, Hanming Fang, and Lixin Colin Xu. 2011. “Eat, Drink, Firms, Government: An
       Investigation of Corruption from Entertainment and Travel Costs of Chinese Firms.” Journal
       of Law and Economics, 54, 55-78.
Coad, A., Daunfeldt, S.O., Hölzl, W., Johansson, D. and Nightingale, P., 2014. High-growth firms:
       introduction to the special section. Industrial and Corporate Change, 23(1), pp.91-112.
Cohen, W. M., and Klepper, S. (1996). Firm size and the nature of innovation within industries: The
       case of process and product r&d. Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 232-243.
Cohen, W. M., and Levin, R. C. (1989). Empirical studies of innovation and market structure. In R.
       Schmalansee and R. D. Willig (Eds.), Handbook of industrial organization (Vol. 2).
       Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Clarke, George, Christine Z. Qiang, Lixin Colin Xu. 2015. “The Internet as a General-Purpose
       Technology.” Economics Letters 135, 24-27.

                                                                                                         29
Clarke, George, Yue Li, and Lixin Colin Xu. 2016. “Business Environment, Economic
       Agglomeration, and Job Creation around the World.” Applied Economics, 48(33), 3088-3103.
Clarke, George, and Lixin Colin Xu. 2004. “Privatization, Competition, and Corruption: How
       Characteristics of Bribe Takers and Payers Affect Bribes to Utilities.” Journal of Public
       Economics 88, 2067–97.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Laurent Gobillon. 2015. “The Empirics of Agglomeration Economies.”
      In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 5A.
Cull, Robert, and Lixin Colin Xu. 2005. “Institutions, Ownership, and Finance: The Determinants of
        Investment among Chinese Firms.” Journal of Financial Economics 77, 117–46.
Davis, S. J., and Haltiwanger, J. (1999). On the driving force between cyclical movements in
       employment and job reallocation. American Economic Review, 89, 1234-1258.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 1998. "Law, Finance, and Firm Growth." Journal
      of Finance 53, 2107–37.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Inessa Love, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2006. “Business Environment and the
      Incorporation Decision.” Journal of Banking and Finance 30, 2967–93.
Djankov, Simeon. 2009. “The Regulation of Entry: A Survey.” World Bank Research Observer 24,
      183–203.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. "The
      Regulation of Entry." Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1): 1–37.
Dollar, David, Mary Hallward-Driemeier, Taye Mengistae. 2005. “Investment Climate and Firm
        Performance in Developing Economies.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 54(1),
        1-31.
———. 2006. “Investment Climate and International Integration.” World Development 34(9), 1498–
    516.
Fernandes, A. 2008 “Firm-Level Productivity in Bangladesh Manufacturing Industries.” World
       Development 36(10), 1725–44.
Fisman, Raymond, and Jacob Svensson. 2007. “Are corruption and taxation really harmful to growth?
       Firm level evidence.” Journal of Development Economics 83(1), 63–75.
Freund, Caroline, Mary Hallward-Friemeier, and Bob Rijkers. 2016. “Deals and Delays: Firm-Level
       Evidence on Corruption and Policy Implementation Times.” World Bank Economic Review
       30(2): 354-382.
George Clarke, Christine Z. Qiang, L. Colin Xu. 2015. “The Internet as a General-Purpose
       Technology.” Economics Letters 135, 24-27.
Galiani, S., S. Knack, L.C. Xu, B. Zou. 2017. “The effect of aid on growth: Evidence from a quasi
        experiment,” Journal of Economic Growth 22(1), 1-33.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “Human
      Capital and Regional Development.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 105-164.
Glaeser, E.L., J.D. Gottlieb. 2009. “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies and Spatial
       Equilibrium in the United States,” Journal of Economic Literature 47(4), 983-1028.



                                                                                                 30
Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. "Do
       Institutions Cause Growth?" Journal of Economic Growth 9, 271–303.
Goedhuys, Micheline, and Leo Sleuwaegen. "High-growth entrepreneurial firms in Africa: a quantile
      regression approach." Small Business Economics 34.1 (2010): 31-51
Greenstone, M., Hornbeck, R., and Moretti, E. (2010). Identifying agglomeration spillovers:
       Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings. Journal of Political Economy,
       118, 536-598.
Gupta, Priya Dhamija, Samapti Guha, and Shiva Subramanian Krishnaswami. "Firm growth and its
       determinants." Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship 2.1 (2013): 15.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Scott Wallsten, Lixin Colin Xu. 2006. "The Investment Climate and the
       Firm: Firm-Level Evidence from China" Economics of Transition, 13(1), 1-24.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Lant Pritchett. 2015. “How Business is Done in the Developing World:
       Deals versus Rules.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(3), 121-140.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R.S. and Miranda, J., 2013. Who creates jobs? Small versus large versus
       young. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), pp.347-361.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R.S., Kulick, R. and Miranda, J., 2016. High growth young firms:
       contribution to job, output, and productivity growth. In Measuring Entrepreneurial
       Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges. University of Chicago Press.
Hampel-Milagrosa, Aimée, Markus Loewe, and Caroline Reeg. "The entrepreneur makes a difference:
      Evidence on MSE upgrading factors from Egypt, India, and the Philippines." World
      Development 66 (2015): 118-130.
Harrison, Ann, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy
       for Developing Countries,” in Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 5, edited by
       Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, North Holland, 2010, pp. 4039-4214.
Harrison, Ann, Justin Y. Lin, Lixin Colin Xu. 2014. “Explaining Africa’s (Dis)advantage”, World
       Development 63, 59-77.
Hausman, R., Dani Rodrik, and Andres Velasco. 2005. “Growth Diagnostics.” In J. Stiglitz and N.
      Serra, eds., The Washington Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global Governance.
      New York: Oxford University Press.
Holmes, T. J., and Stevens, J. J. (2002). Geographic concentration and establishment scale. Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 84, 682-690.
Jones, Charles and Paul M. Romer, 2010. “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and
        Human Capital.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(1), 224-245.
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff. 2002. “Property Rights and Finance.”
       American Economic Review 92(5), 1335–56.
King, RG, R. Levine. 1998. “Finance and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3), 717-
       737.
Kremer, Michael, 1993. "The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development," The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 108(3), 551-75.
Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. 2006. “Entry regulation as a barrier to
       entrepreneurship.” Journal of Financial Economics 82, 591-629.

                                                                                                  31
Knack, Stephen and Keefer, Philip.1995. "Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross- Country
       Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures" Economics and Politics 7(3): 207-27.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. "Law and
       Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 106(6), 1113–55.
La Porta, Rafael, Andrei Shleifer. 2014. “Informality and Development.” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 28(3), 109-126.
Levine, Ross. 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda.” Journal
       of Economic Literature 35(2), 688–726.
Li, Wei, Taye Mengistae, Lixin Colin Xu. 2011. “Diagnosing Development Bottlenecks: China and
       India.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 73(6), 722-752.
Li, Wei, Xiaoning C. Long, Lixin Colin Xu. 2017. “Regulation, Agglomeration, and the Reversal of
       Fortune between China and India," mimeo, World Bank.
Li, D., Lu, Y., and Wu, M. (2012). Industrial agglomeration and firm size: Evidence from china
        Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42, 135-143.
Lin, Justin Yifu. 2009. Economic Development and Transition: Thought, Strategy, and Viability.
        New York: Cambridge University Press.
Long, Cheryl, and Xiaobo Zhang. 2011. "Cluster-based Industrialization in China: Financing and
       Performance.” Journal of International Economics 84(1), 112-123.
Lucas, Robert E. 1988. “On the Mechanisms of Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary
       Economics 22, 3-42.
McMillan, John, and Christopher Woodruff. 2002. "The Central Role of Entrepreneurs in Transition
      Economies." Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(3), 153–70.
Melitz, M. J., and Ottaviano, G. (2008). Market size, trade and productivity. Review of Economic
        Studies, 75, 295-316.
Moulton, Brent. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables on
      Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics 72 (2), 334-38.
North, Douglas. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. New York:
       Cambridge University Press.
Petrin, Amil, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. 2006. "Job Security Does Affect Economic Efficiency: Theory,
        A New Statistic, and Evidence from Chile," processed, University of Minnesota.
Reyes, Jose-Daniel. Forthcoming. “Spillover Effects of Foreign Direct Investment in High Growth
       Firms.” Mimeo, the World Bank Group.
Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88(3),
       559-586.
Roller, L.-H., and Waverman, L. (2001). Telecommunications infrastructure and economic
        development: A simultaneous approach. American Economic Review, 91, 909-923.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004。"Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
       Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development," Journal of
       Economic Growth 9 (2): 131-165.
Rodrik, Dani. 2016. “Premature Deindustrialization.” Journal of Economic Growth 32, 1-33.

                                                                                                    32
Romer, Paul M. 1986. "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy
      94(5), 1002-1037.
------. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy 98(5), S71-102.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. 2010. Observational Studies. New York: Springer.
Rosenthal, S. S., and W. C. Strange. 2004. “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
       Economies.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4: Cities and
       Geography, edited by J. V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, 2119–71. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Stern, Nicholas. 2002. A Strategy for Development. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank. 2005. A Better Investment Climate for Everyone. World Development Report, World
      Bank.
------ The World Bank Enterprise Survey Database. www.enterprisesurvey.org. Washington, D.C.
        United States.
------ 2010. Doing Business 2010. www.doingbusiness.org.
------ 1994. World Development Report: Infrastructure for Development. Washington, D.C., United
         States.
Xu, L. C. (2011). The effects of business environments on development: Surveying new firm-level
       evidence. World Bank Research Observer, 26, 310-340.




                                                                                                  33
      Figure 1. Classification of the business environment

                   •   Basic Protection
                   •   Infrastructure
    Basic BE
                   •   Human Capital
                   •   Access to finance

                   • Barriers to entry/exit
    Refined BE     • Labor regulations
                   • Tax environment

                  • In a big city
Agglomeration
                  • Capacity agglomeration
 environment
                  • Informal competition




                                                             34
                                  Table 1. Variable definitions and Sources

Variables        Definition and source
                 One-year employment growth rate. First calculate 3-year growth rate as the change in permanent
                 employees in 3 years divided by initial number of permanent employees. Then convert it to one-year
Lgrowth
                 growth rate (g1). The Lgrowth = 2*g1/(2+g1), which is the Haltiwanger measure of labor growth,
                 bound by -2 and 2 to avoid the typical extreme outlier problem associated with the un-transformed g1.
                 The logarithm of labor productivity (LP). LP is measured as sales over the number of permanent
lnLP
                 employees. Winsorized at tail 2 percent to avoid the outlier issue.
                 The annualized (Haltiwanger) LP growth rate. The procedure is the same with Lgrowth except that
LPgrowth
                 the basic building block is LP instead of L.
                 Total factor productivity, estimated as the residual from industry-specific production function with
                 log value added as the dependent variable and log capital and log labor as the independent variables.
TFP
                 K is replacement cost of land and machine. L is the number of permanent employees plus 0.5 times
                 the number of temporary employees.
Foreign          The share of foreign ownership of the firm.
OwnBiggest       The ownership share of the largest owner.
L0 20-100
                 The firm’s number of employees three years ago was 20-100 (more than 100).
    (100+)
Age 6-10 (10+)   The firm’s age is between 6 and 10 years (or 10 or more years).
                 The firm is located in a city of a million residents or the capital. This variable has 20.5% of missing,
                 and to avoid loss of sample, we impute the missing with we impute the missing with World Bank
In Big City      income group dummies, regional dummies (LAC, MNA, SAR, ECA, EAP, Africa), service industry
                 dummy, size dummies (10-20 employees, 20-60 employees, 60+ employees), age dummies (firm age
                 between 6 and 10 years old; 10 years plus).
Small            The firm is a small enterprises, that is, employing fewer than 50 employees.
Young            The firm’s age is younger than 10 years.
Rich             The firm is located in a country that is below the medium GDP per capita in the sample.
Exporter         The firm is an exporter.
lnPopt-1         Log(once-lagged population level)
lnGDPPCt-1       Log(once-lagged GDP per capita in real US dollars).
lnPopDent-1      Log(once-lagged population density)
                 City-industry-level average of the firm’s answer on whether “XX’ constitutes an obstacle, ranking
                 from 0 to 4 (with 4 being more severe obstracles). XX is one of the following: corruption, skilled
XX Obstaclec
                 labor availability, labor regulation, tax rate burdens, land acquisition. The subscript c for these
                 variables indicate that it is based on city-industry-level average rather than a firm’s answer.
Overdraft
                 City share of firms with overdraft facility. Based on WBES calculation.
Facilityc
                 City average of the proportion of total annual sales of goods and services that are paid for after
Trade Creditc
                 delivery. Based on WBES calculation.
                 City share of firms who say that they directly compete with informal firms. It is a measure of the
Inf
                 importance of the informal sector and its competition with the formal sector. Based on WBES
Competititonc
                 calculation.
Outagec          City-industry share of firms that experienced a power outage in the survey year. Based on WBES.
Webc             City-industry share of firms that answer that they use websites to conduct business.
Security Costc   City-industry average of the share of a firm’s sales paid for security. Based on WBES.
Capacity         The share of firms whose number of employees exceeding 50, as a proxy of capacity agglomeration.
Agglomerationc   Computed based on sample firms.




                                                                                                                        35
                            Table 2. Summary Statistics

                                   N    mean       sd        p10      p25      p50      p75      p90
Lgrowth                        97669    0.041   0.143     -0.084    0.000    0.007    0.096    0.179
LPgrowth                       70068   -0.026   0.299     -0.270   -0.126   -0.040    0.051    0.199
TFP                            33288   -0.133   1.351     -1.856   -1.032   -0.137    0.709    1.549
lnLP                           85803    9.534   1.554      7.431    8.496    9.632   10.635   11.517
Export share                  106384    0.100   0.253      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.400
Foreign share                 106284    0.075   0.246      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.030
OwnLargest                    103061    0.795   0.264      0.400    0.510    1.000    1.000    1.000
L0 20-100                      97930    0.300   0.458      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000
L0 100+                        97930    0.153   0.360      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
Age 6-10                      106338    0.221   0.415      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
age 10+                       106338    0.635   0.481      0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000    1.000
In Big City                   107777    0.481   0.450      0.000    0.000    0.474    1.000    1.000
Small                         107777    0.714   0.452      0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000    1.000
young                         106338    0.365   0.481      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000
rich                          102222    0.488   0.500      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000
In Big City                    85700    0.476   0.499      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000
service                       107777    0.446   0.497      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000    1.000
exporter                      106384    0.219   0.413      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    1.000
Country level
lnPopt-1                         122   15.764   2.001   12.779     14.802   15.999   17.111   18.260
lnGDPPCt-1                       121    7.583   1.264    5.920      6.596    7.666    8.578    9.277
lnPopDent-1                      122    4.084   1.260    2.418      3.446    4.240    4.867    5.660
City level variables
Corruption obstacle              638    0.489   0.276     0.092     0.279    0.493    0.697    0.878
Overdraft facility               636    0.377   0.263     0.070     0.146    0.325    0.585    0.771
Trade credit                     638    0.427   0.198     0.178     0.272    0.414    0.574    0.706
Inf competition                  633    0.499   0.208     0.246     0.338    0.478    0.659    0.783
Skilled labor obstacle           642    0.408   0.223     0.125     0.224    0.388    0.567    0.712
Labor regulation obstacle        638    0.282   0.200     0.058     0.140    0.243    0.402    0.554
Tax rate obstacle                642    0.582   0.224     0.267     0.446    0.594    0.757    0.870
Land access obstacle             638    0.334   0.212     0.100     0.177    0.284    0.469    0.664
Outage                           638    0.575   0.269     0.220     0.340    0.578    0.832    0.933
Web                              642    0.440   0.239     0.114     0.241    0.448    0.618    0.766
Security Cost                    642    0.018   0.018     0.004     0.008    0.014    0.022    0.037
Capacity agglomeration           648    0.268   0.146     0.077     0.161    0.260    0.354    0.456




                                                                                                 36
                                                Table 3. Base Specification
                                                    Lgrow                                        LPgrow
                                             coef                se                      coef                  se
 Foreign                                  0.020**              0.003                  0.054**                0.007
 OwnLargest                              -0.012**              0.003                 -0.026**                0.006
 L0: 20-100                               0.026**              0.004                 0.036**                 0.004
 L0: 100+                                0.087**               0.008                 0.046**                 0.005
 Age 6-10                                -0.027**              0.003                   -0.007                0.005
 Age 10+                                 -0.041**              0.003                   -0.006                0.005
 Corruption Obstaclec                     -0.016*              0.006                   0.017                 0.013
 Security Costc                            -0.078              0.049                   -0.130                0.111
 Outagec                                   -0.001              0.007                   -0.002                0.013
 Webc                                    0.017**               0.006                 0.035**                 0.013
 Skill Obstaclec                            0.005              0.006                   -0.010                0.013
 Overdraft Facilityc                       0.014*              0.006                  0.033*                 0.014
 Trade Creditc                             -0.008              0.008                  0.034*                 0.016
 L Regu Obstaclec                           0.002              0.007                    0.003                0.015
 Tax Rate Obstaclec                        -0.007              0.007                    0.008                0.015
 Land Access Obstaclec                     -0.007              0.007                   -0.004                0.014
 In Big City                               0.006*              0.003                   -0.000                0.005
 Capacity Agglomerationc                 0.046**               0.015                    0.015                0.026
 Inf Competitionc                         -0.012*              0.005                   0.006                 0.011
 Country, industry, year FEs                          Yes                                          Yes
 N                                                  57,455                                        44,279
*, ** represent statistical significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels. Heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors clustered
at the country level in columns indicated by “se”.




                                                                                                                             37
                          Table 4. Base Specification, City-Industry Mean Specification

                                                                Lgrow                              LPgrow
                                                         coef               se                coef               se
 Corruption Obstaclec                                  -0.012             0.006              0.001             0.017
 Security Costc                                      -0.109**             0.038             -0.329             0.214
 Outagec                                               -0.004             0.006              0.000             0.012
 Webc                                                 0.036**             0.007             0.054*             0.022
 Skill Obstaclec                                        0.013             0.007              0.015             0.017
 Overdraft Facilityc                                  0.033**             0.009             0.040*             0.016
 Trade Creditc                                         -0.001             0.007            0.075**             0.019
 L Regu Obstaclec                                       0.002             0.007             -0.003             0.018
 Tax Rate Obstaclec                                    -0.002             0.006             -0.025             0.019
 Land Access Obstaclec                                 -0.005             0.009              0.018             0.018
 In Big City                                            0.002             0.005             -0.002             0.010
 Capacity Agglomerationc                              0.066**             0.022             0.015              0.030
 Inf Competitionc                                    -0.016**             0.006             -0.009             0.011
 Other averages of firm controls                                 Yes                                  Yes
 country, industry, year FEs                                      Yes                                 Yes
 N                                                              4,219                               3,695
 R2 Within: all BE variables                                    15.6%                               37.9%
 R2 Within: excluding AE                                        14.8%                               37.8%
 R2 Within: excluding Refined BE                                15.6%                               37.8%
 R2 Within: excluding Basic BE                                  13.0%                               36.6%
 R2 Within: excluding Basic Protection                          15.3%                               37.7%
 R2 Within: excluding Human Capital                             15.5%                               37.8%
 R2 Within: excluding Infrastructure                            14.5%                               37.5%
 R2 Within: excluding Finance                                   14.3%                               37.1%
 R2 Between: all BE variables                                   3.6%                                10.8%
 R2 Between: excluding AE                                        5.0%                               11.1%
 R2 Between: excluding Refined BE                                4.0%                               10.6%
 R2 Between: excluding Basic BE                                 3.1%                                5.8%
 R2 Between: excluding Basic Protection                          4.2%                               11.4%
 R2 Between: excluding Human Capital                             3.8%                               10.7%
 R2 Between: excluding Infrastructure                           3.7%                                8.0%
 R2 Between: excluding Finance                                   2.5%                                7.7%
*, ** represent statistical significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels. Heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors reported.

The unit of observation is an country-city-industry cell.




                                                                                                                             38
                                        Table 5. BE effects on growth by quantiles
                                                                   Dependent variable: Lgrowth
                               5 percentile          25th percentile       Median           75th percentile      95th percentile
                                                                                             High-growth        Very-high growth
                               coef          se      coef        se      coef       se      coef        se       coef        se
 Corruption Obstaclec        -0.034**       0.010   -0.005**    0.001   -0.009**    0.002     -0.007    0.004     -0.019     0.011
 Security Costc              -0.414**       0.139    -0.038*    0.017     0.012     0.024     0.066     0.042     0.020      0.132
 Outagec                        0.002       0.006     0.000     0.001     0.002     0.001     -0.002    0.003     -0.012     0.009
 Webc                           0.011       0.009   0.006**     0.001   0.009**     0.002   0.019**     0.004   0.044**      0.009
 Skill Obstaclec               -0.020       0.011     -0.002    0.001     0.002     0.002     0.004     0.004     0.016      0.015
 Overdraft Facilityc            0.001       0.010    0.002*     0.001   0.006**     0.002   0.017**     0.004    0.024*      0.009
 Trade Creditc                 -0.016       0.009   -0.005**    0.001     -0.003    0.002     -0.006    0.005     0.004      0.011
 L Regu Obstaclec               0.012       0.013     0.001     0.002     0.002     0.002     -0.004    0.005     -0.001     0.013
 Tax Rate Obstaclec             0.002       0.009     0.002     0.001     -0.003    0.002    -0.008*    0.004    -0.022*     0.009
 Land Access Obstaclec          0.013       0.010     -0.000    0.001     -0.003    0.002    -0.008*    0.004     -0.006     0.011
 In Big City                    0.000       0.003   0.001**     0.000   0.004**     0.001   0.007**     0.002    0.008*      0.004
 Capacity Agglomerationc     0.086**        0.014    0.005*     0.002     0.001     0.003     0.008     0.008     0.030      0.025
 Inf Competitionc              -0.001       0.006   -0.003**    0.001   -0.007**    0.002   -0.010**    0.003    -0.019*     0.009
 Other firm controls                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Country FE                           Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
                                                                  Dependent variable: LPgrowth
 Corruption Obstaclec           0.017       0.017     0.004     0.006     0.006     0.005    0.019*     0.008    0.050*      0.022
 Security Costc                -0.525       0.318   -0.282**    0.080     -0.011    0.051   0.187**     0.070     0.008      0.235
 Outagec                       -0.008       0.010     -0.002    0.004     -0.003    0.003     -0.009    0.005     -0.019     0.015
 Webc                           0.008       0.015     0.004     0.005     0.005     0.005   0.017**     0.006     0.026      0.020
 Skill Obstaclec               -0.010       0.019     -0.000    0.006     -0.007    0.005     -0.001    0.007     -0.009     0.022
 Overdraft Facilityc         0.048**        0.012   0.027**     0.005   0.026**     0.004   0.022**     0.006   0.049**      0.018
 Trade Creditc                 -0.009       0.016     0.004     0.006   0.015**     0.004   0.040**     0.006   0.070**      0.022
 L Regu Obstaclec              -0.017       0.022     0.007     0.007   0.020**     0.005     0.009     0.009     0.024      0.025
 Tax Rate Obstaclec             0.008       0.012     0.003     0.004     0.003     0.004     0.003     0.006   -0.042**     0.016
 Land Access Obstaclec          0.015       0.016     0.002     0.006     -0.006    0.005    -0.019*    0.008     -0.028     0.021
 In Big City                   -0.010       0.006     -0.001    0.002     -0.002    0.002    -0.005*    0.002     -0.002     0.007
 Capacity Agglomerationc       -0.005       0.031     0.016     0.011   0.032**     0.009     0.022     0.013     0.026      0.033
 Inf Competitionc              0.029*       0.012   0.016**     0.004   0.014**     0.004     0.005     0.005     -0.001     0.014
 Other firm controls                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Country FE                           Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
*, ** represent statistical significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels. Standard errors bootstrapped (with replications of 100)
in columns indicated by “se”. The number of observations for Lgrowth is 57,455; that for LPgrowth is 44,279.




                                                                                                                              39
                                        Table 6. Results with Small Interactions
                                                           Lgrowth                                LPgrowth
 Corruption obstacle                              0.011               0.008              0.019               0.016
     Corruption obstacle * Small                -0.035**              0.007              -0.003              0.014
 Security Cost                                   0.404**              0.107              0.026               0.202
     Security Cost * Small                      -0.630**              0.116              -0.215              0.240
 Skilled labor obstacle                          0.018*               0.009              -0.022              0.016
     Skilled labor obstacle * Small              -0.021*              0.010              0.018               0.016
 Outage                                           0.008               0.008              0.005               0.015
     Outage * Small                             -0.019**              0.007              -0.010              0.012
 Web Intensity                                   0.038**              0.009              0.001               0.016
     Web Intensity * Small                      -0.029**              0.008             0.050**              0.015
 Land access obstacle                             0.018               0.011              0.009               0.020
     Land access obstacle * Small               -0.035**              0.010              -0.018              0.017
 Trade credit                                     0.016               0.013              0.042*              0.019
     Trade credit * Small                        -0.027*              0.011              -0.018              0.016
 Labor regulation obstacle                      -0.033**              0.011              0.012               0.020
     Labor regu. obstacle * Small                0.047**              0.012              -0.014              0.019
 Tax rate obstacle                                0.013               0.009              -0.013              0.018
     Tax rate obstacle * Small                  -0.036**              0.009              0.035*              0.015
 In Big City                                     0.016**              0.004              -0.001              0.006
     In Big City * Small                        -0.012**              0.004              -0.001              0.007
 Inf competition                                  0.011               0.008              0.024*              0.012
     Inf competition * Small                    -0.036**              0.008              -0.025              0.013
 Capacity agglomeration                          0.075**              0.023              -0.016              0.030
     Capacity agglomeration * Small             -0.083**              0.019              0.059*              0.026
 N                                                         57,455                                  44,279
 Country, industry, year FEs                                 Yes                                    Yes
 adjusted R-squared                                         0.225                                  0.287
*, **: significance at the 5 and 1 percent. Heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors clustered at the country level in
columns indicated by “se”.




                                                                                                                             40
                                       Table 7. Results for old and young firms

                                                                Lgrowth                                LPgrowth
                                                          coef                 se                coef                 se
  Corruption obstacle                                       -0.019**              0.007               0.019               0.014
     Corruption obstacle * Young                              0.012*              0.006              -0.002               0.011
  Skilled labor obstacle                                       -0.003             0.007              -0.019               0.013
     Skilled labor obstacle * Young                           0.019*              0.009               0.025               0.015
  Web Intensity                                                 0.012             0.006              0.030*               0.013
     Web Intensity * Young                                    0.017*              0.007               0.017               0.012
  Land access obstacle                                          0.000             0.007               0.003               0.015
     Land access obstacle * Young                            -0.020*              0.009              -0.020               0.015
  Overdraft facility                                          0.016*              0.007            0.042**                0.015
     Overdraft facility * Young                                -0.006             0.007             -0.027*               0.012
  Trade credit                                                 -0.011             0.009              0.035*               0.017
     Trade credit * Young                                       0.009             0.009              -0.002               0.015
  Labor regulation obstacle                                     0.013             0.008               0.012               0.015
     Labor regulation obstacle * Young                      -0.035**              0.011              -0.028               0.020
  Tax rate obstacle                                            -0.014             0.008               0.002               0.016
     Tax rate obstacle * Young                                0.020*              0.009               0.022               0.014
  In Big City                                                   0.006             0.003               0.004               0.005
     In Big City * Young                                       -0.000             0.003             -0.012*               0.006
  Inf competition                                              -0.010             0.005               0.016               0.012
     Inf competition * Young                                   -0.004             0.006             -0.029*               0.012
  Capacity agglomeration                                     0.060**              0.016              -0.007               0.026
     Capacity agglomeration * Young                         -0.038**              0.014              0.064*               0.026
  controls in panel B of Table 4                                     Yes                                   Yes
  N                                                                51,685                                 38,120
  Country, industry, year FEs                                        Yes                                   Yes
  adjusted R-squared                                                0.117                                 0.272
*, ** represent statistical significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels. Heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors clustered at
the country level in columns indicated by “se”.

Those variables without significant interaction terms with Young have similar coefficients as in Table 5 and are not
reported.




                                                                                                                              41
                      Table 8. Effects for manufacturing and services firms

                                                               Lgrowth                            LPgrowth
                                                       Coef                se               coef                se
   Corruption obstacle                                -0.010             0.007             0.014              0.015
      Corruption obstacle * service                  -0.012*             0.006             -0.003             0.012
   Outage                                             -0.002             0.007             0.014              0.015
      Outage * service                                0.001              0.006           -0.039**             0.014
   Land access obstacle                               0.003              0.008             -0.006             0.016
      Land access obstacle * service                 -0.023*             0.009             0.005              0.019
   Overdraft facility                                 0.009              0.006            0.041**             0.014
      Overdraft facility * service                    0.012              0.006            -0.029*             0.013
   Trade credit                                       -0.006             0.009             0.009              0.016
      Trade credit * service                          0.000              0.009            0.059**             0.017
   Labor regulation obstacle                          -0.010             0.008             0.011              0.016
      Labor regulation obstacle * service            0.029**             0.009             -0.026             0.018
   In Big City                                        0.002              0.003             -0.005             0.005
      In Big City * service                          0.009**             0.003             0.014*             0.006
   Other controls as in Table 4 panel B                             Yes                               Yes
   N                                                               51,685                            38,120
   Country, industry, year FEs                                      Yes                               Yes
   adjusted R-squared                                              0.117                             0.271
*, ** represent statistical significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels.
Heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors clustered at the country level in columns indicated by “se”.

Those variables without significant interaction terms with the two income dummies have similar coefficients as in Table 5
and are not reported.




                                                                                                                        42
                               Table 9. Development stage and environmental effects

                                                                               Lgrowth                 LPgrowth
                                                                            Coef      se            coef       se
 Outage                                                                   -0.0004   0.007          -0.015    0.014
   Outage * Poor (i.e., low-income countries)                              0.001    0.015          0.106*    0.042
 Overdraft facility                                                        0.017*   0.008         0.048**    0.016

    Overdraft facility * Upper Middle (i.e., upper-middle and above)       -0.015      0.012      -0.059*      0.023

 Trade credit                                                              -0.011      0.013      0.071**      0.023

    Trade credit * Upper Middle                                            0.0004      0.015      -0.062*      0.027

   Trade credit * Poor                                                     0.018       0.019      -0.090*      0.039
 Capacity agglomeration                                                    0.044*      0.018       -0.010      0.028

    Capacity agglomeration * Poor                                          -0.007      0.033      0.144*       0.062

 Controls in Table 4 panel B
 N                                                                               54,960                  44,279
 Country, industry, year FEs                                                      Yes                     Yes
  adjusted R-squared                                                              0.131                  0.286
*, ** represent statistical significance at the 5 and 1 percent levels. Heteroskedasticity-corrected standard errors clustered at
the country level in columns indicated by “se”.

Those variables without significant interaction terms with the two income dummies have similar coefficients as in Table 5
and are not reported.




                                                                                                                              43
