                                                     WPS8205


Policy Research Working Paper                       8205




Making It Easier to Apply for a Bank Account
                    A Study of the Indian Market

                               Asli Demirguc-Kunt
                                  Leora Klapper
                                   Saniya Ansar
                                   Aditya Jagati




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8205


  Abstract
 This paper draws on new individual-level survey data from                          has made it easier to get an account, through lower costs
 India to study the costs of opening an account and the effi-                       and greater ease of applying. Yet despite the scheme’s initial
 ciency of the account application process. The data show a                         successes, people who wish to apply for an account continue
 recent increase in account ownership, especially by women                          to incur a range of costs. The survey results suggest several
 and poor adults. The data also suggest that India’s flagship                       recommendations that could improve the account applica-
 financial inclusion program, the Jan Dhan Yojana scheme,                           tion process and increase ownership and usage of accounts.




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at lklapper@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      Making It Easier to Apply for a Bank Account:
                         A Study of the Indian Market


    Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Leora Klapper, Saniya Ansar and Aditya Jagati*




JEL classification: D14, G21, G28

Keywords: Financial Inclusion; India; Household Finance; Financial Institutions




*
 Demirguc-Kunt is Director, Klapper is Lead Economist, Ansar is Research Analyst and Jagati is consultant in
the Development Research Group, World Bank. We thank Pawan Bakhshi, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, Neeraj
Prasad, Niraj Verma and Sakshi Varma for helpful comments and Saniya Ansar and Jake Hess for valuable
contributions. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, their Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
Corresponding author: Leora Klapper, lklapper@worldbank.org.
1. Introduction
About 2 billion adults worldwide lack an account at a formal financial institution, despite
mounting evidence that accounts help enable a wide range of development goals. This paper
draws on new individual-level survey data from India – home to about a fifth of the world's
unbanked adults – to explore the costs of opening an account, the efficiency of the account
application process, and demographic differences between those who choose to apply and those
who do not. These insights can help policy makers improve account application processes to
foster greater financial inclusion.

The survey was carried out between January and March 2016, roughly a year and a half after
the Government of India launched its flagship program aimed at achieving universal account
ownership, known as the Jan Dhan Yojana (JDY) scheme.1 The ambitious goal of the JDY
scheme is to open one account per Indian household by offering zero-balance accounts with no
opening fees. Our survey finds that the JDY program has made it easier to get an account.
Compared to traditional applicants, adults who applied for a JDY account in the past year were
half as likely to say the application process was difficult. JDY application rates are negatively
correlated with wealth at the state level, unlike traditional application rates, which suggests the
policy has disproportionally helped adults in poorer states.

Despite these initial successes, people who wish to apply for an account continue to incur a
range of costs, including the cost of traveling to bank branches, the cost of collecting
documentation and various other monetary costs. Most applicants face a combination of these
costs, and their cumulative impact may be enough to dissuade unbanked adults from applying.
For instance, on average applicants had to make two trips to the bank to complete the
application process. In addition, more than half of JDY applicants reported paying a required
minimum initial deposit, even though there is no such requirement under the program. The
survey results suggest several recommendations to improve the account application process,
including more effectively communicating the requirements for opening a JDY account.

Research suggests that financial inclusion helps facilitate economic development. Access to
accounts has been shown to support women's empowerment as well as help people manage risk,


1
    For additional information on the government roll-out of JDY accounts see Chopra, Prabhala, and Tantri (2017).
                                                           2
accumulate savings and make investments.2 There is also evidence that financial inclusion
supports many of the Sustainable Development Goals (Klapper, El-Zogbhi and Hess, 2016).
Well-functioning financial systems serve a vital purpose, offering savings, credit, payment and
risk management products to people with a wide range of needs. Inclusive financial systems –
where financial services are affordable and readily accessible to everyone who wants them – are
especially likely to benefit poor adults and other disadvantaged groups. Without inclusive
financial systems, poor people must rely on their own limited savings to invest in their
education or open a business – and small enterprises must rely on their limited earnings to pursue
growth opportunities. Financial systems that exclude poor adults, women, and other
underserved populations can contribute to persistent income inequality and slower economic
growth.3

Informed by a fast-growing body of knowledge and experience, policy makers and regulators
are beginning to make universal financial inclusion a priority in financial sector development. A
survey of bank regulators in 143 countries found that 67 percent have a mandate to promote
financial inclusion (World Bank, 2014a). More than 50 countries have set formal targets and
ambitious goals for financial inclusion in the last few years.4 International organizations such as
the G20 and World Bank have put financial inclusion at the center of their development
strategies.5

While financial inclusion begins with having an account, the benefits only come from active use
of accounts to make payments, save money and manage risk. Moving cash payments into
digital channels has many potential advantages for both senders and receivers, including higher
account ownership and usage.6 For example, digitizing transfers of government wages or social
benefits can increase the number of adults with an account. It can also lower the cost of


2
  See, for example, Aportela (1999); Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2010); Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Martinex Peria
(2007); Bruhn and Love (2014); Burgess and Pande (2005); Dupas and Robinson (2013a, 2013b); Prina (2012);
and Ruiz (2013).
3
  See, for example, King and Levine (1993); Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2007); Beck, Levine, and Loayza
(2000); Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2009); Klapper, Laeven, and Rajan (2006); and World Bank (2008).
4
  For example, the “Maya Declaration Commitments" made by the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, http://www.afi-
global.org/maya-declaration-commitments.
5
  For example, the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (http://www.gpfi.org) and the World Bank
Universal Financial Access 2020 goal (http://ufa.worldbank.org).
6
  See World Bank (2014b) for a more detailed discussion of the benefits and challenges of digitizing payments.

                                                       3
disbursing and receiving payments (e.g. Aker, et al., 2013; Babatz, 2013), and increase
transparency between the sender and receiver, thereby reducing leakage (Muralidharan,
Niehaus, and Sukhtankar 2014). Evidence also suggests that digital transfers empower women
within their households (Docquier, F., L. Lowell, and A. Marfouk, 2009). However, shifting cash
payment into accounts is not without challenges. When making the switch, governments must
take steps to guarantee a reliable and consistent digital payments experience. This includes
making up-front investments in payments infrastructure, consumer protection and financial
literacy programs to ensure that payments recipients know how to access and use their accounts
(Klapper and Singer, 2017).

It is important to note that financial inclusion and access to finance are different issues. Some
people choose not to use financial services even when they are affordable and available. Others
want to use financial services but are prevented from doing so by any number of factors,
including high costs, a lack of documentation needed to open accounts, or unavailability of
banking services. Policy interventions should only target people who are involuntarily excluded
from the formal financial system.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the survey instrument and
breaks down account application rates by time and individual characteristics such as gender,
income, age and education. Section 3 discusses reasons for not applying for an account and who
are the unbanked. Section 4 discusses the introduction of JDY accounts and differences
between adults who applied for an account within the past year and those that applied earlier for
a traditional account. Section 5 offers a detailed overview of costs incurred in the application
process and Section 6 concludes.



2. Access to Financial Services in India

Financial exclusion remains widespread in India and the wider region. South Asia, home to
about 625 million adults without an account, hosted about 31 percent of the world's unbanked
population in 2014 (Demirguc-Kunt, et al., 2015).7 Between 2011 and 2014 account
penetration increased in India from 35 percent to 53 percent. In absolute numbers, this growth

7
    Global Findex data is available at: https://www.worldbank.org/globalfindex.
                                                           4
means that 175 million adults in India became account holders. But the sheer size of India's
population means that there is still a long way to go before universal financial inclusion
becomes a reality.

This paper updates the 2014 Global Findex indicator of account ownership using data from a
new module of questions- Measuring the Ease of Financial Access8- added to the “Gallup 2016
India State Survey”. Our survey asked respondents if they had ever applied for an account at
any financial institution and finds that 68 percent of adults—in surveyed states—have applied
for an account at a financial institution at some point in their lives.

This data provides another gauge of financial inclusion and the degree to which groups such as
the poor, women and youth are excluded from formal financial systems. The indicators in the
survey are based on a state-level representative sample of 12,000 adults in 12 Indian states –
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh (including Telangana).9 It is important
to note that the survey is not nationally representative. However, it is representative for these
states, which make up about 70 percent of the country's population, according to the latest
government census.10 The survey was carried out between January 2016 and March of 2016 by
Gallup Inc. The target population is the entire civilian, non-institutionalized adult (age 15 and
above) population living in these 12 states.11



2.1 Account applications by individual characteristics: Inequality in gender and income

Survey results show differences by individual characteristics (Figure 1). Women do not have
equal access to the financial system in India. The gender gap in application rates was 10
percentage points - 73 percent of men applied for an account, versus 63 percent of women
(Figure 2). Madhya Pradesh lags with one of the largest gender gaps (21 percentage points).
There is also an income gap, with 64 percent of poorer adults and 71 percent of richer adults
8
  The questionnaire is shown in Appendix 1.
9
  The states of West Bengal and Karnataka are excluded from the analysis in this paper due to data inconsistencies.
10
   Summary statistics by state are shown in Appendix 2.
11
   To ensure that the sample is representative of the adult population of the 12 states surveyed in India, weights
based on available population demographics were used. Final weights consist of the base sampling weight, which
corrects for unequal probability of selection based on household size, and the post-stratification weights which
corrects for age, gender, education, caste and urban/rural to correct for nonresponse error.
                                                         5
applying for an account. In the state of Bihar, where the share of overall applicants is
substantially lower than the overall average, only about half of poorest adults applied for an
account - 15 percentage points fewer than their rich counterparts. Application rates vary by
workforce participation and educational attainment. The share of wage earners (72 percent) is
higher than the share of adults who are out of the workforce and applied for an account (64
percent). Among adults with primary school education, 62 percent applied as compared with 70
percent of adults who had completed secondary school education (and 84 percent of adults with
a graduate degree).

Figure 1: Account applications, by individual characteristics
Adults who applied for an account (%)




Note: All gaps are statistically significant at 99 percent confidence level.



Regression results are shown in Table 1. In line with the summary statistics, we find statistically
significant differences between adults that do and do not apply for an account: men, adults from
the richest 60 percent of households, adults living in urban areas and more educated adults are
significantly more likely to apply for an account. While there are no significant results for
divorced, separated, and widowed adults, single adults are significantly less likely to apply than
married adults. Adults who are out of the workforce or unemployed also find themselves
significantly less likely to apply for an account. Our regression results suggest that older adults are
more likely to apply for an account and adults are most likely to apply for an account when they
are 56 years of age or above.
                                                            6
Table 1: Characteristics of adults who applied for an account

                                                                                Adults who applied for an account


          Female (0/1)                                                                         -0.10***
                                                                                                 (0.01)
          Income: poorest 40% of households (0/1)                                              -0.05***
                                                                                                 (0.01)
          Rural (0/1)                                                                          -0.07***
                                                                                                 (0.01)
          Education: illiterate (0/1)                                                          -0.14***
                                                                                                 (0.02)
          Education: primary (0/1)                                                             -0.14***
                                                                                                 (0.02)
          Marital status: single (0/1)                                                         -0.06***
                                                                                                 (0.02)
          Marital status: divorced/separated/widowed (0/1)                                        -0.03
                                                                                                 (0.03)
          Employment: out of workforce/unemployed (0/1)                                         -0.04**
                                                                                                 (0.02)
          Employment: self-employed (0/1)                                                        0.04**
                                                                                                 (0.02)
          Age                                                                                   0.02***
                                                                                                 (0.00)
          Age squared                                                                           0.02***
                                                                                                 (0.00)
          Constant                                                                              0.41***
                                                                                                 (0.06)
          States dummies                                                                          YES
          Observations (All Adults)                                                              12,000


 Note: Table shows the marginal effect estimation of probit regressions, where the dependent variable is equal to one if an
 adult applied for an account and equal to zero otherwise. The base categories are male, richest 60 percent of households, urban
 residents, above primary school, married adults, and wage earners. The marginal effect for a zero/one variable is the effect of a
 change in the variable from 0 to 1 on the probability of an adults applying for an account, relative to the means of the other
 variables. Standard errors in parentheses, Asterisks ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.




3. Challenges of Applying for an Account

We also survey reasons for not applying for an account. Of adults who never personally applied
for an account, 20 percent report that they had an account opened for them by an employer or

                                                                7
the government in the past. For the remaining adults who never applied, we explore barriers that
need to be addressed in order to facilitate higher financial inclusion. The survey allowed
respondents to give multiple reasons for not applying. On average, 2.5 responses were cited.
The most common reason is that the respondent has no need for an account: 41 percent adults
without an account identified this as a reason, but only 6 percent cited it as the only reason
(Figure 2). This suggests that once other perceived barriers, such as expense, are addressed, this
pool of adults might perceive that they have enough money to open an account.

Figure 2: Self-reported barriers to applying for an account
Adults who never applied for account (%)




Note: Respondents could choose more than one reason.


The next most common barrier – adults did not know how to apply or thought the application
process was too hard – was reported by 39 percent of unbanked adults. 42 percent of rural
unbanked report this as a barrier compared with 28 percent of urban residents without an
account. Greater simplification and clarification of the application process might help
encourage these adults to apply for an account.

About a third of unbanked adults reported not having an account because of the high cost of
opening an account. Some adults decline to get an account because they are unable to afford the
fees for maintaining and using an account, or think the fees are not worth it. Fixed transaction
costs and annual fees tend to make small transactions unaffordable for many people in
                                                       8
emerging economies like India.12

About a third of the unbanked also reported a lack of trust in financial institutions. In a separate
series of questions on trust in national institutions (e.g. government, military, etc.), on average,
90 percent of adults reported that they have confidence in the country's financial institutions.
Yet 40 percent of these adults cited lack of trust as reason for not opening an account.
Difference across states in people’s perception of the safety of financial institutions (and the
trustworthiness of bankers and agents) might reflect overall lawfulness and crime rates. For
example, lack of trust in financial institutions was the biggest reason cited by 52 percent and 63
percent, respectively. in the states of Uttar Pradesh (cited by 52 percent) and Bihar (cited by 63
percent). While there were no significant gender gaps, rural residents (41 percent) and the poor
(43 percent) were significantly more likely to cite this as a barrier than their urban (29 percent)
and rich (33 percent) counterparts. This barrier can stem from cultural norms, past policy
failures, and uncertainty about the future.

Documentation requirements are another important barrier to account ownership, cited by
around 30 percent of adults without an account across all states in the survey. These
requirements may especially affect those living in rural areas or employed in the informal
sector. In fact, rural adults without an account were 11 percentage points more likely to report
this as a barrier than urban adults. Since more than 90 percent of Indian workforce are a part of
the informal economy,13 producing a formal proof of domicile or an authentic wage slip may be
challenging.

Documentation requirements should be less of a barrier in the future given that almost 93
percent of adults in India have an Aadhaar identification card. Moreover, in 2016 the Reserve
Bank of India launched eKYC, a biometric Aadhaar authentication system, eliminating the need
for paper documentation. eKYC is a step in the right direction towards simplifying the process
of opening an account.

While none of the factors are strong enough on their own to dissuade adults from opening an
account, the confluence of these factors makes account opening a tedious task.

12
   It should be noted, however, that under government-led schemes, no fee is imposed on the account holder and any
condition of a minimum balance is also waived.
13
   “Report of the Committee on Unorganized Sector Statistics”, National Statistical Commission, Government of
India, February 2012.
                                                        9
4. A Surge in Account Applications

The data illustrates a recent surge in account applications. People who answered that they
applied for an account were asked about the timing of their application. Adults who said they
applied less than five years ago were also asked more detailed questions, such as if they applied
within the past 12 months and whether their application was approved or denied— and less than
2 percent said it was denied. Adults who said they applied more than 5 years ago were not
asked additional questions about the application process (or if their application was approved or
denied).

Among our sample, 28 percent of adults applied for an account more than five years ago.
Nineteen percent of adults reported that they had applied in the last five years, but not in the last
12 months. The last 12 months saw a surge in numbers, with 20 percent of adults applying for
an account in this period. This constituted 30 percent of overall adults who applied for an
account. Overall, among states, the share of banked adults who applied in the past 12 months
ranges from a high of 52 percent in Madhya Pradesh to a low of 8 percent in Maharashtra.



4.1 Jan Dhan Yojana scheme and application rates

Favorable government policies could lead to higher application rates. One possible example of
such a policy is India's National Mission on Financial Inclusion “Jan Dhan Yojana (JDY)”
scheme, which was launched about 18 months before the survey was conducted. JDY accounts
were introduced by the Indian government in August 2014, with the goal to ensure that every
household in the country has an account. JDY accounts offer several features designed to appeal
to unbanked adults. Everyone with a JDY account is eligible for a RuPay debit card, accident
insurance of INR 100,000 and life insurance coverage of INR 30,000 (for accounts opened prior
to January 26, 2015). After six months of account ownership and depending on the account
owner’s creditworthiness, JDY account holders become eligible for an overdraft facility of INR
5,000 at the discretion of the bank. Policy makers hope the overdraft facility serves as a source
of small, short-term loans to combat the high interest rates charged by moneylenders. On a
broader level, the JDY policy also aims to combat leakage (government transfer payments
going to unintended recipients) by channeling all government benefits directly into accounts.

                                                  10
The JDY has yielded impressive results: near the end of 2016, about 250 million accounts have
been opened under the policy, with more than 78 percent of these accounts issued by public
sector banks.

We find that 21 percent of adults (32 percent of adults who ever applied for an account) applied
for a JDY account, and the majority of these accounts were opened in the last 12 months.
However, since we can only identify accounts opened during two periods—accounts opened
within the past year and prior to the past year—we can only compare traditional and JDY account
openings within the last 12 months, i.e. any comparison of accounts opened prior to the past
year would include a substantial period where JDY accounts did not exist. Since we cannot
include accounts opened during the first 6-months of the JDY scheme, where as many as 130
million accounts where opened,14 it would be unfair to compare individual characteristics of
JDY and traditional account holders from the full sample. However, in the following sections
we compare the cost and efficiency of opening JDY accounts, as compared to traditional
accounts, in the last 12 months.

We explore whether there are demographic differences between adults who applied for an
account within the past year, as compared to adults who applied for an account before JDY
accounts were available (Table 2).

Our results suggest that in the last 12 months, groups with traditionally excluded individual
characteristics have applied in larger numbers than groups that would otherwise fare better.
During this period, women and the poor were about 5 percentage points more likely to apply
than men and wealthier adults. Applications were 10 percentage points higher among illiterate
adults compared with those who have studied beyond primary school. In the last 12 months,
single adults were more likely to apply for an account than married adults, by 7 percentage
points. Young adults were more likely to apply as compared to older adults; we find that fewer
adults older than 62 or above applied for an account in the last 12 months.




14
     Official Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana website.
                                                        11
Table 2: Characteristics of adults who applied for an account in the last 12 months


                                                                                  Adults who applied for an
                                                                                 account in the last 12 months
            Female (0/1)                                                                      0.05***
                                                                                               (0.02)
            Income: poorest 40% of households (0/1)                                           0.05***
                                                                                               (0.03)
            Rural (0/1)                                                                        -0.03*
                                                                                               (0.02)
            Education: illiterate (0/1)                                                       0.10***
                                                                                                (0.02)
            Education: primary (0/1)                                                            0.04*
                                                                                              (0.0179)
            Marital status: single (0/1)                                                       0.07**
                                                                                                (0.02)
            Marital status: divorced/separated/widowed (0/1)                                     0.00
                                                                                                (0.03)
            Employment: out of workforce/unemployed (0/1)                                        0.02
                                                                                                (0.02)
            Employment: self-employed (0/1)                                                      0.02
                                                                                                (0.02)
            Age                                                                               -0.02***
                                                                                                (0.00)
            Age squared                                                                       -0.02***
                                                                                                (0.00)
            States dummies                                                                      YES
            Observations (Adults who ever applied for an account)                               8,683

Note: Table shows the marginal effect estimation of probit regressions, where the sample includes all adults who ever applied
for an account and the dependent variable is equal to one if an adult applied for an account within the past year and equal to
zero otherwise. The base categories are male, richest 60 percent of households, urban residents, above primary school, married
adults, and wage earners. The marginal effect for a zero/one variable is the effect of a change in the variable from 0 to 1 on the
probability of an adults applying for an account, relative to the means of the other variables. Standard errors in parentheses,
Asterisks ***, **, and * indicate significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.




                                                               12
4.1.1 Do poorer states have a higher JDY application rate?

Typically, there is a there is a positive relationship between account applicants and state gross
national income. In India, however, we find that the number of applications for traditional
accounts does not have a significant relationship with the wealth of a state. This could be due to
many reasons. For example, while richer economies may have higher per capita income, they
may not have other advantages such as better banking infrastructure or higher financial
capability, among others. In contrast, the number of JDY account applications is significantly
smaller in wealthier states (Figure 3). This suggests that the JDY policy is making it easier for
poor people to sign up for an account regardless of where they live.


 Figure 3: Account applications for JDY accounts and state-level national income per capita
 Adults who applied for an account (%)

                                       70
      accounts in the last 12 months
       Adults who applied for JDY

        (% of adults who applied)




                                       60                      MP                                 R² = 0.4086
                                                                      OR
                                       50                      JH      RJ

                                       40
                                                          UP            CG
                                       30                                               HP

                                       20                BR
                                                                                       PB
                                       10                                         AP            MH
                                                                                              KL
                                       -
                                            -   20,000    40,000    60,000    80,000    100,000   120,000   140,000
                                                         Per capita national income (INR)

 Source: Per Capita National Income data are from World Bank-World Development Indicators (2017).


4.1.2 Reasons why people apply for a JDY account

This section examines peoples' motivations for applying for a JDY account. Adults that replied
they opened a JDY account were asked a follow-up question on the reason for opening the
account. Respondents could give multiple reasons, such as receiving, sending, and saving
money, using the account to collect subsidies, the overdraft facility, and receiving a bonus
payment from the government in exchange for opening an account. About 70 percent of JDY
applicants cited receiving, sending and saving money as their main reason for applying (Figure
4).
                                                                        13
 Fig 4. Self-reported reasons for applying for a JDY account
 Adults who applied for a JDY account (%)


                           Subsidy payment

                     Overdraft          11
                      facility      4


         Govt. bonus for       13
         opening account
                                                            70      Save, receive
                                                                   and send money




 Note: Two percent of responses are “don’t know” and “refuse to answer”, not shown.




Another popular reason to apply for a JDY account is receiving payments from government
social benefits programs. Around 11 percent of adults who opened JDY accounts cited this as
their main reason. In some states, more than a third of JDY account holders applied for this
reason, including Chhattisgarh (37 percent) and Maharashtra (34 percent). The government
plans to use JDY accounts to expand the current direct benefit transfer (DBT) program in order
to reduce corruption15 and encourage encourage the use of formal financial services. But media
reports also suggest that people might have been lured into opening a JDY account with the
promise that they would be automatically eligible for public benefits that would be directly
transferred into their bank accounts, regardless of whether they meet the actual individual
criteria for benefits programs.16

Some JDY applicants were drawn to the overdraft facility. Nationally, only 4 percent of JDY
account holders cited this reason, but the share approaches 25 percent in Maharashtra. The
purpose of the overdraft facility under the JDY is to "provide hassle free credit to low income
groups/ underprivileged customers”17 when they need a short-term loan. However, media

15
   The direct benefit transfer (DBT) program was rolled out by the previous (UPA) government on January 1, 2013
for transferring subsidies of various welfare schemes through the Aadhaar platform.
16
   “Truth vs Hype: Jan Dhan's Half-Empty Promise”. NDTV. May 17, 2015, http://www.ndtv.com/india-
news/truth- vs-hype-jan-dhans-half-empty-promise-763720.
17
   Overdraft facility, Official Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana website.
                                                       14
reports suggest that not all JDY account owners understood the overdraft facility. Many believed
that they do not have to return overdrawn money, and as a result some banks lowered their
overdraft allowance in response to such misunderstandings.18 Many applicants mistakenly think
the capped overdraft amount of INR 5,000 is a direct transfer to their account, similar to
government safety- net payments that could be transferred electronically.

The reason cited by 13 percent of respondents is that they expected the government to give
them a cash bonus for opening a JDY account. The proportion was especially high in certain
states, particularly Bihar (46 percent), and Andhra Pradesh (31 percent). While a cash bonus
could be perceived by the respondents as other forms of government subsidies, the official JDY
policy does not feature such a provision. However, the Indian media has documented incidents
where adults were promised an influx of cash from the government if they opened an account
under the JDY scheme. For example, cases have been reported in Rajasthan, Haryana, and Bihar
where adults were promised payouts from "black money" that the government had planned to
repatriate from illegal accounts set up by Indian nationals overseas.19 This promised amount has
been reported to vary across states ranging from INR 5,000 to as high as INR 150,000.

Widespread misconception about JDY accounts underscore the need to provide the public with
clear, consistent, and reliable information. There is a danger that accounts opened under false
expectations will go unused and people will miss out on the benefits of financial inclusion.



5. Exploring the Costs and Difficulties to Open an Account

There are costs associated with opening an account. Costs can be monetary in the form of fees
or minimum balance requirements, or they can be non-monetary in the opportunity cost of time
spent when applying for an account. Most applicants face a mixture of both types of costs (see
Box 1, below). Questions on the efficiency of the application process were asked only to adults
who applied for an account in the last five years.



(http://pmjdy.gov.in/files/QuickLinks/Overdraft-facility.pdf).
18
   Business Standard. Sept 11 2014. http://www.business-standard.com/article/finance/jan-dhan-yojana-initially-
overdraft-amount-might-be-small-114091000446_1.html.
19
   “Mr Modi, show them the money - Why cashier Mithun is facing the music”. The Telegraph. Oct 28, 2015,
http://www.telegraphindia.com/1151028/jsp/frontpage/story_50067.jsp#.V6NinNKV-Uk.
                                                        15
An important caveat is that self-reported barriers to account opening might be inflated by
government efforts to offer JDY accounts to the unbanked, who may also have lower levels of
financial capability, including poor adults and those living in rural areas, who might have the
greatest difficulties accessing bank branches, documentation, etc. In other words, although JDY
accounts might have simpler opening requirements, adults opening JDY accounts might report
greater difficulties, relative to adults that opened traditional accounts.



     Box 1: Efficiency of Application Process
                                           Adults who report it took more than 1 hour to get to the required location
     Travel Time
                                           to apply for an account
                                           Adults who report that transportation costs to get to the place to apply for
     Transport cost
                                           an account were expensive
                                           Adults who report that the process of getting all necessary documents to
     Necessary documents
                                           apply for an account was difficult
                                           Adults who report that they were required to deposit a minimum amount
     Minimum deposit
                                           of money to apply for an account
                                           Adults who report giving presents or additional money to apply for
     Presents/Money
                                           an account



5.1 The efficiency of opening an account (among applicants in the past five years)

In response to the question, “Was the whole process of applying for an account easy or
difficult?”, 15 percent of adults who applied for an account within the past five years found the
overall process difficult (Figure 5). The survey investigated further and asked questions on
different aspects of cost and ease of application to identify specific challenges to the overall
efficiency of the process. Figure 6 summarizes, by step of the application process, the
percentage of adults that report the process of applying for a new bank account (within the past
five years) to be expensive or difficult.20




20
     Summary statistics by state are shown in Appendix 2.
                                                            16
 Figure 5: Percentage of applicants who reported the following steps as difficult or expensive
 Adults who applied in the past five years (%)




     Minimum deposit                                                                             66


       Presents/money                               17


 Necessary documents                           14


            Travel time                       13


    Transportation cost                  10


 Note: See Box 1 for definitions of efficiency measures.




To summarize the reported challenges of applying for an account:

-    About 1 in 10 adults who applied in the last 5 years found the travel costs to be expensive
     and spent more than 1 hour at the required location to open an account. On average,
     applicants made 2 trips to the bank when applying for an account.

-    14 percent of adults who applied in the last 5 years found the process of applying for
     additional documentation difficult.

-    Overall, 66 percent of adults who applied in the past 5 years paid a minimum deposit.
     More than 85 percent of adults in Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan paid some sort of
     minimum deposit when applying for an account.

-    17 percent of adults who applied in the past 5 years paid additional presents/money on top
     of the minimum deposit, including nearly 50 percent of applicants in Punjab.

No significant gender, income or literacy gaps were found in the overall difficulty or cost of
application. While the transportation costs were relatively equal, rich and urban adults were half
as likely to report that it took more than 1 hour to travel to the place of application compared
with their poor and rural counterparts. Poor adults were just as likely as rich adults (66 percent)

                                                           17
to report depositing a minimum deposit at the time of account opening. In addition, poor adults
were 4 percentage points more likely than rich adults to make an additional informal payment
on top of their minimum deposit.

Some of the widest gaps were seen in comparisons between wage employed and adults who are
out of the workforce, unemployed or self-employed. Only about 5 percent of employed adults
found the application process difficult or expensive, compared with unemployed, self-employed
and out of workforce adults, 20 percent of whom found the process difficult and 11 percent
reported it expensive. Compared to unemployed, self-employed and out of workforce adults,
wage employed adults were half as likely (5 percent) to report that they found the process of
getting the necessary documents to open an account difficult. On average, wage employed
adults are more likely to have a higher income and education level—and proper knowledge and
documentation needed to apply for an account. Employers might leverage this ease with the
account opening process to introduce their employees to an electronic wage payment setup.



5.2 The efficiency of opening a JDY account (among applicants in the past year)

In the subsequent we explore the efficiency of account application for JDY accounts, as
compared to traditional accounts. While a comparison of the full sample is not possible for
reasons explained above, we will exploit the information using only accounts opened in the last
12 months (instead of last 5 years) to compare ‘quality’ differences in account application for
JDY and traditional accounts (Figure 6). We examine the following reported barriers to account
ownership: transportation costs, travel time, necessary documents, the costs of additional
presents/money, and a requested minimum deposit.

It is again important to keep in mind that JDY accounts targeted unbanked individuals
traditionally excluded from the formal financial sector, including women, poor adults and rural
residents. Reported barriers to opening an account also reflect individual’s subjective
understanding of the application process and perceived requirements. Survey results highlight
the importance of clarifying and simplifying JDY account opening procedures and improving
financial capability among new account holders.


                                                18
 Figure 6: Efficiency of applying for Jan and traditional accounts, by application step:
 Percentage of applicants who reported the following steps as difficult or expensive
 Adults who applied in the last 12 months (%)



                                                                                                             72*
     Minimum deposit
                                                                                           53

                                                    19
       Presents/money
                                                    18

                                                                                         Traditional
                                                  17 *
 Necessary documents
                                           11
                                                                                         JDY

            Travel time                           16
                                             14


   Transportation cost                             18 *
                                       8

 Note: See Box 1 for definitions of efficiency measures. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant
 difference between the cost or difficultly of applying for a Traditional versus a JDY account.




5.2.1 Travel to the place of account opening

Someone who wants to open an account must travel to a bank branch. Sometimes this can
involve travelling long distances in rural areas. Other times, something as simple the lack of
staff or account opening forms at the bank branches can require multiple trips. Such trips
entail financial costs in the form of transportation expenses, in addition to the opportunity costs
of losing time in making the commute. This section considers both costs.

Around 95 percent of account applicants chose to file their application at a bank branch.
Overall, an average applicant made two trips to travel to the place of application. Only 8
percent of adults who applied for a JDY account said traveling to the bank was expensive in
terms of money spent on transportation, as compared to 18 percent of adults who applied for a
traditional account (Figure 7). One possible reason the share is lower among JDY applicants is
that as part of the JDY policy, banks set up micro-ATMs or mobile branches near areas that
lacked banking facilities, potentially reducing the travel costs for applicants. Adults who
opened JDY accounts through these may have found the overall travel cost to be less expensive.
                                                          19
In addition to the money spent on transportation fees, there is also the opportunity cost of time
spent traveling. There was no statistically significant difference in the travel time between JDY
applicants and traditional applicants; around 15 percent of adults who applied for an account
said traveling to the bank took more than an hour.

It is important to note that traveling imposes multiple burdens on working people. According to
the survey, nearly 4 in 10 adults in India work for wages, and a substantial segment are either
self- employed or work as casual laborers. Among account applicants who said their travel time
was more than one hour, the average travel time to the place of application was at least four
hours. This translates into a significant amount of time lost for workers.

Nonetheless, India is taking significant steps to reduce the travel costs associated with opening
an account. The Reserve Bank of India’s New Payment Banks now allow telecommunication
companies, such as Airtel, to offer savings and debit accounts. The benefits of these New
Payment Banks are multifold. Since telecommunications firms tend to have a deeper presence
in remote areas than traditional banks, New Payment Banks significantly improve the travel
time and transportation costs for rural residents. For example, within six months of its launch,
the Airtel Payment Bank already had 10 million users, 25 percent of whom were from rural or
poor areas. Withdrawal costs are lower with payment banks, as well. For example, Airtel
Payment Bank, which now claims to have 200,000 agents across the country, charges customers
just 0.65 percent per withdrawal, compared to an average 2 percent per withdrawal at a
traditional bank. Initiatives like RBI’s New Payment Banks are promising steps towards
reaching disproportionately unbanked groups, such as the rural residents and the poor.

5.2.2 Ensuring availability of necessary documents

A new biometric authentication system, eKYC, now allows Indian bank customers to verify
their identify electronically. Yet at the time of our survey, Know Your Customer (KYC)
regulations required people to produce certain types of paper documents to get an account. This
section assesses the difficulties of collecting the necessary documentation for opening an
account with KYC, including the ease of obtaining the paperwork in question. The typical
applicant who did not have the necessary documents on hand made an average of more than 2
visits to government offices to collect documents.

                                                 20
The survey reveals that around 17 percent of adults who applied for a traditional account found
it difficult to obtain the required documents, versus 11 percent of adults who applied for JDY
accounts (Figure 7). Although they were significantly less likely to report documentation woes,
we expected a much lower figure for JDY applicants. The JDY policy was designed to make it
easier for unbanked adults to get an account by easing documentation requirements. To qualify,
a person only needs to produce a 12-digit identification number issued by the government,
either in person, or electronically. The question remains whether eased documentation
requirements will encourage adults to open accounts (see Box 2). In some states, the share of
JDY applicants citing documentation costs was significantly higher, including Uttar Pradesh
(26 percent) and Chattisgarh (31 percent).




Box 2: Are easy documentation requirements enough to encourage account ownership?

The JDY policy has attempted to make documentation requirements relatively lenient. The only
documentation required to open a JDY account is a biometric 12-digit individual identification
required to open a JDY account is a biometric 12-digit individual identification number, also
called an Aadhaar number, issued by the Unique Identification Authority of India on behalf of
the government. The government's goal was to have universal coverage, and as of mid-2016, 93
percent of adults in India had an Aadhaar number.21 For adults without an Aadhaar number, at
least one other official document- voter ID card,22 driving license, PAN card, passport, or
MGNREGA23 card- can be submitted to open a JDY account. If none of these documents are
available, a temporary “small” account is opened for a period of one year. Upon successful
submission of documents, these accounts are converted to permanent accounts.24




21
   Press Information Bureau, 2016.
22
   Permanent Account Number (PAN) is a unique, 10-character alpha-numeric identifier, issued to all judicial
entities identifiable under the Indian Income Tax Act, 1961.
23
   Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) is an Indian labor law and social
security measure that aims to provide at least 100 days of wage employment in a financial year to every household
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
24
   “Small Account”, Official Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana website
(http://pmjandhanyojana.co.in/small- account-pmjdy/ ).
                                                        21
Drawing data from a complimentary survey on government delivery of public goods and
services,25 we find that 95 percent of adults who never applied for an account had an Aadhaar
number.


Despite high coverage of Aadhaar and the launch of eKYC, which allows customers to verify
their identity electronically, the share of unbanked adults remains high. This suggests the
importance of ensuring documentation requirements under the JDY policy are clearly and
effectively communicated to the public in order to clear up misconceptions.



5.2.3 Other monetary costs

The survey explores two potential types of fraud: minimum deposit requirements at the time of
opening an account and informal payments in the form of presents or money requested in
addition to the official cost of opening an account.

Officially, there is no fee for opening a JDY account. Anyone who produces the necessary
documents and shows up at the bank is eligible for a free account. Yet one in five adults who
opened an account said they were required to pay extra money or presents, such as to a
middleman who demanded extra payments in exchange for processing account applications,
with no differences between JDY account holders and traditional account holders (Figure 7).

Among adults who opened a traditional account, 72 percent said they were required to pay a
minimum deposit (Figure 7). The share was 53 percent among those who opened a JDY
account– which is surprising given that there is no minimum deposit requirement under the
JDY policy. In fact, the zero-balance provision is touted as one of policy's most attractive
features. Most adults are not well informed about the policy and continue to attach high costs to
the process of applying for an account. Marketing the policy clearly and correctly might prevent
people from being misinformed.

Our aim in this section has been to provide a detailed analysis of individual account application

25
     Demirguc-Kunt, D., L. Klapper, and N. Prasad (2016).

                                                        22
costs. Yet it is important to bear in mind that these costs often manifest simultaneously and not
in isolation. It is the cumulative effect of these costs rather than the individual effect that makes
the overall cost prohibitively high and dampers the efficiency of account application process.
Skipping several hours of work to collect documentation or visit a bank branch means
foregoing income, especially for the many adults who are employed in the informal sector.
Additional payments to facilitate applications and minimum deposit requirements can make the
account opening process an expensive affair.



5.2.4 Bank cards: Encouraging the use of accounts

While having an account is the the first step in financial inclusion, people only benefit when
they use their accounts to manage money. Bank cards (ATM/debit cards) are important in
facilitating this use through point-of-sale and other digital payments. This is especially
important in light of recent Government of India efforts to reduce the use of cash. The survey
reveals that around 58 percent of adults who applied in the last 5 years for an account also
received a debit card. In the last 12 months, 62 percent of adults who applied for a JDY account
and 50 percent of those who applied for a traditional account during the same time said they
either received a bank card or were in the process of receiving one. 31 percent of applicants
who applied in the last 5 years said they simply were never offered a bank card. Among JDY
applicants, a greater share – 42 percent - reported that they were not offered a bank card. For
traditional applicants, the proportion was much lower at 24 percent. Many applicants also
declined cards: of JDY applicants who did not get a bank card, 38 percent said they did not
want one; among traditional applicants that number was 41 percent. The remaining adults who
did not get a card said the fee was too high or that they were not aware of the cards. Expanding
access to bank cards is essential to reduce account dormancy and increase usage of accounts for
cash management, savings, and electronic payments.



6. Policies Towards Achieving the Last Mile

Although the percent of adults in India that have applied for an account has increased in recent
years, the share of adults that never applied for an account is higher among women and the
                                                  23
poor. Policies like the JDY, with its relatively easy documentation process, shorter travel time
and lack of minimum balance requirements, could prove to be key in achieving the
government’s goal of increasing account ownership. The Reserve Bank of India’s New Payment
Banks, more common in remote areas than traditional banks, also help to cut travel costs and
improve access for rural residents. The overall increase in account ownership in the last few
years, particularly for women and poor adults, is an important step in the right direction. That
said, the take-up of any government scheme, including the success of the JDY program,
depends on a host of factors, such as demographic distribution, cultural norms, physical
infrastructure, and effectiveness of outreach.

This survey reveals several opportunities for India to build on its financial inclusion successes.
Clearly communicating documentation requirements for JDY accounts, and encouraging the use
of the existing eKYC electronic authentication system, are potential steps. The survey suggests
that the vast majority of adults who cite lack of documentation as their reason for being
unbanked actually do have what is needed: 94 percent report having an Aadhaar number. If
unbanked adults were better informed about application requirements, they might choose to
open an account.

Better marketing of the policy is also essential for addressing the concerns of the 35 percent of
adults who said they did not apply for an account as the process is too expensive. Adults need to
be informed that JDY accounts are free and there are no minimum deposit requirements—a
person could easily open a zero-balance account, which does not require any initial deposit.
However, the survey shows that about a fifth of JDY applicants were asked to offer some form
of unofficial payment, and about half were required to make a minimum deposit. One of the
potential ways to increase accountability may be better governance of the agents. Since agents
are seen as the face of the bank, particularly in rural areas where bank branches are not widely
present, better agents could help anchor trust for financial institutions, which would further the
goal of financial inclusion.

The ultimate goal of the JDY scheme is to expand financial inclusion. While the first step
involves opening a bank account, it is important to ensure that adults use their account in
beneficial ways. The 2014 Global Findex found that 43 percent of accounts in India were
dormant. Although the survey does not ask about account usage, official JDY account figures
                                                 24
on zero-balance accounts26 show that the share of zero-balance accounts has dropped from a
high of 77 percent in the early months of the policy in September 2014 to about 24 percent in
July 2016.

There could be multiple reasons for the declining share of zero-balance accounts, but the data
provide some limited clues. A recent study finds that in spite of unfamiliarity with banking or
financial literacy training, newly banked adults show an increase in JDY account activity as
accounts age and usage levels converge or exceed levels seen in comparable traditional
accounts (Chopa, et al., 2017). Another study finds that moving government payments from
cash into accounts is a plausible way to reinvigorate dormant accounts and further expand
financial inclusion (Klapper and Singer, 2017). JDY accounts are being used to receive
government social benefits payments, which was touted as one of the policy's main potential
upsides. The Indian government estimates that it has saved around USD 2 billion by digitizing
the delivery of fuel subsidies, and they attribute part of that success to the use of JDY
accounts.27 However, additional research could investigate if opening an account leads to usage
of additional financial services, such as electronic payments, savings and appropriate credit.

There have been a number of initiatives to collect demand-side data on account ownership,
directly from users of financial services. The survey shows the value of extending the scope of
questions to include metrics of the cost, time and documentation challenges of opening new
accounts. This information can help inform policy makers, researchers and practitioners
working towards greater and more inclusive access and use of formal financial sector services.




26
   Zero balance accounts are regular savings accounts which could be opened without having any balance in the
account.
27
   “India saved $2 billion by reforming fuel subsidiary delivery”, The Economic Times, July 03, 2015.
http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2015-07-03/news/64068421_1_lpg-subsidy-pahal-pradhan.

                                                       25
References

Aker, J., R. Boumnijel, A. McClelland, and N. Tierney. 2013. "How Do Electronic Transfers
       Compare? Evidence from a Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment in Niger." Tufts
       University

Aportela, F. 1999. "Effects of Financial Access on Savings by Low Income People." Banco de
       Mexico.

Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin. 2010. "Female Empowerment: Further Evidence from a
       Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines." World Development 28 (3): 333–44.

Babatz, G. 2013. "Sustained Effort, Saving Billions: Lessons from the Mexican Government's
       Shift to Electronic Payments." Better Than Cash Alliance Case Study.
       http://betterthancash.org/.

Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and M. S. Martinez Peria. 2007. "Reaching Out: Access to and
       Use of Banking Services across Countries." Journal of Financial Economics 85 (2):
       234–66.

Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza. 2000. "Finance and the Sources of Growth." Journal of
       Financial Economics 58 (1): 261–300.

Bruhn, M., and I. Love. 2014. "The Real Impact of Improved Access to Finance: Evidence
       from Mexico." Journal of Finance 69 (3): 1347–76.

Burgess, R., and R. Pande. 2005. "Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian Social
      Banking Experiment." American Economic Review 95 (3): 780–95.

Chopra Y., N. Prabhala, and P. Tantri 2017. “Bank Accounts For The Unbanked: Evidence
      from a Big Bang Experiment”. Mimeo.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., and R. Levine. 2009. "Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence."
      Annual Review of Financial Economics 1: 287–318.

Demirguc-Kunt, D., L. Klapper, and N. Prasad. 2017. “Measuring the Effectiveness of
      Service Delivery: Delivery of Public Goods and Services in India”, World Bank
      Development Research Group Working Paper.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., L. Klapper, D. Singer, and P. van Oudhessden. 2015. Global Findex
      database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World”. Washington, DC:
      World Bank.

Docquier, F., L. Lowell, and A. Marfouk. 2009. "A Gendered Assessment of the Brain Drain."
      World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, No. 4613. Washington DC.

                                            26
Dupas, P., and J. Robinson. 2013a. "Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development:
      Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya." American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics 5 (1): 163–92.

Dupas, P., and J. Robinson. 2013b. "Why Don't the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health
      Savings Experiments." American Economic Review 103 (4): 1138–71.

Economic Times. 2015. "India saved $2 billion by reforming fuel subsidiary delivery". July 3.

Government of India. "UIDAI generates a billion (100 crore) Aadhaars: A Historic Moment for
      India" Government of India. April 4.

King, R. G., and R. Levine. 1993. "Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right." Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 108 (3): 717–37.

Klapper, L., M. El-Zogbhi, and J. Hess. 2016. "Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals:
      The Role of Financial Inclusion." CGAP and UNSGSA, Washington, DC

Klapper, L., L. Laeven, and R. Rajan. 2006. "Entry Regulation as a Barrier to Entrepreneurship."
      Journal of Financial Economics 82: 591–629.

Klapper, L. and D. Singer. 2017. "The Opportunities and Challenges of Digitizing
      Government- to-Person". World Bank Research Observer, Forthcoming.

Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar. 2014. "Payments Infrastructure and the
       Performance of Public Programs: Evidence from Biometric Smartcards in India." NBER
       Working Paper 19999, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

National Statistical Commission. 2012. Report of the Committee on Unorganized Sector
      Statistics. Government of India.

Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana. Official Website. Department of Financial Services. Ministry
      of Finance. Government of India.

Prina, S. 2012. "Do Basic Savings Accounts Help the Poor to Save? Evidence from a Field
       Experiment in Nepal." Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve
       University, Cleveland, OH.

Ruiz, C. 2013. "From Pawn Shops to Banks: The Impact of Formal Credit on Informal
      Households." Policy Research Working Paper 6643, World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2014a. Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial
     Inclusion. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank, 2014b. The Opportunities of Digitizing Payments. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                               27
Appendix 1: “Measuring the Ease of Financial Access” Questionnaire


   1.   Have you, personally, either by yourself or together with someone else, EVER applied for an account at a
        bank or other financial institution?
           i.    Yes
          ii.    No

   2.   When was the LAST TIME you applied for an account at a bank or other financial institution? Was it in the
        last 12 months, in the last 5 years, or more than 5 years ago?
            i.   In the last 12 months
           ii.   In the last 5 years
          iii.   More than 5 years ago

   3.   Did you apply for a JanDhan Yojana scheme account?
           i.   Yes
          ii.   No

   4.   What is the MAIN REASON you applied for a JanDhan Yojana scheme account? Was it to save, receive,
        or send money, to get a government monetary bonus for opening an account, to get the overdraft facility, to
        receive a government subsidy payment, or for some other reason?
            i.   To save, receive, or send money
           ii.   To get a government monetary bonus for opening account
          iii.   To get the overdraft facility
          iv.    To receive a government subsidy payment
           v.    Some other reason

   5.   Now, I would like to ask you a few questions about the LAST TIME you applied to open an account at a
        bank or financial institution. Did you receive that account, were you denied that account, or are you still in
        the process of opening the account?
            i.   Received account
           ii.   Denied account
          iii.   Still in process

   6.   Did you receive a debit/bank/ATM card when you opened your account?
           i.   Yes, received card
          ii.   No, did not receive card
         iii.   (Still in process)

   7.   What was the main reason that you did not receive a debit/bank/ATM card? Was it because it was not offered
        to you, because the fee was too high, because you did not want one or did not apply for one, or because you
        were not aware you could get a debit/bank/ATM card?
            i.   It was not offered to you
           ii.   The fee was too high
          iii.   You did not want one/did not apply for one
          iv.    You were not aware that you can get a debit/bank/ATM card


                                                         28
8.   Was the whole process of applying for an account easy or difficult?
        i.   Easy
       ii.   Difficult

9.   How did you first apply to open your account? At a bank, using a NGO or bank agent (not located at a bank),
     on the Internet or using a mobile phone, or some other way?
         i.   At the bank
        ii.   Using a NGO or bank agent (not located at a bank)
      iii.    On the internet or using a mobile phone
       iv.    Some other way

10. Roughly, how long did it take to get to the place where you had to apply for an account?
       i.   Less than 30 minutes
      ii.   30 minutes to less than an hour
     iii.   1-4 hours
     iv.    More than 4 hours
      v.    (No time- done in my home)

11. Roughly, how many times did you need to go there in order to complete the whole application process?
      i.    Record number of times

12. Were the transportation costs to get to the place where you applied for an account expensive, a reasonable
    price, or there was no cost?
        i.    It was expensive
       ii.    It was a reasonable price
      iii.    There was no cost

13. Was it easy or difficult for you to get all necessary documents you needed to open an account?
      i.     Easy
     ii.     Difficult

14. Did you have all government documents in your home that were necessary to open the account at the time
    you applied, or not?
       i.   Yes
      ii.   No

15. Roughly, how many times did you need to go to a government office in order to collect all the necessary
    documents?
       i.   Record number of time

16. Which of the following best describes ALL OF THE COSTS of opening an account? It was expensive, it was
    a reasonable price, or there was no cost?
        i.   It was expensive
       ii.   It was a reasonable price
      iii.   There was no cost

17. Were you required to deposit some minimum amount of money at the time the account was opened?
      i.   Yes
     ii.   No
                                                       29
18. In addition to the official cost of opening an account, did you have to give presents or money in order to
    open an account?
        i.   Yes
       ii.   No

19. Do you have an account at a bank or financial institution that was opened for you by someone else, like an
    employer or the government?
       i.   Yes
      ii.   No

20. Please tell me whether each of the following is a BIG reason why you have never, personally, applied for
    an account. Is it because (Read A-F)
    A. You didn't need it or thought it would not be useful for you
    B. It cost too much
    C. You didn't have the necessary documents
    D. The closest bank is too far away
    E. You don't know how to apply or it is too hard
    F. You don't trust banks
       i.    Yes
      ii.    No




                                                        30
