                                                     WPS8160


Policy Research Working Paper                       8160




          Online Exports and the Wage Gap
                                 Marcio Cruz
                                Emmanuel Milet
                                Marcelo Olarreaga




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8160


  Abstract
 The development of the Internet is often seen as a source                          a priori that an expansion of online exports reduces the
 of demand for skilled workers and therefore a potential                            wage gap. After correcting for potential endogeneity bias
 driver of the wage gap between skilled and unskilled work-                         in a sample of 22 developing countries for which online
 ers. This paper focuses on the impact that international                           trade and wage gap data can be matched, the study finds
 trade in online platforms has on the wage gap. Because                             that a 1 percent increase in the share of online exports
 online trade allows smaller firms with relatively more                             over GDP leads to a 0.01 percent decline in the wage gap.
 unskilled workers to access world markets it can be expected




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at marciocruz@worldbank.org, emmanuel.milet@unige.ch, and marcelo.olarreaga@unige.ch.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                            Online Exports and the Wage Gap∗
                  Marcio Cruz†             Emmanuel Milet‡               Marcelo Olarreaga§




Keywords: wage gap, online trade.
JEL codes: F14, J31, L86.




  ∗
                                                                    eline Carr`
     We are grateful to Rita Almeida, Omar Arias, Irene Brambilla, C´         ere, Alvaro Gonzalez, Daniel Lederman,
Andreas Lendle, J´ er´emy Lucchetti, Monika Mr´ azov´     ed´
                                                     a, Fr´ eric Robert-Nicoud, Indhira Santos, Shawn Tan, Pierre-
Louis V´ezina, and participants at workshops at the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank Institute, the Tunis
Business School, and at the Western Economic Association conference in San Diego for very constructive comments
and suggestions. We also gratefully acknowledge support from the r4d program on Employment funded by Swiss
National Science Foundation and the Swiss Development Cooperation, as well as the Knowledge for Change Program
and the World Bank’s Chief Economist Oﬃce for Latin America.
   †
     World Bank and UFPR, email: marciocruz@worldbank.org
   ‡
     University of Geneva, email: emmanuel.milet@unige.ch
   §
     University of Geneva, CEPII, and CEPR, email: marcelo.olarreaga@unige.ch
1        Introduction

We explore the impact of online international trade on the wage gap between skilled and unskilled
workers. In a sample of 22 developing countries for which we have data on cross border online trade,
and labor surveys to estimate the wage gap, we ﬁnd that a one percent increase in the share of online
exports over GDP reduces the wage gap by 0.01 percent. This can be explained by the information
providing mechanisms in online platforms that reduce the ﬁxed cost of exporting, allowing smaller
ﬁrms with a more unskilled workforce to export. We provide evidence supporting this mechanism
as the reduction in the wage gap associated with online exports is larger in countries with a larger
share of small ﬁrms.
        This result is important for at least three reasons. First, while world trade increased by 92
percent (8 percent annual growth) between 2004 and 2012, cross-border online trade grew more
than 7 times faster (see Figure 1 where the left axis shows the growth in world trade, and the
right axis the growth in online trade). Even if cross-border e-commerce only represents around 20
percent of online sales, it has been rapidly growing and its share is expected to double over the next
5 years (UNCTAD, 2015). For policy makers, it is important to assess early on the consequences
of such a rapidly growing phenomenon. Second, the wage gap has been declining in the developing
world over the last decade (Cruz and Milet, 2017). Our sample is no exception, with an average
annual decline of 1 percent as can be seen from Figure 2. Understanding the forces behind the
decline in the wage gap, and the role played by employment in small ﬁrms, can provide useful tools
in the ﬁght against income inequality. Third, it contributes to the debate on how technological
progress aﬀects skilled and unskilled workers, and ultimately income inequality. Does technological
progress promote or reduce income inequality? While the development of the Internet has often
been seen as skilled biased and contributing to income inequality (Akerman et al., 2015), this paper
suggests otherwise. Online platforms that allow small ﬁrms to access world markets help unskilled
workers and contribute to a reduction in income inequality.1
        We face several challenges. First, data on online cross border trade ﬂows are not yet collected by
any national or international agency, although some proposals have been put forward (UNCTAD,
2015). As a proxy we use cross-border ﬂows on the eBay platform made available by Lendle et al.
    1
     As noted by Varian (2005): “big enterprises were the ﬁrst to reap the beneﬁts of this technological progress. But
the impact of information technology on small and medium-size enterprises may yet turn out to have the most impact
on the economy ”. He also remarked more recently that small businesses are taking advantage of technologies which
used to be the sole privilege of large companies: “[. . . ] even the smallest company can now aﬀord a communications
and computational infrastructure that would have been the envy of a large corporation 15 years ago ”(Varian, 2011).



                                                          1
(2016). One problem with using eBay ﬂows is that the platform originally started as a peer-to-peer
online market where second-hand products were auctioned, even if it rapidly became a platform
mainly used by professional sellers on ﬁxed price transactions. Because we want our proxy to reﬂect
the access of ﬁrms to foreign consumers via an online platform rather than the general expansion of
e-commerce, we decided to disregard transactions that were undertaken under the auction system.
We are still left with measurement error due to the fact that cross border eBay ﬂows are only a
fraction of total online transactions between ﬁrms and foreign consumers. We will address this
measurement error using an instrumental variable strategy described below.
      The second challenge we face is endogeneity. Indeed, other unobserved factors such as techno-
logical progress may simultaneously determine online trade and the wage gap, thus introducing a
bias in our estimates. To correct for this (and measurement error) we use an instrumental variable
estimator. We use three instruments: i) the time varying geography determinants of bilateral on-
line trade ﬂows following Feyrer (2009); ii) the value of domestic online sales in each of the partner
countries; and iii) the average import tariﬀ in the importing countries. These three variables are
likely to be valid instruments. Indeed, geography related variables and variables capturing demand
shocks in importing countries are unlikely to be correlated with other determinants of the wage
gap in the exporting country.
      The third challenge is to provide estimates of the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers
that are consistent across countries. We do this using the methodology and data provided by Cruz
and Milet (2017). The raw data are based on labor and household surveys in diﬀerent countries and
at diﬀerent points in time harmonized by the World Bank in the International Income Distribution
Database (I2D2). This makes feasible the use of the same methodology and variables to estimate
the wage gap across countries and time.
      We are not the ﬁrst to look at the determinants of the wage gap between skilled and unskilled
workers. Labor economists have emphasized the role played by changes in supply and demand
to explain changes in the wage gap and ultimately in wage inequality. The workhorse framework
linking supply and demand to factor prices is developed in Katz and Murphy (1992), later reﬁned
by several authors (see Card and Lemieux, 2001, for instance). The most recent version of this
model features skill-biased technologies, i.e. technologies that shift outward the relative demand for
skilled workers. This skill-biased technology change (SBTC hereafter) induces a permanent shift
in the demand for the labor service of skilled workers.2 However, technological change need not be
  2
      The fact that wage inequalities increased at the same time when many industries were investing in computers



                                                        2
biased in favor of skilled workers. Luo (2017) shows that as Europe was experiencing signiﬁcant
technological progress during the 500 years before the First World War, the wage gap between
skilled and unskilled workers declined by more than 50%. In our empirical model we will control
for both demand and supply side determinants of the wage gap. Our contribution is to add as
potential demand driver the growth in online international trade.
    The literature has also looked at the importance of trade as a determinant of the wage gap.
Some trade economists have stressed the fact that the timing of rising wage inequalities in developed
and developing countries coincided with a rapid increase in international trade ﬂows (see Feenstra
and Hanson, 2001; Harrison and McMillan, 2011, for surveys). Feenstra and Hanson (1999) ﬁnd
that imports of intermediate inputs account for about 15 percent of the increase in the relative wage
of skilled workers in the United States over the period 1979-1990. SBTC is twice as important and
accounts for about a third of the increase. Evidence from developing countries is more scarce,
but also suggests that wage inequalities have been driven by episodes of trade liberalization in the
1980s and 1990s (Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007). Lower tariﬀs imply that many developed economies
outsourced part of their production process to lower income countries, which as emphasized by the
“trading tasks” models (Feenstra and Hanson, 1996; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008) can lead
to increased wage inequalities in both developed and developing countries as long as the tasks being
outsourced to developing countries are considered as unskilled in the rich country and skilled in the
low-income country. Autor et al. (2013) ﬁnd that trade with China hurts more unskilled workers
in the United States, and Autor (2014) and Autor et al. (2015) argue that the negative impact of
imports from China on wage and employment of unskilled workers in the United States is much
larger than the impact of technological change.
    More recently, income inequality has been declining in many developing countries, especially in
Latin America (De la Torre et al., 2015). Lustig et al. (2013) review some of this literature and
conclude that the decline in overall inequalities in Latin American countries is to a large extent
the consequence of a decline in the wage gap, income redistribution associated with government
transfers, and the boom in commodity prices (Gasparini et al., 2011).
    To sum up, the existing literature has concluded that both trade and skill biased technological
progress play a role in explaining changes in the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers.
Importantly, these changes substantially contribute to the evolution in income inequality. However,
gave strong support to the skill-biased technology change hypothesis (Krueger, 1993; Berman et al., 1994; Autor
et al., 1998; Acemoglu, 2002).




                                                      3
to our knowledge the impact of online cross border trade on the wage gap between skilled and
unskilled workers is yet to be investigated.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical strategy and
section 3 the data. Section 4 discusses the empirical results of the impact of online exports on
the wage gap. Section 5 explores theoretically and empirically the role played by small ﬁrms in
explaining the impact of online exports on the wage gap. Section 6 concludes.


2    Empirical strategy

We explain variations in the wage skill gap within countries and over time with the following
empirical model:




ln(wage gap)c,t = β1 ln(online exportsc,t /GDPc,t ) + β2 ln(exportsc,t /GDPc,t )                              (1)

                         +β3 ln(skilled/unskilled)c,t + β4 ln(Internet usersc,t /P opc,t ) + δc + ηt +        c,t



where β s are parameters to be estimated, (skilled/unskilled )c,t is the relative supply of skilled
workers, δc and ηt are country and year ﬁxed eﬀects, and               c,t   is the error term. We expect β1 ,
which captures the impact of online exports on the wage gap to be negative. Indeed, the reduction
in the ﬁxed cost of entering foreign markets brought by online platforms helps smaller and less
productive ﬁrms which tend to hire more unskilled workers, to enter international markets.3 This
again increases the relative labor demand for unskilled workers. Total exports over GDP controls
for the overall impact of trade openness on the wage gap. The expected sign is ambiguous as some
of the early studies have shown that trade increased the wage gap, whereas some of the more recent
studies have shown that the commodity boom has contributed to a reduction of the wage gap. The
relative supply of skilled workers should reduce the wage gap and therefore β3 is expected to be
negative. The share of Internet users in the population is a proxy for skilled biased technological
change (Akerman et al., 2015) and we therefore expect β4 to be positive.
    An important concern with the estimation of equation (1) is the endogeneity of online and total
    3
      For evidence that small ﬁrms have a more unskilled workforce, see the classic work by Brown and Medoﬀ (1989)
or Hamermesh (1980). For evidence that online markets help small ﬁrms access otherwise unreachable international
markets see Lendle et al. (2013). They show that 90 percent of US ﬁrms on the eBay platform export and that their
size is much smaller than the size of traditional US exporting ﬁrms. Lendle and Olarreaga (2017) provide similar
evidence for ﬁrms in developing countries.




                                                        4
exports ﬂows, as well as measurement error associated with the use of eBay cross border ﬂows as
a proxy for online exports. We address this by instrumenting online and total trade ﬂows using
three exogenous sources of variation. First, we use the time-varying distance determinant of online
and total exports as in Feyrer (2009). We expect the impact of distance to vary over time due
to innovations in the transport sector that has shifted shipments towards air transport, as well
as technological progress in the information and telecommunication sector. We expect the impact
of distance to be diﬀerent for online and total trade because technological improvements, which
reduce information barriers and that we proxy using geographic distance, are likely to be stronger
for online transactions given the information providing mechanisms in online platforms such as the
top rated seller or buyer information in online markets (Lendle et al., 2016). Thus the variation in
the use of these instruments comes from the diﬀerential impact of distance across time and across
online and oﬄine ﬂows.
   The second set of instruments capture foreign demand shocks for online and total exports in
importing countries. In the case of online trade, domestic demand is computed as the sum of
domestic online transactions and online imports. For total trade, we simply use the GDP of the
importing country. We expect demand in the importing country to be positively correlated with
online and total export ﬂows of exporting countries, and uncorrelated with other determinants of
the wage gap in the exporting country.
   Finally, we use the average tariﬀ imposed by the importing country. To diﬀerentiate the tariﬀ
imposed on online and total trade, we use the average import tariﬀ on manufacturing products
for online trade and the average tariﬀ on all products (including raw materials and agricultural
products) for total trade. There is no reason to believe that the average tariﬀ imposed by the
importing country is correlated with the wage gap in the exporting country other than through its
impact on bilateral trade, which we expect to be negative.
   We estimate the following six equations:




                                                 5
                                                            d
            ln(online exportsx,m,t /GDPx,t ) =             βt ln(distance)x,m + βx,m + βx,t +    x,m,t        (2)
                                                       t
            ln(online exportsx,m,t /GDPx,t ) = η ln(online demand)m,t + βx,m + βx,t +              x,m,t      (3)

            ln(online exportsx,m,t /GDPx,t ) = λln(1 + tarif fmanuf )m,t + βx,m + βx,t +            x,m,t     (4)


                                                            d
                    ln(exportsx,m,t /GDPx,t ) =            αt ln(distance)x,m + αx,m + αx,t + µx,m,t          (5)
                                                       t
                    ln(exportsx,m,t /GDPx,t ) = θln(GDP )m,t + αx,m + αx,t + µx,m,t                           (6)

                    ln(exportsx,m,t /GDPx,t ) = ψ ln(1 + tarif f )m,t + αx,m + αx,t + µx,m,t                  (7)


where ln(online exports )x,m,t and ln(exports )x,m,t are respectively the online and total exports from
country x to country m in year t. βx,m and αx,m control for time-invariant country-pair speciﬁc
determinants of trade ﬂows such as distance, colonial linkages, common language, etc. βx,t and αx,t
are year and country speciﬁc shocks in the exporting country. We use the estimate in equations (2)-
(7) to predict the log of bilateral online and total exports. To estimate the impact of online trade
on the wage gap, we need to aggregate the bilateral exports ﬂows at the exporter and year level.
We ﬁrst take the exponential of the predicted bilateral trade ﬂows estimated by equations (2)-(7).
We then aggregate these trade ﬂows at the exporter and year level by summing the trade ﬂows over
all importers each year. After taking logs we use these six variables to instrument the log share of
online and total exports in GDP.


3        Data

The variable of interest is the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers. We borrow the
data and methodology from Cruz and Milet (2017). The data source is the International Income
Distribution Database (I2D2) put together by the World Bank which compiles more than 1,000
household and labor force surveys from 164 countries over the period 1960-2014 covering more
than 120 million individuals. The data have been harmonized to the extent possible ensuring that
conceptual variables have similar meaning, allowing for cross-country analysis.4 For the purpose of
this study, we selected a restricted sample of 22 countries for which suﬃcient data are available.5
    4
        See Montenegro and Hirn (2009) and Montenegro and Patrinos (2014) for more information about the database.
    5
        See table 1 for a list of countries and surveys.



                                                           6
We kept surveys for which individual information on gender, age, education achievement, and
labor income (wage) was available and consistent over the period 2004-2012 for which we have
cross-border trade data. We kept the working age population, and dropped individuals below 15
and above 64 years of age.6 Finally, we kept workers who reported being paid employees rather
than self-employed. Wages are reported in various units depending on the country being surveyed.
We converted them into monthly full-time equivalent.7 We exclude the top and bottom 1% of
the wage distribution as non-response and under-reporting are typically quite severe among high-
income households, and the bottom end of the distribution is likely to suﬀer from measurement
error, misreporting, and omissions to consider ﬁnancial transfers within the household (such as
remittances for instance). There are ﬁve categories of educational achievement: no education
or incomplete primary, complete primary, incomplete secondary, complete secondary, and post-
secondary.
       We deﬁne skilled workers as workers with at least a complete secondary education.8 The group of
unskilled workers is made of individuals without education (below primary), incomplete primary and
complete primary education.9 Following Katz and Murphy (1992) and Acemoglu and Autor (2011),
wages and labor supply are deﬁned in terms of eﬃciency units by adjusting for the composition
of the workforce. We follow Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and deﬁne 50 demographic groups of
individuals based on the ﬁve education categories (no education or incomplete primary education,
complete primary education, incomplete secondary education, complete secondary education, and
post-secondary education), ﬁve job experience groups (0-9 years, 10-19 years, 20-29 years, 30-
39 years, and more than 40 years), and gender (50=5 education groups×5 experience groups×2
genders). We regress the individual log wage on the ﬁve education dummies, an experience quartic,
the full interaction between the education dummies and the experience quartic, a dummy for
   6
     This restriction does not aﬀect our results. Individuals outside the [15-64] years old interval account for on
average 4.7% of the population, and 4.6% of the total wage bill.
   7
     Wages reported in the various surveys are either daily, weekly, by-weekly, monthly, bi-monthly, quarterly, annually
or hourly wages. In the case of hourly wages, we multiplied by the number of hours worked during the day, and by
the number of weeks during the month (52 weeks divided by 12 months). In the case where wages are reported on
a hourly basis and information on the number of hours is missing, we made the assumption that workers worked 8
hours per day.
   8
     In unreported descriptive statistics, we show that the real wages of workers with complete secondary and post-
secondary education follow similar trend over time, and so do the wages of workers with below complete secondary
education. This similarity in the trends suggest that there is a higher degree of homogeneity within the skilled and
unskilled workers rather than between them.
   9
     In unreported descriptive statistics, we looked at the evolution of the real wage for each of these education
categories. Real wages of workers with complete secondary or post-secondary education followed a similar pattern,
quite diﬀerent from the one for workers with at most incomplete secondary education.




                                                           7
whether the individual lives in an urban area, and an industry dummy10 . We then predict wages at
the corresponding education levels and ﬁve experience levels (at 5, 15, 25, 35, 45 years of experience,
corresponding to the average experience in each experience group deﬁned above), in each industry.
We perform separate estimations for men and women. We then take the weighted average of the
predicted log wage for skilled and unskilled workers. Weights are deﬁned as the average of the labor
share of each of the 50 demographic groups in each industry over time.11
         Figure 3 describes the evolution of the wage gap and online exports in some selected countries.12
The countries were selected so that the variables have similar dimension for illustration purposes.
Nevertheless, ﬁgure 3 suggests that if the wage gap declined in most countries in our sample, this
is not the case in the Philippines, for instance.
         The online trade data are borrowed from Lendle et al. (2016), where we only consider ﬁxed price
transactions, as the mechanism we have in mind does not go through the auctioning of second-hand
goods.13 It contains bilateral cross-border ﬂows on the eBay platform over the period 2004-2012.
Cross border ﬂows represented on average 20 percent of the total value of transactions on the eBay
platform during this period. As shown in ﬁgure 1 online trade was growing faster than overall trade
over the period 2004-2012.
         Table 2 provides summary statistics for all the variables used in the estimations of equa-
tions (1)-(7). The data source for GDP, average tariﬀs, and the share of Internet users is the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators. Information on distance comes from the CEPII
distance database (Mayer and Zignago, 2011).


4         Online exports and the wage gap

Table 3 presents the ordinary least square estimates. All regressions include country and year
ﬁxed eﬀects, and standard errors are clustered at the country-level to account for intertemporal
correlation in the error term for each country. In all columns online exports has a negative sign and
is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. Using the estimates of column (4) which corresponds
to equation (1) we ﬁnd that a 1 percent increase in the share of online exports over GDP decreases
    10
     There are ten broad industries in the I2D2: agriculture, mining, manufacturing, public utilities, construction,
retail and wholesale, transport, ﬁnance, public administration, and others.
  11
     See Cruz and Milet (2017) for further details on the construction of the wage gap.
  12
     We selected countries based on the comparable magnitudes in terms of changes in the wage gap and online trade.
Graphs for other countries show similar patterns.
  13
     We also used as a robustness check all online trade ﬂows on eBay which include auction transactions. Results
are similar and often larger in magnitude.



                                                         8
the wage gap by 0.01 percent. The log of total exports over GDP is never statistically signiﬁcant.
The coeﬃcient on the relative supply of skilled workers is as expected negative and statistically
signiﬁcant.14 The share of Internet users, which we use as a proxy for technological change, has a
negative and statistically signiﬁcant sign, suggesting that as the number of Internet users increases
the wage gap between skill and unskilled workers declines.
       As discussed earlier an important problem with the estimates in table 3 is measurement error as
online exports are only captured by cross-border transactions that occurred over the eBay platform.
Other platforms like Amazon, or Alibaba are excluded. Moreover, many electronic transactions do
not occur over the platforms but directly on ﬁrms’ web pages.15 There may also be omitted
variable bias if the role of the Internet, which is imperfectly captured by the share of Internet
users, is correlated with both online exports and the wage gap. In order to correct for these two
problems we instrument online and total exports using equations (2)-(7). Results of the estimation
of equations (2)-(7) are shown in table 4. The log of online exports over GDP is the dependent
variable in columns (1)–(3), and the log of total exports over GDP in columns (4)–(6). Time-
varying distance and trade costs have the expected negative signs but with very diﬀerent point
estimates. The marginal impact of distance on total export ﬂows tends to declining over time for
both online and total trade. As can be seen from column (4) in 2004 the impact of distance on total
trade is 12 percent smaller than in 2012 (the reference year). For online trade the impact is more
than 30 percent smaller in 2005 (we do not use 2004 as it is imprecisely estimated). Columns (2)
and (5) report the estimates of equations (3) and (6) where we use the domestic demand for online
products (column 2) and GDP (column 5) in partner countries as instruments for online exports and
total exports respectively. In both columns the coeﬃcients on the demand variables are positive
and statistically signiﬁcant, as expected. Finally, columns (3) and (6) report the estimates of
equations (4) and (7) where the instruments are respectively the average tariﬀ on manufacturing
products and the average tariﬀ on all products in the importing country. As expected, import
tariﬀs are negatively correlated with export ﬂows. The correlation matrix of total and online trade
ﬂows with their predicted values is given in table 5. All trade ﬂows are highly correlated, but it
is important to note that the correlation between the predicted trade ﬂows and the actual ﬂows
  14
     Its magnitude, -0.10 can be interpreted in terms of the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled
workers. Following a simple supply and demand framework a     ` la Katz and Murphy (1992), assuming that technological
change is exogenous to the supply of skilled workers, the coeﬃcient we estimate is (minus) the inverse of the elasticity
of substitution between skilled and unskilled workers. Our estimate in column (4) therefore implies an elasticity
around 10.
  15
     Note that the latter may be less likely for exporters from developing countries which need independent feedback
mechanisms provided by these platforms to create a reputation as a reliable business partner.


                                                           9
is always above 0.84, suggesting that our instrumental variables are doing a reasonable job in
explaining observed trade ﬂows. This is not surprising given that we use the gravity framework.
    Table 6 provides the instrumental variable estimates of equation (1). In the ﬁrst three columns
we report the estimates using one of the three types of instruments for each export ﬂow (online
and total). In columns (4) to (6) we use two instruments for each trade ﬂow, which allows us to
test for the validity of our instruments. IV (2) + (3) corresponds to the ﬁrst two instruments for
each trade ﬂow (i.e. obtained form equations (2) and (3) for online exports, and from equations (5)
and (6) for total exports. The same logic applies to IV (2)+(4) and IV (3)+(4). In column (7) we
use all instruments.
    All the estimated coeﬃcients on the share of online exports are negative as expected and sta-
tistically signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. The estimates in column (4) suggest that a 1 percent
increase in online exports would lead to a 0.01 percent decline in the wage gap, which is very
close to the OLS estimate. The estimated coeﬃcient on total exports is also always negative and
statistically signiﬁcant with a point estimate around -0.05. The coeﬃcient on the relative sup-
ply of skilled workers remains negative across the four speciﬁcations, but is always statistically
insigniﬁcant. The share of Internet users is negative and statistically signiﬁcant at the 10 percent
level. At the bottom of the table we report various statistics attesting the overall validity of our
instruments. The p-value of the F-test for the ﬁrst stage is strongly below the admitted threshold
of 5% in all speciﬁcations, and the Hansen J test shows that the overidentiﬁcation restriction are
valid (except perhaps in column (6) when we only use demand and tariﬀ shocks as instruments).
The Cragg-Donald F-test also attests of the strength of our instruments.


5    The role of small ﬁrms

As discussed earlier a potential explanation for the negative impact of online exports on the wage
gap is that the reduction in the ﬁxed cost of exporting beneﬁts small ﬁrms which tend to be less
skill-intensive. While small ﬁrms are under-represented in the population of regular exporters,
anecdotal evidence suggest that they account for a signiﬁcant share of the ﬁrms engaged in cross-
border e-commerce. The company “Ecommerce Europe” which describes itself as “the voice of
the e-commerce sector in Europe” represents over 25,000 online shops across Europe. Its 2016
e-commerce report surveyed 585 European ﬁrms engaged in e-commerce and shows that 334 of the




                                                10
surveyed ﬁrms are what they call “pure-players” (i.e. not retailers or wholesalers).16 Most of these
independent ﬁrms (72%) have fewer than 10 employees and 84% have fewer than 20 employees,
and two-thirds engage in cross-border e-commerce. In developing countries, anecdotal evidence
taken form UNCTAD (2015) shows that when facing substantial challenges while engaging in e-
commerce, many micro and small enterprises rely on existing online platforms. Such platforms
propose a variety of service that micro and small ﬁrms would not be able to provide on their own
such as advertising, product management, shipping, and most importantly payments via credit
cards, PayPal, or bank accounts.17
       We ﬁrst develop a simple analytical model to analyze the role of small ﬁrms in explaining the
impact of online exports on the wage gap. We then empirically assess whether the impact of online
exports on the wage gap is stronger in countries with a larger share of employment in small ﬁrms.


5.1      A conceptual framework

Building on Ekholm and Midelfart (2005) and Yeaple (2005) it can be shown that a reduction in
the ﬁxed cost of exporting faced by small ﬁrms leads to a reduction in the wage gap between skilled
and unskilled workers, and that this reduction is larger in the presence of a relatively larger share
of small ﬁrms.18
       On the demand side we have a representative consumer with CES preferences over two im-
perfectly substitutable composite goods Xh and Xl who maximizes her utility with respect to her
budget constraint E . Each composite good is also a CES aggregate of individual varieties produced
by monopolistically competitive ﬁrms. The aggregate production and corresponding price index in
each sector is given by:
  16
      Reports are available at https://www.ecommerce-europe.eu/.
  17
      In developing countries it is also important to recognize the role played by mobile phones in facilitating the
access by micro and small business to e-commerce. According to WTO (2013), “The most popular ICT in developing
countries and one which is progressing very rapidly in Africa and Asia, in particular India, is the mobile phone. Mobile
phones are increasingly playing a larger role in the expansion of e-commerce in developing countries, especially among
users without terminal connections. [..] In many developing countries, [...] they are increasingly being used for data
application such as m-commerce and m-banking. In a number of African countries, notably Kenya, South Africa,
Tanzania and Zambia, mobile telephones are being used to do personal banking services ”.
   18
      We develop a simple closed economy model, but it can be easily reinterpreted as an open economy model by
either having consumers and producers being located in diﬀerent countries, or by adding a second set of consumers
in a diﬀerent country in which a ﬁxed cost needs to be paid in order to reach them.




                                                          11
                                           −1            −1
                                                                     −1
                           U   =     Xh         + Xl

                           E = wh H + wl L                                                                    (8)
                                           Nk            σ −1
                                                                        σ
                                                                      σ −1
                         Xk =                   qk (i)     σ    di           ,     k ∈ {h, l}                 (9)
                                       0
                                           Nk                          1
                                                                      1−σ
                          Pk =                  pk (i)1−σ di                 ,      k ∈ {h, l}.              (10)
                                       0


We assume that σ > > 1 meaning there is a greater substitutability between varieties within each
composite good than in ﬁnal consumption.
    On the supply side, ﬁrms in each sector behave monopolistically. Firms in sector h incur a
ﬁxed cost paid in skilled labor, and a unit skilled labor requirement to produce one unit of output.
Firms in sector l use a diﬀerent technology. They incur a lower ﬁxed cost paid in skilled labor, and
a unit unskilled labor requirement to produce one unit of output.19 The cost functions of a typical
ﬁrm in each sector are given by:




                                   T Ch (qh ) = F wh + qh wh

                                   T Cl (ql ) = δF wh + ql wl ,                  δ < 1.


where δ < 1 is the discount on the ﬁxed cost faced by ﬁrms in sector l. Our objective is to see what
is the impact of a reduction in δ (the fraction of ﬁxed cost paid by ﬁrms in sector l) on the wage
gap, and how this changes with the share of ﬁrms in sector l. Firms maximize their proﬁt, and we
get the standard pricing rule, where ﬁrms charge a constant markup over their marginal cost.



                                                                      σ
                                                   ph =                  wh                                  (11)
                                                                     σ−1
                                                                      σ
                                                   pl =                  wl .                                (12)
                                                                     σ−1

Free-entry in each sector drives proﬁts to zero and gives us the equilibrium quantities produced by
a typical ﬁrm in each sector:
  19
     In the appendix we develop the more general case where both sectors use unskilled and skilled labor, but with
diﬀerent intensity.




                                                                 12
                                               qh = F (σ − 1)                                          (13)

                                                ql = δF (σ − 1)ω,                                      (14)


where ω is the wage gap (ω = wh /wl ). The revenues of a typical h-type ﬁrms are given by:
Rh = ph qh = F σwh and the revenues of a typical L-type ﬁrms are: Rl = pl ql = δF σwh . With δ
smaller than one, it follows that Rh /Rl = 1/δ is greater than one, meaning that h-type ﬁrms have
greater revenues than l-type ﬁrms.
       Within each sector we can express the aggregate quantities consumed Xh and Xl , as well as the
corresponding price indices Ph and Pl , as a function of the number of ﬁrms in each sector, Nh and
Nl :



                                                     σ
                                   Xk = qk Nk1−σ ,                      k ∈ {h, l}                     (15)
                                                     1
                                                    1−σ
                                    Pk = pk Nk            ,             k ∈ {h, l}.                    (16)


       Relative demand for the two composite goods is given by:


                                                   Xh   Ph          −
                                                      =                                                (17)
                                                   Xl   Pl

       Substituting equations (15) and (16) into equation (17), and then using equations (11) to (14),
we can express the wage gap as a function of δ , and the relative number of ﬁrms:



                                         qh N h σ − σ
                                                      1             ph Nh   1/(1−σ ) −
                                                              =
                                         ql Nl                      pl Nl
                                                −
                                   1    Nl (σ−σ1)( −1)
                               δ   −1                         = ω                                      (18)
                                        Nh

       It is straightforward to see that the derivative of ω with respect to δ is positive and that the
second derivative with respect to δ and Nl /Nh is also positive. Thus, a lower ﬁxed cost faced by
smaller and less skill-intensive ﬁrms (due to online platforms) leads to a reduction in the wage-gap
and the eﬀect is stronger the larger is the share of smaller ﬁrms.20
  20
       Note that the number of ﬁrms is endogenous in this monopolistic competitive model. In the appendix we


                                                              13
5.2     Empirical evidence

To empirically investigate the role of small ﬁrms in cross-border e-commerce, we go back to the
harmonized I2D2 and extract information on ﬁrm size. We compute, for each country and year the
share of workers employed in ﬁrms with fewer than 10 employees.21 It is on average 45 percent,
and it oscillates between 15 percent in Russia and 74 percent in Costa Rica. This suggests that
for many countries in our sample the share of employment in small ﬁrms is suﬃciently large as to
have an economically signiﬁcant impact on the wage gap.
    We also compute the share of skilled workers in small and large ﬁrms to check whether small
ﬁrms are less skilled-intensive. Columns (2) and (3) of table 7 show that on average only 25 percent
of workers in small ﬁrms (ﬁrms with fewer than 10 employees) are considered skilled. In large ﬁrms
(ﬁrms with more than 50 employees) 49 percent of workers are skilled. Comparing each row in
columns (2) and (3) of table 7 we observe in all countries a larger share of skilled workers in large
ﬁrms.
    The variation across countries in the share of employment in small ﬁrms suggests that if the
mechanism at work is the one described above, then the impact of online exports on the wage gap is
likely to be heterogeneous across countries. In order to test this heterogeneity and provide evidence
for our mechanism, we re-estimate equation (1) with an interaction between online exports and
two dummies indicating whether the country is above or below the median share of employment
in small ﬁrms in our sample. The median is at 44 percent in our sample. We use a dummy for
two reasons. First, the size of the ﬁrm is not systematically reported by all individuals in the
I2D2 surveys and the resulting information may be quite noisy. In addition, the I2D2 does not
provide the exact number of employees, but an interval with a lower and upper bound for ﬁrm size.
Second, the relationship between the impact of online exports on the wage gap and the share of
workers in small ﬁrms may not be linear. The solution to these two problems is to use a dummy
variable instead of the actual continuous variable. We expect the coeﬃcient on the interaction of
online exports with the dummy indicating a share of employment in small ﬁrms above the median
to be negative and larger than the coeﬃcient on the interaction of online exports with the dummy
indicating a share of employment in small ﬁrms below the median. Because we are ultimately
endogenize the number of ﬁrms and solve for a full model with more general assumptions on the production side to
show that the wage gap increases with the ﬁxed costs faced by ﬁrms in the less skill-intensive sector, and that this
eﬀect is larger the larger is the endowment of unskilled to skilled workers.
  21
     Information on ﬁrm size is unfortunately not available for Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Sri Lanka, and
the Philippines.




                                                        14
interested in the interaction between the role of small ﬁrms and online exports, we also interact the
total exports with the same dummies to ensure that the mechanism we describe is not also present
in the case of total exports. If the channel through which exports aﬀect the wage gap works through
the ability of small ﬁrms to export via online platforms, the interaction terms between total exports
and the dummies should not be statistically diﬀerent from one another.
         The instrumental variable estimates are reported in table 8. The interaction between online
exports and the dummy indicating a share of employment in small ﬁrms above the median is
negative and statistically signiﬁcant in all speciﬁcations. It is almost identical to the baseline
results. Note that the coeﬃcient is very stable across speciﬁcations and precisely estimated (p-value
below 1%). On the other hand, the interaction with the dummy indicating a share of employment
in small ﬁrms below the median is not statistically diﬀerent from zero. Thus, the negative impact
of online exports on the wage gap is observed in countries with a larger share of small ﬁrms. The
impact of total exports on the wage gap remains negative and statistically signiﬁcant.22


6         Concluding remarks

We examine the impact of online exports in reducing the wage gap between skilled and unskilled
workers. Our econometric results suggest that as the share of online exports increases the wage
gap declines. The economic signiﬁcance of the impact is small as the elasticity of the wage gap
with respect to the share of online exports is 0.01, reﬂecting the fact that online cross-border trade
is still a relatively small phenomenon. However, with online cross border trade growing at a pace
seven times faster than world trade, its contribution to reductions in wage inequality is bound to
increase.
         We also ﬁnd that the impact is stronger in countries where the share of the labor force in
small ﬁrms is larger. Small ﬁrms are more likely to beneﬁt from the reduction in the ﬁxed cost of
exporting provided by online markets. They also tend to hire relatively more unskilled workers.
Thus, as the share of online exports increases, this leads to a relative increase in the demand faced
by small ﬁrms, which will in turn increase the relative demand for unskilled workers, and reduces
the wage gap. In fact we ﬁnd that the negative impact is only observed in countries with a large
share of the labor force in small ﬁrms. In countries where the share of the labor force in small ﬁrms
    22
    We also interact total exports with the same dummies as for online exports. The coeﬃcients on the two inter-
actions are not statistically diﬀerent from each other. Thus, the impact of total exports on the wage gap does not
depend on the relative importance of small ﬁrms in the economy.



                                                       15
is below the median, an increase in online exports has no impact on the wage gap.
   These results suggest that reducing barriers to online trade may be desirable for reasons that
go beyond economic eﬃciency, as it may help reduce labor income inequality. Anyone who has
tried to purchase goods online across borders knows that there are still important administrative
barriers to international trade online. These include unclear taxationm customs requirements, and
long customs delays. Solutions to these problems need to be considered. Examples include the
introduction of higher de minimis thresholds under which no customs duties or other taxes (such
as VAT) apply, the introduction of streamlined procedures for payment of customs duties and
other taxes, such as e-Customs or e-taxation, or a coordination eﬀort by exporting and importing
countries to allow for the payment of customs duties online.




                                               16
References

Acemoglu, D. (2002). Directed Technical Change. Review of Economic Studies 69 (4), 781–809.

Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011). Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment
  and Earnings, Volume 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics, Chapter 12, pp. 1043–1171. Elsevier.

Akerman, A., I. Gaarder, and M. Mogstad (2015). The Skill Complementarity of Broadband
  Internet. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4), 1781–1824.

Autor, D. (2014). Polanyi’s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth. NBER Working
  Papers 20485.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013). The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Eﬀects
  of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121–68.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2015). Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence
  from Local Labour Markets. The Economic Journal 125 (584), 621–646.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and A. B. Krueger (1998). Computing Inequality: Have Computers
  Changed The Labor Market? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (4), 1169–1213.

Berman, E., J. Bound, and Z. Griliches (1994). Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
  U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 109 (2), 367–97.

Brown, C. and J. Medoﬀ (1989). The Employer Size-Wage Eﬀect. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 97 (5), 1027–59.

Card, D. and T. Lemieux (2001). Can Falling Supply Explain The Rising Return To College For
  Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 705–746.

Cruz, M. and E. Milet (2017). Skill Premium in Developing Countries. mimeo, World Bank.

De la Torre, A., A. Ize, G. Beylis, and D. Lederman (2015). Jobs, Wages and the Latin American
  Slowdown. World Bank Other Operational Studies 22709, The World Bank.

Ekholm, K. and K. H. Midelfart (2005). Relative wages and trade-induced changes in technology.
  European Economic Review 49 (6), 1637–1663.


                                             17
Feenstra, R. and G. Hanson (2001). Global Production Sharing and Rising Inequality: A Survey
  of Trade and Wages. NBER Working Papers 8372.

Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (1996). Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality.
  American Economic Review 86 (2), 240–45.

Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (1999). The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Cap-
  ital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 114 (3), 907–940.

Feyrer, J. (2009). Trade and Income – Exploiting Time Series in Geography. NBER Working
  Papers 14910.

Gasparini, L., S. Galiani, G. Cruces, and P. Acosta (2011). Educational Upgrading and Returns to
  Skills in Latin America: Evidence from a Supply-Demand Framework, 1990-2010. IZA Discussion
  Paper 6244.

Goldberg, P. K. and N. Pavcnik (2007). Distributional Eﬀects of Globalization in Developing
  Countries. Journal of Economic Literature 45 (1), 39–82.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Oﬀshoring.
  American Economic Review 98 (5), 1978–97.

Hamermesh, D. S. (1980). Commentary. In J. J. Siegfried (Ed.), The Economics of Firm Size,
  Market Structure and Social Performance. Washington: FE. Trade Comm.

Harrison, A. and M. McMillan (2011). Oﬀshoring Jobs? Multinationals and US Manufacturing
  Employment. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3), 857–875.

Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992). Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand
  Factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1), 35–78.

Krueger, A. B. (1993). How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from Micro-
  data, 1984-1989. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (1), 33–60.

Lendle, A. and M. Olarreaga (2017). Can Online Market Make Trade More Inclusive?          ADBI
  Working Papers 742.




                                              18
                                                 ezina (2013). eBay’s anatomy. Economics
Lendle, A., M. Olarreaga, S. Schropp, and P.-L. V´
  Letters 121 (1), 115–120.

                                                 ezina (2016). There Goes Gravity: eBay and the
Lendle, A., M. Olarreaga, S. Schropp, and P.-L. V´
  Death of Distance. Economic Journal 126 (591), 406–441.

Luo, R. (2017). Skill Premium and Technological Change in the very Long Run: 1300-1914.
  Discussion Papers in Economics 17/09, University of Leicester.

Lustig, N., L. F. Lopez-Calva, and E. Ortiz-Juarez (2013). Declining Inequality in Latin America
  in the 2000s: The Cases of Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. World Development 44 (0), 129 – 141.

Mayer, T. and S. Zignago (2011). Notes on CEPII’s Distances Measures: The GeoDist Database.
  CEPII Working Papers 2011-25.

Montenegro, C. E. and M. Hirn (2009). A new disaggregated set of labor market indicators using
  standardized household surveys from around the world. Background paper prepared for World
  Development Report .

Montenegro, C. E. and H. A. Patrinos (2014). Comparable estimates of returns to schooling around
  the world. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper (7020).

UNCTAD (2015). Information Economy Report 2015: Unlocking the potential of E-Commerce for
  developing countries. UNCTAD/IER/2015.

Varian, H. (2005). Technology Levels the Business Playing Field. The New York Times, August
  25 .

Varian, H. (2011). Micromultinationals Will Run the World. Foreign Policy, August 15 .

WTO (2013). e-Commerce in Developing Countries: Opportunities and challenges for small and
  medium-sized enterprises. ISBN 978-92-870-3864-7.

Yeaple, S. R. (2005). A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages.
  Journal of International Economics 65 (1), 1–20.




                                              19
Appendix

In this appendix we generalize the model we presented in section 5.1 to allow for more general
assumptions on the production side. We also fully close the model and instead of looking at
whether the impact of a reduction in the ﬁxed cost faced by small and unskilled-intensive ﬁrms is
aﬀected by the number of small and unskilled-intensive ﬁrms relative to large ﬁrms (which is an
endogenous variable) we explore the results in terms of endowments of unskilled to skilled workers
in the economy, which are assumed exogenous and are a determinant of the number of small and
large ﬁrms.


Aggregate Demand

The model draws on Ekholm and Midelfart (2005) and Yeaple (2005). As in section 5.1 a represen-
tative consumer has CES preferences over two imperfectly substitutable composite goods Xh and
Xl and maximize their utility with respect to their budget constraint E . Each composite good is a
CES aggregate of individual varieties produced by monopolistically competitive ﬁrms in diﬀerent
sectors. It is useful to think as sector h as populated by ﬁrms more skill-intensive than those in
sector l. The aggregate consumption and corresponding price index in each sector are given by:



                                      −1            −1
                                                                −1
                       U   =    Xh         + Xl

                       E = wh H + wl L                                                        (19)
                                      Nk            σ −1
                                                                   σ
                                                                 σ −1
                      Xk =                 qk (i)     σ    di           ,   k ∈ {h, l}        (20)
                                  0
                                      Nk                          1
                                                                 1−σ
                      Pk =                 pk (i)1−σ di                 ,   k ∈ {h, l}.       (21)
                                  0


We assume that σ > > 1 meaning there is a greater substitutability between varieties within each
composite good than in ﬁnal consumption.


Firm production

In each sector, ﬁrms behave monopolistically and incur a ﬁxed cost to be paid in skilled labor, and
a variable using a mix of skilled and unskilled labor. In sector h ﬁrms incur a ﬁxed cost F and
require αh skilled-labor and 1 − αh unskilled labor to produce one unit of output. In sector l ﬁrms
incur a ﬁxed cost δF (δ ≤ 1) and require αl skilled labor and 1 − αl unskilled workers. We assume

                                                            20
that ﬁrms in sector h are more skill-intensive in production than ﬁrms in sector l, i.e. αh > αl .
The cost functions of a typical ﬁrm in each sector are given by:



                                                   αh 1−αh
                           T Ch (qh ) = F wh + qh wh wl
                                                    αl 1−αl
                           T Cl (ql ) = δF wh + ql wh wl    ,       δ < 1.


Firms maximize their proﬁt, and we get the standard pricing rule, where ﬁrms charge a constant
markup over their marginal cost.



                                                 σ    αk 1−αk
                                      pk =     σ − 1 wh wl                                      (22)
                                                 σ    αl 1−αl
                                      pk   =   σ − 1 wh wl                                      (23)


Free-entry in each sector drives proﬁts to zero and gives us the equilibrium quantities produced by
a typical ﬁrm in each sector:




                                     qh    = F (σ − 1)ω 1−αh                                    (24)

                                      ql = δF (σ − 1)ω 1−αl ,                                   (25)


where ω is the wage gap between skilled and unskilled worker (i.e. the wage gap ω = wh /wl ). Note
that as long as delta is strictly lower than one, ﬁrms in sector h has greater revenues than ﬁrms in
sector l: Rh /Rl = 1/δ .


Labor market clearing conditions

To close the model we need to determine the number of ﬁrms active in each sector, which we get
from the labor market clearing conditions. Skilled labor is used to pay the ﬁxed cost of ﬁrms in
both sector, and used with intensity αh in sector h, and with intensity αl in the l sector. Unskilled
labor is only used in the production of each ﬁrm with the complementary intensities 1 − αh in
sector h and 1 − αl in sector l. Using the total cost functions and Shephard’s lemma, we obtain
the following demand for skilled and unskilled labor:



                                                  21
                             H = Nh F (1 + αh (σ − 1)) + Nl δF (1 + αl (σ − 1))                                     (26)

                              L = Nh F ω (σ − 1)(1 − αh ) + Nl δF ω (σ − 1)(1 − αl )                                (27)


The equilibrium is given by the 11 equations (20)-(27) and the 11 unknowns E , Xh , Xl , Ph , Pl , ph ,
pl , qh , ql , Nh , Nl .


Solving for the wage gap

Our aim is to express the wage gap (ω ) as a function of the relative factor endowment ( H
                                                                                         L ) and the

parameter δ . The labor market clearing conditions allow us to pin down the number of ﬁrms in
each sector. Using equations (26) and (27) we get:



                                            Hω (σ − 1)(1 − αl ) − L(1 + αl (σ − 1))
                                 Nh =                                                                               (28)
                                                   F ωσ (σ − 1)(αh − αl )
                                            Hω (σ − 1)(αh − 1) + L(1 + αh (σ − 1))
                                 Nl =                                                                               (29)
                                                   F ωδσ (σ − 1)(αh − αl )

For convenience, let us deﬁne the ratio of the number of ﬁrms as a function of the wage gap
                                             H                                                Nh
ω and relative factor endowment              L.     We deﬁne the function g such that:        Nl   = δg (ω, H
                                                                                                            L ) where
                H
g (ω, H         L ω (σ −1)(1−αl )−(1+αl (σ −1)) .
      L) =      H                                   Note that the function g is strictly positive and diﬀerent from
                L ω (σ −1)(αh −1)+(1+αh (σ −1))
zero as it is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of ﬁrms in each sector.23 Using CES preferences
in the consumption of the aggregate goods gives the usual relationship between relative aggregate
consumption and relative price indices:



                                                     Xh             Ph   −
                                                           =                 .                                      (30)
                                                     Xl             Pl

Within each sector, the CES structure of consumption of varieties allows us to express the aggregate
quantities consumed Xh and Xl as well as the corresponding price indices as a function of the
number of ﬁrms in each sector:
  23
       CES preferences over the varieties in each sector ensures that there is at least one ﬁrm producing in each sector.




                                                               22
                                                  σ
                                Xk = qk Nk1−σ ,                           k ∈ {h, l}                                  (31)
                                                  1
                                 Pk = pk Nk1−σ ,                          k ∈ {h, l}.                                 (32)


   Substituting for the equilibrium prices and quantities into equations (31) and (32) and plugging
into equation (30), we can express the wage gap as a function of relative factor endowment, δ , and
the relative number of ﬁrms:



                                                      Xh               Ph −
                                                               =
                                                      Xl               Pl
                                          qh Nh         σ
                                                      σ −1             ph Nh     1/(1−σ ) −
                                                               =
                                          ql Nl                        pl Nl
                                    σ−
                         g (ω, H
                               L)
                                     −1   ω (αh −αl )(σ−1) = δ                                                        (33)

                                                                                   H
This last expression links the wage gap ω to factor endowment                      L    and to the diﬀerence in ﬁxed
cost requirement between ﬁrms in sectors h and l. We now use the implicit function theorem and
                                                                                  dx
                                                              ˆ=
totally diﬀerentiate this expression. Using hat-algebra (i.e. x                   x )   we obtain:



                                                                               σ−
                                        1                          ˆ−           −1 εg,H/L        H
                     ˆ =
                     ω                                  σ−         δ                   −           ,                  (34)
                            (σ − 1)(αh − αl ) +          −1 εg,ω         (σ   − 1) + σ− 1 εg,ω
                                                                                                 L

                                                                                                       H
where εg,ω and εg,H/L are the elasticities of the g function with respect to ω and                     L   respectively. It
is straightforward to check that these two elasticities are identical: εg,ω = εg,H/L are equal to:



                                  ωH
                                   L σ (σ − 1)(αh − αl )                             1
 εg,ω = εg,H/L =                                                           2
                       H                                                       g (ω, H/L)
                       L ω (σ   − 1)(αh − 1) + (1 + αh (σ − 1))
                                                             H
                                                             L ωσ (σ   − 1)(αh − αl )
                 =
                       H                                                      H
                       L ω (σ   − 1)(αh − 1) + 1 + αh (σ − 1)                 L ω (σ   − 1)(αl − 1) − 1 − αl (σ − 1)

These two elasticities are strictly positive since we imposed αh > αl > 0 and σ > 1. It follows that
in expression (34), the terms in front of δ ˆ and Hˆ
                                                   L are positive. Therefore, a reduction in the ﬁxed

cost of exporting for ﬁrms in sector l reduces the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers.


                                                             23
Similarly, an increase in the relative supply of skilled workers also reduces the wage gap. Finally,
we want to investigate whether the marginal eﬀect of a reduction in the ﬁxed cost of exporting for
ﬁrms in sector l varies with factor endowment. We simply take the second order derivative of the
wage gap with respect to δ and to the relative factor endowment:


                                               σ−
      ∂ω       ω 1−(αh −αl )(σ−1) g (ω, H/L)− −1
           =                             −
      ∂δ         (σ − 1)(αh − αl ) + σ−   1 εg,ω
                                                           σ−
                    −
                 ( σ−      1−(αh −αl )(σ −1) g (ω, H/L)−
  ∂2ω                 1 )ω
                                                            −1
                                                                 L                                σ−         ∂εg,ω
           = −                                          2        H εg,H/L   (σ − 1)(αh − αl ) +       εg,ω +       .
∂δ∂H/L                                       σ−                                                    −1        ∂H/L
                      (σ − 1)(αh − αl ) +     −1 εg,ω


                                                                                            ∂εg,ω
A suﬃcient condition for this equation to be negative is for the partial derivative         ∂H/L    to be positive
since the other terms between brackets are positive. Deriving the elasticity gives us the following
expression, which is positive given the restriction imposed on factor-intensity (αh > αl > 0).



                       ∂εg,ω                   (σ − 1)(αh − αl )(1 − αh )ω
                                 =                                                     2.
                       ∂H/L                H
                                      αl   L ω (σ   − 1)(αh − 1) + 1 + αh (σ − 1)




                                                        24
             Table 1: List of the countries and survey years

             (1)      (2)
Country   # Surveys   Years available
ARG           7       2005, 2006, 2007,   2008, 2009, 2010, 2012
BOL           4       2005, 2007, 2008,   2009
BRA           8       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2012
CHL           3       2006, 2009, 2011
COL           7       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009, 2010
CRI           6       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009
DOM           9       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009, 2010, 2011, 2012
ECU           8       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009, 2010, 2012
ETH           6       2005, 2006, 2009,   2010,   2011,   2012
GTM           3       2004, 2006, 2011
HND           7       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007, 2009, 2010, 2011
KHM           2       2006, 2008
LKA           2       2004, 2008
MEX           3       2008, 2010, 2012
NIC           2       2005, 2009
PAN           8       2005, 2006, 2007,   2008,   2009,   2010,   2011,   2012
PER           9       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009,   2010,   2011, 2012
PHL           8       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009,   2010,   2011
PRY           8       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009,   2010,   2012
RUS           6       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008,   2009
SLV           4       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007
URY           9       2004, 2005, 2006,   2007,   2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012




                                   25
                                      Table 2: Summary statistics

Variable                                                                      #Obs.     Mean      Std. Dev.
Ln online exports/GDP                                                          131      -13.67       3.68
Ln online exports/GDP (IV: distance)                                           131      -14.03       4.19
Ln online exports/GDP (IV: importer online domestic sales)                     131      -14.03       4.18
Ln online exports/GDP (IV: importer tariﬀ on manuf. products)                  131      -14.04       4.19
Ln total exports/GDP                                                           131       -1.84       0.70
Ln total exports/GDP (IV: distance)                                            131       -2.08       0.86
Ln total exports/GDP (IV: importer GDP)                                        131       -2.08       0.86
Ln total exports/GDP (IV: importer tariﬀ on all products)                      131       -2.09       0.86
Ln relative supply                                                             131        0.21       0.63
Internet user/Pop.                                                             131        0.21       0.14
Ln distance                                                                   60038       8.56       0.92
Ln demand (online)                                                            60038     12.53        4.92
Ln GDP                                                                        60038      25.84       1.90
Ln(1+ average tariﬀ on manuf. products)                                       60038       1.51       0.72
Ln(1+ average tariﬀ)                                                          60038       1.54       0.70
Source: Online trade data comes from Lendle et al. (2016). Data on the wage gap and relative supply of skilled
workers is from Cruz and Milet (2017). Data on bilateral distance comes from Mayer and Zignago (2011).
Predicted trade ﬂows are estimated by the authors. All other variables come from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators 2016.




                                                     26
         Table 3: Impact of online exports on the wage gap (OLS)

                                  (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)
Ln online exports/GDP         -0.010***     -0.009***     -0.009***      -0.012***
                               (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)
Ln total exports/GDP                          -0.020         -0.018         -0.019
                                             (0.013)        (0.012)        (0.014)
Ln relative supply                                         -0.102**      -0.100***
                                                            (0.046)        (0.033)
Internet user/Pop.                                                        -0.303**
                                                                           (0.145)
Observations                     131           131           131             131
R2                               0.34          0.35          0.40            0.43
All regressions include country and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Robust standard errors clustered
at the country level in parenthesis. Signiﬁcance levels: *: 10%, **: 5% ***: 1%.




                                          27
         Table 4: Instrumenting online and total bilateral ﬂows using equations (2)-(7)

                        dep. var :        Ln (online exports/GDP)                          Ln (total exports/GDP)
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)               (6)
Ln distance – 2004                       -0.080                                 -0.122***
                                        (0.094)                                  (0.017)
Ln distance – 2005                    -0.350***                                 -0.122***
                                        (0.076)                                  (0.015)
Ln distance – 2006                    -0.301***                                 -0.126***
                                        (0.056)                                  (0.014)
Ln distance – 2007                    -0.317***                                 -0.125***
                                        (0.053)                                  (0.016)
Ln distance – 2008                    -0.297***                                 -0.109***
                                        (0.055)                                  (0.014)
Ln distance – 2009                    -0.160***                                 -0.104***
                                        (0.044)                                  (0.017)
Ln distance – 2010                     -0.078**                                 -0.045***
                                        (0.039)                                  (0.014)
Ln distance – 2011                       -0.014                                 -0.033***
                                        (0.043)                                  (0.012)
Ln demand (online)                                  0.204***
                                                     (0.019)
Ln(1+ average manuf. tariﬀ)                                       -0.406***
                                                                   (0.093)
Ln GDP                                                                                        0.755***
                                                                                               (0.026)
Ln(1+ average tariﬀ)                                                                                             -0.083***
                                                                                                                  (0.025)
Observations                            60,038        60,038        60,038        60,038        60,038             60,038
R2                                      0.712          0.713        0.711         0.950          0.951              0.950
All columns include bilateral and exporter times year ﬁxed eﬀects. Bootstrapped (50 replications) standard errors in parenthesis.
Signiﬁcance levels: *: 10%, **: 5% ***: 1%. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is the log of bilateral online exports
over GDP. The dependent variable in columns (4)-(6) is the log of bilateral total exports. Ln Online demand is domestic online
sales on eBay. Data on average tariﬀs are taken from the World Development Indicator.




                                                         28
     Table 5: Correlation between observed and predicted trade ﬂows using equations (2)-(7)

                Ln Xonline     Ln Xonline     Ln Xonline     Ln Xonline         X       Ln X      Ln X           Ln X
Ln Xonline          1
Ln Xonline       0.8436          1.0000
Ln Xonline        0.8442         0.9986         1.0000
Ln   Xonline      0.8433         0.9996         0.9989          1.0000
Ln   X            0.3365         0.3944         0.3939          0.3943       1.0000
Ln   X            0.3414         0.4047         0.4041          0.4046       0.9745     1.0000
Ln   X            0.3437         0.4044         0.4040          0.4044       0.9750     0.9995       1
Ln   X            0.3412         0.4045         0.4042          0.4046       0.9745     0.9999    0.9994            1
X stands for total exports, and eBay for online exports. Xonline , Xonline , and Xonline are predicted online trade ﬂows over
GDP using equations (2), (3) and (4) respectively. X, X , and X are predicted total trade ﬂows over GDP using equations (5),
(6), and (7) respectively.




                                                      29
                        Table 6: Impact of online exports on the wage gap (instrumental variables)

                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)           (7)
     Ln online exports/GDP           -0.012***      -0.012***      -0.012***     -0.012***      -0.011***      -0.012***     -0.012***
                                      (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.003)
     Ln total exports/GDP            -0.047***      -0.050***      -0.047***     -0.047***      -0.049***      -0.046***     -0.049***
                                      (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.018)       (0.018)         (0.017)       (0.018)
     Ln relative supply                -0.095         -0.094         -0.095         -0.095        -0.095          -0.095        -0.094
                                      (0.077)        (0.077)        (0.077)        (0.077)       (0.077)         (0.077)       (0.077)
     Internet user/Pop.               -0.339*        -0.342*        -0.337*       -0.343**       -0.338*        -0.348**      -0.349**
                                      (0.175)        (0.176)        (0.175)        (0.173)       (0.175)         (0.174)       (0.175)
     Observations                        131           131            131            131            131             131           131
     R2                                 0.40           0.39           0.40           0.40          0.39            0.40          0.39
     F-test (p-value)                   0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000            0.000         0.000
     Hansen (p-value)                                                               0.386          0.549           0.066         0.179
     Cragg-Donald (F-test)             64.851         65.112        64.111         33.682         33.442         32.451        22.142
     IV-online trade                    (2)             (3)           (4)         (2)+(3)        (2)+(4)        (3)+(4)        (2)-(4)
     IV-total trade                     (5)            (6)           (7)          (5)+(6)        (5)+(7)        (6)+(7)        (5)-(7)




30
     All regressions include country and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Signiﬁcance levels: *: 10%,
     **: 5% ***: 1%. We report the p-values of the F-test of the ﬁrst stage,the Hansen overidentiﬁcation J test on the validity
     of the instruments and the F-test on the Cragg-Donald identiﬁcation test for weak instruments. The critical value at
     10% for test of relative size bias is 7.03 in columns (1)-(3), 16.87 in columns (4)-(6), and 21.68 in column(7). The critical
     value at 5% for the test of relative bias in columns (4)-(6) is 11.04, and 15.72 in column (7)
 Table 7: Share of employment in small and large ﬁrms by country

                   (1)                     (2)                    (3)
Country     Employment share          Skilled/total          Skilled/total
              in small ﬁrms          in small ﬁrms          in large ﬁrms
ARG               29.52                   48.61                  78.22
BOL               52.42                   44.15                  71.07
BRA               60.96                   39.71                    .
CHL               26.13                   46.98                  72.47
CRI               73.96                   21.06                    .
ECU               49.13                   8.768                  19.06
ETH               59.69                   20.13                  38.67
GTM               53.92                   16.25                  34.99
HND               59.79                   7.520                  48.78
KHM               45.07                   12.57                  16.44
MEX               41.96                   21.75                  48.86
NIC               42.33                   14.88                  50.59
PAN               20.34                   28.36                  69.74
PER               44.00                   53.58                  85.46
PRY               43.38                   39.10                  70.39
RUS               14.61                   14.33                  19.94
SLV               33.73                    4.96                  16.10
URY               37.59                   17.77                  46.43
Average           45.20                   25.39                  49.20
Source: World Bank’s I2D2 database. Small ﬁrms are deﬁned as those with less
than 10 employees (excluding self-employment). Column (1) provides the share
of workers in small ﬁrms in the total labor force. Column (2) provides the share
of skilled workers in small ﬁrms’ total employment, and column (3) the share of
skilled workers in large ﬁrms’ total employment. Skilled workers are deﬁned as
workers with at least a complete secondary education.




                                      31
                                         Table 8: Impact of online exports on the wage gap (IV): The role of small ﬁrms

                                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)                            (7)
     Ln online exports/GDP × small ﬁrms above median                 -0.010***     -0.010***     -0.010***     -0.011***     -0.010***     -0.011***                       -0.011***
                                                                       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)                         (0.002)
     Ln online exports/GDP × small ﬁrms below median                    -0.012        -0.012        -0.011        -0.009        -0.015         0.000                          -0.005
                                                                       (0.017)       (0.018)       (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.016)       (0.017)                         (0.015)
     Ln total exports/GDP                                             -0.051**      -0.055**      -0.050**      -0.049**      -0.054**      -0.045**                        -0.047**
                                                                       (0.022)       (0.023)       (0.021)       (0.020)       (0.022)       (0.019)                         (0.020)
     Ln relative supply                                                 -0.095        -0.095        -0.095        -0.094        -0.096        -0.092                          -0.093
                                                                       (0.080)       (0.079)       (0.080)       (0.080)       (0.079)       (0.080)                         (0.080)
     Internet user/Pop.                                                 -0.260        -0.263        -0.258        -0.268        -0.264        -0.265                          -0.278
                                                                       (0.206)       (0.209)       (0.206)       (0.203)       (0.206)       (0.205)                         (0.204)
     Observations                                                         105          105           105            105           105           105                            105
     R2                                                                   0.39         0.40          0.40           0.39          0.40          0.40
     F-test (p-value)                                                    0.000        0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000         0.000                         0.000
     Hansen (p-value)                                                                                              0.204         0.549        0.078                          0.113
     Cragg-Donald (F-test)                                                                                         9.443         9.286       11.727                          7.916
     IV-online trade                                                     (2)           (3)           (4)        (2)+(3)       (2)+(4)       (3)+(4)                         (2)-(4)
     IV-total trade                                                      (5)           (6)           (7)        (5)+(6)       (5)+(7)       (6)+(7)                         (5)-(7)




32
     All regressions include country and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Signiﬁcance levels: *: 10%, **: 5% ***: 1%. Small ﬁrms are deﬁned as those with less than 10 employees
     (excluding self-employment). We report the p-values of the F-test of the ﬁrst stage, and of the Hansen overidentiﬁcation J test on the validity of the instruments.
                                               Figure 1
                      Evolution of world and online cross-border trade, 2004-2012




                                                                                                          15
       2
       1.8




                                                                                                          10
       1.6
       1.4




                                                                                                          5
       1.2
       1




                                                                                                          0
             2004                2006                  2008                   2010                  2012

                     Offline export (left axis)               Online exports (right axis)




Note: The evolution of world trade is from United Nations’ Comtrade database. The evolution of online cross-border
trade is proxied by the evolution of eBay cross-border trade from Lendle et al. (2016) (ﬁxed price transactions only).




                                                         33
                                                                        Figure 2
                                                      Evolution of wage skill premimum, 2004-2012
                    .2           .1
         e( log skill premium | X)
       -.1            0
                    -.2




                                      -4                    -2                     0           2    4
                                                                              e( trend | X )
                                      coef = -.01242624, se = .00169072, t = -7.35




Note: This is the partial plot of a regression of the log of the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers on
a time trend and country ﬁxed eﬀects for countries in our sample with more than 7 observations over the period
2004-2012. The estimates of wage gap are from Cruz and Milet (2017).




                                                                                34
                                   Figure 3: Wage gap and online trade in selected countries


                                         ARG                                                                                            BOL




                                                                                    1.5




                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                   3
0




                                                                                               -.1
                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
-.05




                                                                                               -.2
                                                                                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                                   1
-.1




                                                                                               -.3
                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
       2004            2006              2008                2010                2012                 2005            2006              2007                 2008               2009

          Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)                           Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)



                                         BRA                                                                                            COL




                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5
0




                                                                                    2




                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                    1.5




                                                                                               -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
-.1




                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                               -.1
                                                                                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                                                               -.15
-.2




                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
       2004            2006              2008                2010                2012                 2004                   2006                     2008                      2010

          Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)                           Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)



                                         ETH                                                                                            ECU
                                                                                               .05
                                                                                    25




                                                                                                                                                                                   5
0




                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                               0
                                                                                    15




                                                                                                                                                                                   3
-.2




                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                               -.05
                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                   1
-.4




                                                                                               -.1
                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0




       2004            2006              2008                2010                2012                 2004            2006              2008                 2010               2012

          Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)                           Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)



                                         PRY                                                                                            PHL
                                                                                               .08
0




                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                               .06
                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                   3
-.05




                                                                                               .04
                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                   2
-.1




                                                                                               .02
                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                   1
-.15




                                                                                    0




                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0




       2004            2006              2008                2010                2012                 2004            2006              2008                 2010               2012

          Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)                           Ln Skill premium (left axis)          Ln Online exports (right axis)

                                                                                          35
