                                                       WPS8232


Policy Research Working Paper                         8232




     The Impact of Large-Scale Migration
  on Poverty, Expenditures, and Labor Market
              Outcomes in Nepal
                                Maheshwor Shrestha




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8232


  Abstract
 This paper studies the impact of migration on poverty,                              to expenditures on food. The paper also finds that migration
 expenditures, and labor market outcomes in Nepal. Between                           increases school enrollment of children, particularly of girls.
 2001 and 2011, the share of male working age population                             Furthermore, the findings show that large-scale migration
 abroad more than doubled, mostly due to young men leav-                             in villages improves labor market outcomes for households
 ing to work in Malaysia and the Persian Gulf countries.                             without a migrant. An increase in village migration rates
 The paper studies the impact using instrumental variables                           of 10 percentage points increases wages by 25 percent, and
 as well as difference-in-difference methods. The findings                           labor force participation by 4 percentage points. The partic-
 show that increases in migration to Gulf-Malaysia explain                           ipation effects are driven by increases in female participation
 40 percent of the decline in poverty between 2001 and                               in non-farm sectors, and increased male participation in
 2011. The estimates of the marginal propensity of con-                              agriculture. The wage effects are driven by higher agricul-
 sumption show that a $1 increase in remittance income                               tural wages for all, and higher non-farm wages for females.
 increases consumption by $0.5, with the largest share going




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be contacted
  at mshrestha1@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
 The impact of large-scale migration on poverty, expenditures, and
                              labor market outcomes in Nepal

                                            Maheshwor Shrestha∗




       JEL codes: F22, F24, J22, I30
       Keywords: Migration, Poverty, Labor Force Participation, Nepal


   ∗
    The World Bank. Email: mshrestha1@worldbank.org. This paper was produced as a background paper to the
Systematic Country Diagnostics of Nepal. I would like to thank Ruth Hill for her comments and suggestions, and
Sailesh Tiwari for providing me access to the Small Area Estimates of poverty and per-capita consumption for Nepal.
The view expressed here do not necessarily represent the views of The World Bank. All errors are my own.
1    Introduction
Large earnings disparity persists across locations, particularly across countries, and international
migration is probably the most eﬀective way out of poverty for the poor (Clemens, 2011; Clemens,
Montenegro, and Pritchett, 2008). Encouraging migration, particularly international, is also found
to be more eﬀective than alternative labor market policies in improving the jobs outcome of those in
poorer countries (McKenzie, 2017). As many host countries could be hesitant to let foreigners come
in permanently, temporary or circular migration programs have provided a pathway for workers,
particularly low-skilled, from poor countries to migrate for work in richer countries. The number of
such temporary migrants has been increasing in the recent years. Two countries, Bangladesh and
Nepal, alone send over 1 million workers each year to work abroad in countries like Malaysia and
those in the Persian Gulf. In the case of Nepal, this has led to concerns among policy makers about
extreme labor scarcity in the origin communities (see, for instance Adhikari and Hobley, 2013).
    In this paper, I examine the impact of large-scale migration on outcomes related to poverty
and labor force outcomes. To estimate the impact on poverty and consumption, I use two diﬀerent
empirical strategies. First, I use data on the migration rates and the small-area estimates of poverty
for each village unit (illaka ) for the census years of 2001 and 2011. Using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence
strategy in this data, I ﬁnd that a 10 percentage points increase in the share of households with
a migrant in Gulf-Malaysia reduces poverty rates by 7 percentage points and increases per-capita
consumption by 11 percent. These estimates suggests that migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia alone
explains 40 percent of the actual decline in poverty between 2001 and 2011. Second, I use richer data
on household level measures of consumption and poverty from the 2010 Nepal Living Standards
Survey. Using migration rates in 2001 as an instrument for a household having a current migrant, I
ﬁnd that increasing the probability that a household has a Gulf-Malaysia migrant by 10 percentage
points lowers poverty by 8 percentage points and increases per-capita household consumption by
over 15%. These estimates are remarkably similar to the village level estimates.
    The positive impact of migration on the living standards and incomes of households are broadly
echoed in the literature as well. Rigorous evaluations of temporary international migration pro-
grams from the Paciﬁc Islands to New Zealand have found large increases in incomes and consump-
tion of the households in the origin communities (McKenzie, Stillman, and Gibson, 2010; Gibson
and McKenzie, 2014).
    A related concern in the context of Nepal is how the income remitted by the migrant is being
used by the households. In a similar empirical strategy, I instrument remittance income with village
level migration rates in 2001 to estimate the elasticity of consumption of remittance income. I ﬁnd
an elasticity of 0.16 and a marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of remittance income of
50 cents per dollar for an household with average consumption and remittance receipt level. The
MPC is slightly lower for rural households at 40 cents per dollar. I ﬁnd that increased remittance
receipt increases consumption in food, durables, non-durables, and on education, particularly for the
urban households. This marginal propensity to consume is lower than what would be expected of a



                                                  2
permanent income shock, but higher than what would be expected of a temporary income shock.1
Given that remittance income is not unanticipated (most literature identiﬁes MPC through un-
anticipated shocks) and that it comes at a cost of foregone labor income of the migrant at home,
these estimates can be considered relatively low.
       I then examine the impact of migration of a family member on the schooling outcomes of the
children in the household using the same empirical strategy. I ﬁnd that having a Gulf-Malaysia
migrant in the household increases the probability of a child being in school and the completed
level of schooling. The eﬀects are completely driven by impact on girls. Having a migrant in the
household increases girls’ schooling by over 2 years, about a 100 percent of the average schooling
for the age-group. However, this eﬀect is only marginally signiﬁcant. The eﬀects for boys are much
smaller in magnitude and are statistically insigniﬁcant. Theoretically, migration of a household
member could impact a child’s education in either direction. Having remittance income can ease
liquidity constraints and make education more aﬀordable, whereas lack of parental supervision and
inputs may hamper child education. Furthermore, expectations about returns to education on
the future labor market prospects (domestically, or abroad) could aﬀect educational investment in
either direction. Researchers have found positive impacts, both in the short-run (Yang, 2008) or
the long-run (Dinkelman and Mariotti, 2016), as well as negative impacts (de Brauw and Giles,
2016; McKenzie and Rapoport, 2011), or diﬀerential impacts by gender (Antman, 2012).
       I further examine the impact of large-scale migration in the local labor markets (villages) on the
labor force participation. I use a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence strategy to estimate the impact of migration
rates at the village level on the labor force participation decision of the working age population.
Large-scale out-migration acts as a negative supply shock to individuals in households without a
migrant which increases wages, and, if job opportunities are scarce, encourages participation. A rise
of 1 percentage points in the share of migrants in the population increases wages by 2.3 percent and
labor force participation by 0.4 percentage points. However, for households with a current migrant,
remittance income may increase their reservation wages, thereby muting the eﬀect on participation.
Consequently, among households with a migrant, the participation eﬀect is almost the half of that
of households without a migrant (and hence, remittances). The participation eﬀect is primarily
driven by increased male participation in agriculture, and an increased female participation in non-
agricultural employment. The wage eﬀects are driven by high agricultural wages for all, and higher
wages for females in non-agricultural sectors as well.
       These ﬁndings are also consistent with the literature on the labor market impact of migration.
A randomized evaluation of a large-scale migration incentive scheme in rural Bangladesh also ﬁnds
that agricultural wages go up in the origin communities, beneﬁting even those who do not migrate
(Bryan, Chowdhury, and Mobarak, 2014; Akram and Mobarak, 2016). A related concern is what
   1
    Well identiﬁed empirical estimates of income shocks are incredibly hard to ﬁnd (Please see Jappelli and Pistaferri,
2010, for a review and diﬃculties in estimation). Paxson (1993) ﬁnds an MPC of 0.7 for permanent income shocks
and about 0.3 for unanticipated temporary income shocks. In a rare randomized trial of an unconditional transitory
transfer of $400 in rural Kenya, Haushofer and Shapiro (2016) ﬁnd an MPC of 0.2. Their measures does not include
housing costs as expenses. Adjusting for that, the estimate in the case of Nepal is about 0.4.



                                                          3
will happen when the migration out-ﬂow stops and the migrants start returning back to their origin
communities. In a study of large-scale migration of male workers from Malawi to the gold mines in
South Africa, Dinkelman, Kumchulesi, and Mariotti (2017) ﬁnds that higher remittance incomes
lead to employment diversiﬁcation away from low-productivity agriculture towards more productive
non-farm service sector. Even decades after the migrants returned, they ﬁnd communities with
higher migration rates are wealthier, and have accumulated more non-farm physical capital and
human capital.
        A closely related question is how having a migrant in the household aﬀects their labor force
participation choices. Two studies have investigated this in the context of Nepal using broadly
similar empirical strategies. Lokshin and Glinskaya (2009) uses the 2003/04 Nepal Living Standards
Survey and instruments household migration status with 2001 migration rates in the village. The
study ﬁnds that female labor force participation in wage-employment falls for households with a
migrant. Phadera (2016) also uses the village level migration rates in 2001 as an instrument, but
examines the impact at a later period using the 2010 Nepal Living Standards Survey. This study
ﬁnds similar reduction in wage employment for women but ﬁnds an increase in participation in
self-employment activities, particularly in agriculture. The results for men are also similar to those
of women, but of slightly lower magnitude and estimated imprecisely. It is important to note
that the results of these studies are not directly comparable to those of this paper. These studies
compare labor market outcomes for individuals in households with a migrant to those without a
migrant, whereas this paper compares participation of individuals in households with a migrant
across villages with diﬀerent overall migration rates.
        This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the context of international migration
from Nepal, Section 3 discusses the data and empirical strategy used in the paper, Section 4 discusses
the results on poverty and consumption (4.1), education (4.2), and labor force participation (4.3),
and Section 5 concludes.


2        Context
International migration of workers from Nepal, to destinations other than India, is a relatively new
phenomenon. Before 2001, almost all out-migration from Nepal was to India (Figure 1). Migration
to other destination increased drastically when Nepal allowed private recruitment of workers to a
set of countries in the late 1990s. Consequently, out-migration from Nepal increased from about 3
percent in 2001 to about 7 percent in 2011.
        The increase in migration has been driven by the migration of primarily male, low-skilled mi-
grants to Malaysia and the Persian Gulf countries. By 2011, almost a million Nepali workers
worked in Gulf-Malaysia. The out-migration has continued to surge in recent years with the esti-
mated stock of over 2 million Nepali workers by 2015 (Figure 2).2 This has led to a massive surge
    2
    The migrant outﬂow declined considerably in 2015 and 2016 owing to a recession in Saudi Arabia and lack of
demand for Nepali workers from Malaysia. Consequently, the remittances, and the stock of migrants abroad are
expected to decline in 2016 and subsequent years.


                                                      4
in remittances received by the country. In 2015, Nepal received over US$6 billion in remittances,
which is about a third of the national GDP. Between 2005 and 2015, GDP per-capita grew by 3.2
percent per year, but GNI per-capita (with net remittance receipt included) grew by 4.8 percent
annually. This shows how earnings abroad are more attractive to Nepali workers relative to the
opportunities available domestically.
    However, the process of ﬁnding a job abroad in Gulf-Malaysia is heavily intermediated and
informal. Local agents typically connect potential migrants with recruitment companies in the
cities, especially in the Kathmandu valley. In addition to connecting to another layer of intermedi-
aries, these agents also help the potential migrants with the legwork associated with the migration
processes and related paperwork. The recruitment companies, known as ‘manpower companies’,
connect the workers with employers (or intermediaries) abroad. Typically, these agencies are re-
sponsible for obtaining an employment contract, a working visa, and make travel arrangements.
Most jobs abroad require potential migrants to obtain a medical clearance and all individuals
going abroad for work are required to obtain a labor permit from the Department of Foreign Em-
ployment, in Kathmandu. Both the local agents, and the manpower companies, are paid by the
potential migrant before they migrate, often with money borrowed from family, friends, and local
money-lenders.3
    Due to the nature of the recruitment market, the cost of migration to these destinations is quite
high. Migrants to Malaysia typically pay $1,600 to migrate and expect to earn $440 per month
for an employment contract of about 2.5 years. Migrants to the Gulf countries typically expect
to pay $1,000 to migrate and can expect to earn $420 per month.4 Under typical interest rates
and reasonable earnings abroad, migrants are still able to consume and remit money to be used for
their family.5 For the migrants who can ﬁnance migration without a loan, typically those that are
wealthier, or former migrants with some savings, greater share of migrant income, obviously, goes
towards other non-repayment uses.
    The extent of male out-migration in Nepal is high, not just in terms of the contribution to the
economy, but also in terms of employment shares. In 2001, only 8 percent of the male working age
population (10 percent of the male labor-force) were employed abroad. By 2011, the number more
than doubled to 16 percent of the the working age population (22 percent of the male labor-force).
Particularly for the relatively young males aged 15-44 from rural areas, the number of individuals
working abroad is higher than then number of individuals employed in wage-work domestically,
and only slightly smaller than the number of individuals employed by domestic agriculture.6 The
   3
     Please see The World Bank (2011) and Shrestha (2017b,a,c) for more details on the migration process in the
context of Nepal.
   4
     These data are collected as a part of the experiment studied in Shrestha (2017b). The earnings estimates are
expectations of those who have prior migration experience, and are likely to be higher than actual earnings. These
individuals actually earned $350-$400 per month in their past migration episode.
   5
     For instance, with monthly earnings of $300 for two years, and a migration cost of $1,000 borrowed at a monthly
interest rate of 3%, migrants would still make over $200 a month for non-repayment uses, more than twice the
minimum wage in the formal sector in Nepal. Lodging and boarding, while abroad, are typically factored into the
earnings, or are heavily subsidized, for most migrant workers in these destinations.
   6
     Author’s estimates using Housing and Population Census of 2001 and 2011.



                                                         5
geographic reach of migration to Gulf-Malaysia has also been quite impressive in these periods. In
2001, about half of the villages (lowest level of administrative units) had no migrants in countries
outside India, whereas by 2011, only about 5 percent of the villages had no migrants outside India
(Figure 3). This paper exploits the variation in diﬀerent migration rates over time and across
diﬀerent villages to identify the impact of migration.


3        Data and empirical strategy
3.1       Data
The migration and outcomes data used in this analysis come from two types of sources which I
describe in detail below.

Housing and Population Census 2001 and 2011

The Housing and Population Censuses are conducted by the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) of
Nepal every 10 years. I use the public-use microdata for tenth and eleventh rounds of the national
census, conducted in June of 2001, and 2011 for this analysis. The public-use micro-data of 2001
covers over 95% of all the villages (rural villages (VDCs) and urban municipalities) in the country
and has data on the 11% random sample of all households. The 2011 data covers all the villages
and has data on 8-100% of the households.7 In both the datasets, I use sampling weights to adjust
for the sampling procedure used to develop the micro-data.
        The census collects information on the basic demographics, education, and labor supply char-
acteristics of household members, as well as basic information on the household ‘members’ that are
currently abroad. I use this measure to capture international migration. Though households can-
not be tracked across the two censuses, villages can be identiﬁed and tracked across these rounds.
The large sample size within the village allow for precise measurement of outcomes as well as the
aggregate migration rate in the village. The large sample size of the census comes at a cost of
not having detailed information on the individuals and households such as earnings, consumption,
and expenditure. Furthermore, the information on labor supply is limited to information about
the ‘usual’ status in the past 12 months, and misses the richness typical of labor force and living
standards surveys.
        However, following the estimation strategy developed by Elbers, Lanjouw, and Lanjouw (2003),
statistical oﬃces worldwide, with the support of the World Bank, have begun to estimate poverty
and consumption measures at granular geographic level by combining census data with the richness
of the living standards surveys. In case of Nepal as well, the 2003/2004 Nepal Living Standards
Survey (NLSS-II) was used to prepare small area estimates of poverty and consumption for village
units (illakas ) in 2001, and the 2010 round of the Nepal Living Standards Survey (NLSS-III) was
used to prepare estimates for the village units in 2011. Due to the smaller sample size of the 2001
    7
   For an average rural village, the microdata cover 13 percent of the households, and for the average urban
municipality, the data cover about 20% of the households.


                                                     6
census, poverty estimates were not produced for each of the villages, but only for the 976 village
units (illakas ). I use the illaka level estimates of poverty and per-capita consumption for analyzing
the impact of migration on poverty.

Nepal Living Standards Survey 2010 (NLSS-III)

The second data-source I use for the analysis is the 2010 Nepal Living Standards Survey (NLSS-
III), also conducted by the CBS. This cross-sectional survey collects information from about 6,000
households designed to be representative at the national, as well as sub-national level.8 The survey
is the premier poverty monitoring tool for the Government of Nepal and has a rich collection
of outcomes including consumption, expenditure, education, labor supply, as well as on absent
members of the households (migrants) and remittance receipts.

3.2      Empirical strategy
The correlation between outcomes (say, consumption of, or labor supply) and migration (household
level, or village level) cannot be interpreted as a causal impact of migration. One of the key problems
is that the households that choose to migrate are very diﬀerent from households that do not choose
to migrate, and these diﬀerences are not fully accounted by the observable characteristics of the
household. The same problem arises when analyzing the impact of the aggregate level of migration
in the village. The villages with higher prevalence of migration are typically diﬀerent from those
where migration is a relatively rare phenomenon. I use two strategies, described in detail below, to
partially ameliorate these concerns.

Instrumental variable estimates

One of the strategies that I use is to instrument the household level migration with the migration
rates of the same villages observed in 2001. The key insight behind this instrument is that house-
holds in villages that had prior migration networks are more likely to migrate subsequently. The
role of migration networks in inﬂuencing future migration has been well established in the litera-
ture (see Munshi, 2003, for a seminal example). Historic migration rates have been widely used as
an instrument for household migration propensity in other contexts (for instance, McKenzie and
Rapoport, 2007) as well as in the context of Nepal (Phadera, 2016; Lokshin and Glinskaya, 2009).
I use this strategy in the NLSS-III data to study the impact of migration or remittance receipt on,
primarily, household consumption, expenditures, poverty, and wages.
       Speciﬁcally, in this context, I estimate the following system of equations using a 2-SLS estima-
   8
    The survey is designed to be representative at the 14 strata, which is a combination of 3 urban strata (Kathmandu,
other hills, terai), and 11 rural strata. The rural strata are a combination of development regions and ecological belts.




                                                           7
tion:

                                 Mhv =α1 + γMv,2001 + δXhv + νhv
                                  yhv =α2 + βMhv + δ Xhv + εhv                                     (1)

where yhv is the outcome for household h in village v , Mhv is a dummy of whether the has a
migrant in Gulf-Malaysia, Mv,2001 is the share of households with Gulf-Malaysia migrants in 2001,
Xhv are controls, and νv and εhv are uncorrelated errors assumed to be clustered at the village
level. The controls in these speciﬁcation include household size, ethnicity of the household head,
ﬁxed eﬀects for survey strata, and the logarithm of distance from Kathmandu. I estimate the
system of equations in (1) with 2-SLS with the predicted migration rate of the household from
the ﬁrst-stage as an instrument for the actual migration status of the household. To estimate the
marginal propensity to consume, I estimate a similar speciﬁcation with the migration status of the
household replaced by the logarithm or remittances the household received.
   To interpret the estimate as a causal impact of migration on the outcomes, the 2001 migration
rates must be uncorrelated with the outcomes in 2011, except through its inﬂuence on current
migration. This assumption is plausible if current migration is inﬂuenced by the social network
of the previous migrants. Even in this case, the estimate will be the causal impact of migration
on the migrants induced by the prior social networks to migrate. That is, this identiﬁes the local-
average-treatment-eﬀect (LATE) in the language of Imbens and Angrist (1994).
   However, a frequent criticism of this approach is that the village level characteristics could be
correlated with migration rates in 2001, migration rates in 2011, as well as the outcomes in 2011.
For instances, villages with higher degree of entrepreneurial individuals may have migrated early (in
2001), and also have better outcomes in 2011 (not necessarily due to the impact of migration). Or,
alternatively, villages that consistently have low labor demand (due to the rough geography, or local
political institutions) could have resulted in higher early migration as well as the labor outcomes
in 2011. To address these concerns, I use a second empirical strategy, a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence
method, that is immune to the village speciﬁc characteristics that inﬂuences the outcomes. For
the outcomes that I can use both empirical strategies, the estimates from both speciﬁcations yield
similar results, which is very comforting.

Diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence estimates

As discussed earlier, villages that have high migration rates could be very diﬀerent from villages
which have lower migration rates. These diﬀerences might reﬂect several observable and unobserv-
able characteristics that also aﬀect the outcomes. Similarly, there could be national trends in certain
outcomes. The most relevant in this context is the demand for Nepali workers from Gulf-Malaysia,
which has drastically increased in recent years. To the extent that village speciﬁc characteristics
are time-invariant, and the trends in outcomes do not diﬀer by villages, a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence
model produces the causal estimate of migration on the outcomes.


                                                  8
    I use the diﬀerence in diﬀerence method to analyze the impact of village migration rates on
outcomes in the census data. The estimating equation is:

                                        yivt =βMvt + µt + γv + εivt                                        (2)

where yivt represents the outcome of individual i of village v at time t. Mvt is the share of individuals
from the village v that are in Gulf-Malaysia at time t. µt represents the time ﬁxed eﬀects to capture
national trends in migration and also in the outcome variables. γv is the village ﬁxed eﬀects that
captures all time-invariant characteristics of the village. εivt represents idiosyncratic error term. I
allow the errors to be correlated across individuals of the same village across time.
    The identiﬁcation assumption of Equation (2) is that the trends in labor market characteristics
in villages with diﬀerent migration rates are the same. Village speciﬁc inherent factors that could
aﬀect the levels of migration as well as the levels of outcomes are subsumed by the speciﬁcation
and are not problematic for identiﬁcation. Neither is the national trend in outcomes as well as
the migration patterns. The variation that identiﬁes Equation (2) arises from the diﬀerence in
migration rates in the same village across time after taking into account the national (or regional)
trend in migration rates and outcomes.9 Figure 3 shows the distribution of village level migration
rates in 2001 and 2011, separately for India and non-India migration. The wide variation in the
rates, both within each year and between each year help identify the parameters.
    Since the impact of migration is likely to be diﬀerent for individuals based on whether they have
a current migrant in the household or not, I estimate Equation (2) by interacting all the explanatory
variables with a dummy indicating whether the household has a migrant in Gulf-Malaysia. This is
numerically same as estimating Equation (2) separately for those living in a household with, and
without a migrant. I present the fully interacted speciﬁcation for compactness.


4     Results and discussion
In this section, I present simple theoretical frameworks on the impact of migration on poverty,
consumption, expenditures, schooling, and labor market outcomes. Then I discuss the results of
estimating Equations (1) and (2) in light of the frameworks.

4.1     Impact on poverty and expenditures
4.1.1    Framework

If migrants have proper information, then migration typically results in welfare gain for the mi-
grants. This could mean higher earnings and/or better amenities upon migration. In the context
of migration from Nepal to Gulf-Malaysia, the amenities while abroad are probably not a pull
  9
    The key results do not change if I allow regions to have their own time trends in outcomes. The results are
omitted for compactness, but are available upon request.




                                                      9
factor.10 Given that many Nepali migrants choose to migrate multiple times, one could expect
positive impact on poverty reduction and increases in per-capita consumption for them and their
families.
    There is an increasing debate, particularly in the context of Nepal, on how the remittance
gets used. The debate hinges on what is the ‘right’ marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out
of remittance income. Permanent income hypothesis provides a guideline for this. Individuals
(households) should consume a large share of changes in their permanent income and save or invest
larger shares of incomes from transitory sources. Paxson (1993) estimates an MPC of about $0.7
per dollar of increases in permanent income and MPC of about $0.3 per dollar increase in transitory
income in the context of Thailand. The remittance income, however, cannot be clearly classiﬁed
as a permanent, or a transitory increase in their lifetime earnings. They are not permanent in
the sense that the migration itself is transitory and most individuals will not become a migrant
worker for the entirety of their working lives. However, with multiple episodes of migration in their
lifetimes, many workers end up spending considerable proportion of their working lives abroad as
a migrant workers. Furthermore, since migration is a part of the plan of migrants’ labor supply
decisions, remittance income cannot be thought of as an windfall for them, or for their households.
Haushofer and Shapiro (2016) provides another useful empirical benchmark, potentially for the
lower bound on the expected MPC. Rural Kenyan households were randomly selected to receive a
one-time unconditional transfer of $400. The MPC in that setting is $0.20 per dollar of transfer.11
Hence, a ‘reasonable’ MPC in the context for Nepal would be somewhere between 0.2 and 0.7.

4.1.2    Results

Between 2001 and 2011, the illakas that saw a greater rise in migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia, also
saw a corresponding fall in poverty rates (Figure 4). However, increases in migration rates to India
is not related with changes in poverty rates. These graphical results translate to the estimates of
Equation (2) on the census data of 2001 and 2011. A 10 percentage points increase in the share
of households with a migrant in Gulf-Malaysia reduces poverty rates by 7 percentage points and
increases per-capita consumption by 11 percent (Table 1). This estimate suggests that migration
rates to Gulf-Malaysia alone explains 40 percent of the actual decline in poverty between 2001 and
2011. Both rural and urban areas beneﬁt from migration, with the eﬀect being slightly larger for
urban areas. On the contrary, an increase in migration rates to India has no impact on poverty
rates or the average level of consumption in the illakas.
    These ﬁndings are echoed in the instrumental variables estimates of Equation (1) on the NLSS-
III data. The instrumental variable estimates show that for households with a migrant in Gulf-
Malaysia, migration reduces the likelihood of poverty by 78 percentage points, and increases con-
sumption by 153% (Table 2). These estimates are only slightly higher than the estimates in Table
  10
     Typically, Nepali workers work in menial jobs, live in shared housing or ‘labor-camps’, and often work in envi-
ronments diﬀerent from Nepal, and in addition, are separated from their families for elongated period.
  11
     Author’s calculations from the published tables and replication data.



                                                        10
1.12 This is quite comforting that the estimates from two diﬀerent empirical strategies and datasets
yield similar results. Here as well, migration to India has no impact on poverty or consumption.
      To estimate the MPC of remittance income, I estimate Equation (1) with (logarithm of) remit-
tance income as the dependent endogenous variable. An increase in remittance income of 1 percent
increases household consumption by 0.16 percent (Table 3). The implied MPC of remittance income
is $0.49 for an additional dollar in remittances.13 The associated increase in food consumption is
$0.18, on durable consumption is $0.09, and on non-durable consumption is $0.10. Educational
expenditure increases only slightly and is statistically insigniﬁcant. The MPC of remittance income
is slightly lower for rural households with only $0.40 increases in consumption, but the share that
goes to food consumption is much higher at $0.20. Given that the rural households are poorer,
it is reasonable to expect higher shares of the consumption going to food. The MPC for urban
areas are high, with an estimate of $0.72, which much of the increases going to non-food items, in-
cluding education. A $1 increase in remittance income increases educational expenditures of urban
households by $0.17, on durable goods by $0.18, and on non-durables by $0.20. It appears that,
at least in urban areas, increase in remittance has spurred local demand for non-food consumption
as well as education whereas in rural areas, the increase in consumption is mostly concentrated in
food items. As expected, the MPC of remittance income is higher than that of a random increase
in transitory income, but lower compared to typical estimates of MPC of permanent increases in
income.

4.2      Impact on education
4.2.1      Framework

Though many migrants state that their children education is one of the drivers of their migration
decision, the impact of adult migration in child schooling outcome is theoretically ambiguous. If
schooling is a normal good, then an increase in household income through migration and remittances
will increase child schooling. The increase will be even higher if liquidity constraints were preventing
some children from obtaining the optimal or desired level of schooling. However, not having a
parent in the household may hamper child education negatively if parental supervision is a key
input to child success in school. In addition, the increasing availability of migration opportunities
for younger workers may aﬀect the incentives to get educated. For instance, if (perceived) returns
schooling in domestic market is low, and the returns to migration are very high, then child might
optimally choose to invest in increasing their migration prospects rather than on schooling. In the
context of Nepal, this is likely to aﬀect incentives for boys, but not necessarily for girls. Hence, the
overall impact of migration on child education is an empirical question, and the literature, brieﬂy
mentioned above, ﬁnds diﬀerent eﬀects in diﬀerent contexts.
 12
      A 10 percentage point increases in likelihood of migration reduces poverty by 7.8 percentage points.
 13
      The MPC is estimated with a bootstrap standard error of 0.19.




                                                          11
4.2.2    Results

I estimate Equation (1) on NLSS-III data to assess the impact of migration of a family member on
the schooling outcomes of the children aged 5-14. A rise of 10 percentage points in the probability
of a household having a migrant in Gulf-Malaysia increases child school enrollment by 4 percentage
points (Table 4). The impact is slightly larger for urban areas compared to rural areas, but the
eﬀects are unlikely to be statistically diﬀerent. The eﬀects are almost completely driven by the
impact on girls. A 10 percentage points in the probability of the household having a migrant in
Gulf-Malaysia increases school attendance of girls by 9 percentage points. The eﬀect for boys are
much smaller (1 percentage points) and are statistically insigniﬁcant. The impact on completed
years of schooling follows a similar pattern, but the estimates are much noisier to be statistically
signiﬁcant at conventional levels. For girls, where the results are marginally signiﬁcant (at 10
percent signiﬁcance), an increase in 10 percentage points in the probability of migration increases
girls schooling by a 0.26 years. Many of the channels noted above could be at play here resulting
in the estimates being imprecise as well as heterogeneous by gender.

4.3     Impact on domestic labor market outcomes
4.3.1    Framework

There are several ways in which migration aﬀects the labor supply decision of individuals. First,
for individuals in a household with a migrant, there is a direct impact of migration. The increased
income through remittances could increase the consumption of leisure reducing their labor supply
in domestic markets. This channel has been explored in the context of Nepal in Phadera (2016)
and Lokshin and Glinskaya (2009), and will not be explored in this paper.
   Second, large-scale migration as in the case of Nepal, is a reduction in the total male labor supply
in the domestic market. A reduction in the total amount of labor can have diﬀerent implications
for diﬀerent genders. For males, male out-migration is a negative supply shock which would lead
to higher wages for the non-migrants. This could also induce more men to participate in the labor
market, which might oﬀset some of the increases in wages. For females, the impact of male out-
migration depends upon whether female labor supply is a complement, or a substitute to male
labor supply. In the extreme case of them being perfect complements, male out-migration reduces
the demand for female labor and lowers their wages. The opposite would be true if male and
female labor are perfectly substitutable with each other. In reality, the degree of substitutability
potentially diﬀers by the sectors as well. In Appendix A, I present a very simple model to formally
articulate the intuition described here. The more substitutable male and female labor supply are,
female wages and participation will respond more positively to increased male out-migration.
   Third, large-scale migration could mean more liquidity and greater availability of credit in the
local labor market. If individuals are credit constrained to open new businesses, then migration
could ease these constraints, increasing self-employment and business creation. Migration could
also increase business creation through a transfer of ideas and technologies from abroad. Similarly,


                                                 12
increased migration and remittances in the local economy could boost the demand for local goods
and services, further increasing employment and wages for all.
    Furthermore, large out-migration also means large social networks of migrants in destination
countries that might ﬁnd jobs abroad, or provide relevant information on jobs abroad. This could
create an incentive for the non-migrants, especially male, to invest in ﬁnding out more about the
labor markets abroad and make related investments, which could come at a cost of labor supplied
in the domestic market. This impact is likely to be stronger for members with a migrant in the
household as they have better access to the migrant network abroad, as well as have the resources
to make related investments and ﬁnance migration.
    The net impact of migration depends upon the relative contribution of these channels in the
local labor markets. Various channels are likely to have stronger impacts in diﬀerent segments of
the population.

4.3.2    Results

To examine the impact of village level migration rate on wages, I estimate Equation (1) on NLSS-III
data, and to estimate the impact on labor supply, I estimate Equation (2) on the census data.14
    A one-percentage point increase in the village level migration rate increases wages by 2.3 percent
(Table 5). Between 2001 and 2011, migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia increased by 3.5 percentage
points which increased the wages by 8 percent. This overall eﬀect is driven by increases in wages
in the agricultural sector, and for women. The change in average level of migration between 2001
and 2011 increased agricultural wages by 14 percent. For females, the change in migration rates
between 2001 and 2011 increased average wages by 14 percent, agricultural wages by 15 percent,
and casual wages by 12 percent. The eﬀects are qualitatively similar in both rural in urban areas,
with the eﬀect on non-agricultural wages higher in rural areas and the eﬀect on casual wages higher
in urban areas (Appendix Tables B.1 and B.2). This suggests that even in agriculture, where
male and female labor inputs are traditionally considered as being complementary to each other,
reduction in male labor supply actually increases female wages. In light of the model described in
Appendix A, this would mean that the elasticity of substitution between male and female labor is
suﬃciently high.
    The impact on labor force participation (extensive margin) echoes and complements the results
on wages. A one-percentage point increase in village level migration rates increases overall LFP
by 0.4 percentage points for individuals from non-migrant households (Table 6). The impact for
households with a migrant is lower at 0.2 percentage points. This means that the increase in
migration rates between 2001 and 2011, increased LFP by 1.2 percentage points for individuals
in non-migrant households, and by 0.7 percentage points for individuals in migrant households.
Though these eﬀects are small in magnitude (around 1-2 percent of the LFP rates in 2011), they
  14
     Census data does not have information on wages or labor earnings, and hence cannot be used to look at the
impact on wages. The NLSS-III data has only about 15 households surveyed per village, and does not provide enough
sample to examine the aggregated impact, separated by whether households have a migrant or not.



                                                       13
are economically meaningful in the sense that aggregate LFP has actually been falling between
2001 and 2011. Migration causes LFP to increase despite a trend to the contrary.15
       Migration increases male participation in agriculture, but fails to elicit female participation
(Table 6). Putting this together with the wage results suggests that increased male out-migration
either increases the price of labor, or induces greater participation, or both. It is entirely plausible
that some of the increases in agricultural wages are oﬀset by increases in participation, particularly
for male workers. For females, the lack of response in the extensive margin is compensated by an
increase in the price of female labor in agriculture.
       For individuals in non-migrant households, migration increases labor force participation in non-
agricultural sectors. This eﬀect is almost completely driven by the impact on females. Large male
out-migration increases female participation in both wage and self-employment outside agriculture.
In light of the model in Appendix A, this suggests that the elasticity of substitution between male
and female labor is also relatively high in non-farm sectors. For males, the impact on participation
is much lower and statistically insigniﬁcant.
       Conditional on participation in the labor market, higher migration rates in the villages increases
the probability that a worker is an employer. An one-percentage point increase in village level mi-
gration rates increases the probability of being an employer by 0.13 percentage points for individuals
in non-migrant households. Given the relatively low incidence of employers in the labor market (2
percent in 2011), the change in migration rates between 2001 and 2011 increased the probability
of being an employer by 22 percent. The eﬀect is strong for both genders, and for individuals from
both migrant and non-migrant households. This eﬀect is consistent with high degree of migration
and remittances in the village easing liquidity and credit constraints for enterprising individuals to
expand and hire other workers.
       However, large male-out migration lowers participation of males from migrant households in
non-farm activities. For males from non-migrant households as well, the (positive) impact on non-
farm activities are muted and statistically insigniﬁcant, particularly in rural areas. This is consistent
with male workers taking advantage of large social network of migrants from their villages to look for
opportunities abroad. This could come at a cost of reduced labor supply in non-farm activities. The
muted response from those in non-migrant households could be a combined eﬀect of a shock to the
local labor supply (which induces participation), increased network to look for jobs abroad (which
reduces participation locally), and greater liquidity constraints to ﬁnance migration and related
investments. For those from migrant households, increased income from remittances oﬀsets some
of the eﬀects from a shock to local labor supply by increasing their reservation wages, and enhances
job search abroad by relieving the liquidity constraints to ﬁnance job search abroad and related
investments. The fact that the eﬀect on male non-farm participation is stronger in rural areas,
where non-farm labor demand is lower and liquidity constraints more binding, is also consistent
with this explanation.16 However, due to data constraints, I am unable to investigate this channel
  15
     There is some diﬀerences between rural and urabn areas, with most of the eﬀects being driven by rural areas
(Appendix Tables B.3 and B.4).
  16
     Though the magnitudes of the impacts are slightly larger for the urban areas, the impacts are more precise and


                                                        14
in greater depth.
    The implications of large scale out-migration on the labor force can be varied and multifaceted.
In the context of Nepal, most of the eﬀects seem to indicate that migration acts as a negative
shock to the labor supply, increasing wages and/or participation of both males and females non-
migrants. Migration also helps small businesses expand which suggests that many businesses might
be credit constrained which migration and the resulting remittance can ease. Migration has some
negative impact on male participation in non-farm activities for those from households with a
current migrant. This could stem from increased access to social network that is abroad, which
could increase investments and time put towards ﬁnding a job abroad. However, it is comforting
to see that male non-farm wages are moderately increased in response to migration, particularly in
the rural areas.


5     Conclusion
Constraints to international labor mobility have often been dubbed as the single biggest distor-
tion in the global economy (Clemens, 2011). Temporary labor migration, such as that of South
Asian workers to Malaysia, and the Persian Gulf countries provides a pathway to alleviate some
of the distortion without imposing a social assistance costs to the host countries. Taking advan-
tage of opportunities in Gulf-Malaysia, almost a quarter of the male labor force from Nepal has
temporarily migrated to these countries for work. The scale of migration has led to increased con-
cerns among policy makers on the impact of migration on, among other things, consumption and
domestic labor markets. In this paper, I provide evidence on the impact of migration on consump-
tion, expenditures, and domestic labor markets using a combination of instrumental variables and
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence strategies.17
    I ﬁnd that Gulf-Malaysia migration has led to large increases in the living standards of indi-
viduals and reductions in poverty. The increase in the Gulf-Malaysia migration rate between 2001
and 2011 explains about 40 percent of the actual decline in poverty during this period.
    The estimated marginal propensity of consumption out of remittance income is also within
reasonable range. Remittance receiving households spend $0.50 out of every dollar increase in
remittance income, most of it going towards increases in food consumption, particularly in rural
areas. In urban areas, remittance income also increases non-food consumption, including on edu-
cation. It does not appear that remittances are spurring a rampant rise in spending by household
members. The estimates of MPC is higher than that of an unexpected transitory income shock,
proportionally larger for rural areas where non-farm participation rate is much lower (see Appendix Tables B.3 and
B.4 for the impacts). For reference the non-farm male employment rate in rural areas is 31 percent, and in urban
areas is 57 percent.
  17
     The impact of migration on societal structures, family dynamics, intra-household bargaining, female empow-
erment, political preferences, and appreciation of the real exchange rate are also extremely interesting and policy
relevant in the context of Nepal and are part of the greater policy debate surrounding migration. Similarly, the nature
of the recruitment market and the risks faced by workers abroad entice passionate policy debates and should be a
part of the broader discussions on the impact of migration in the context of Nepal. But these topics and impacts are
beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                          15
but lower than what would be expected of a permanent increases in income as it is supposed to be.
   I ﬁnd positive, but modest impact of migration of household members on child education. While
the impact on girls is strong and positive, the impact on boys is statistically indistinguishable from
zero. It appears that, at least for boys, the increase in demand for education due to increases in
income is at least partly oﬀset by increases in returns to low-education through low-skilled migration
abroad.
   I also ﬁnd largely positive impacts of migration on wages and labor force participation. The
increase in the Gulf-Malaysia migration rate between 2001 and 2011 has increased overall wages by
8 percent (14 percent for females), and agricultural wages by 14 percent. The increase in migration
during this period also increased labor force participation, both for individuals from households
with and without a current migrant. This eﬀect is remarkable, particularly in light of the falling
LFP during this period. The eﬀect in participation is driven by increases in male participation in
farming, and female participation in non-farm activities. Taken together, migration beneﬁts both
male and female workforce, especially those without a current migrant in their households, either
through increases in wages and/or increases in participation. High migration rates in a village
reduce participation in non-farm activities of men from migrant-households, plausibly because of
their access to better job-search options abroad. This reduction is accompanied by increases in
male non-farm wages, particularly in rural areas.
   These ﬁndings broadly echo the ﬁndings in the literature on the impacts of migration and can
be used to inform the policy discussion on the impact of migration, particularly, in the context of
Nepal.



References
Adhikari, J., and M. Hobley (2013): Everyone is leaving, who will sow our ﬁelds?: The eﬀects
 of migration from the Khotang district to the Gulf and Malaysia. Nepal Institute of Development
 Studies.

Akram, A. A., and A. M. Mobarak (2016): “Seasonal migration to increase incomes of poor
 households in Bangladesh,” Working Paper.

Antman, F. M. (2012): “Gender, educational attainment, and the impact of parental migration
 on children left behind,” Journal of Population Economics, 25(4), 1187–1214.

Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury, and A. M. Mobarak (2014): “Underinvestment in a proﬁtable
 technology: The case of seasonal migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 82(5), 1671–1748.

Clemens, M. A. (2011): “Economics and emigration: Trillion-dollar bills on the sidewalk?,” The
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 83–106.

Clemens, M. A., C. E. Montenegro, and L. Pritchett (2008): “The place premium: Wage
 diﬀerences for identical workers across the US border,” Center for Global Development Working
 Paper 148.


                                                 16
de Brauw, A., and J. Giles (2016): “Migrant opportunity and the educational attainment of
  youth in rural China,” Journal of Human Resources.

Dinkelman, T., G. Kumchulesi, and M. Mariotti (2017): “Labor migration, capital accu-
  mulation, and the structure of rural labor markets,” Working Paper.

Dinkelman, T., and M. Mariotti (2016): “The long-run eﬀects of labor migration on human
  capital formation in communities of origin,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  8(4), 1–35.

Elbers, C., J. O. Lanjouw, and P. Lanjouw (2003): “Micro–level estimation of poverty and
 inequality,” Econometrica, 71(1), 355–364.

Gibson, J., and D. McKenzie (2014): “The development impact of a best practice seasonal
 worker policy,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2), 229–243.

Haushofer, J., and J. Shapiro (2016): “The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers
 to the poor: Experimental evidence from Kenya,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4),
 1973–2042.

Imbens, G. W., and J. D. Angrist (1994): “Identiﬁcation and Estimation of Local Average
  Treatment Eﬀects,” Econometrica, 62(2), 467–475.

Jappelli, T., and L. Pistaferri (2010): “The consumption response to income changes,” Annu.
  Rev. Econ., 2(1), 479–506.

Lokshin, M., and E. Glinskaya (2009): “The eﬀect of male migration on employment patterns
 of women in Nepal,” The World Bank Economic Review, 23(3), 481–507.

McKenzie, D. (2017): “How eﬀective are active labor market policies in developing countries? a
 critical review of recent evidence,” The World Bank Research Observer.

McKenzie, D., and H. Rapoport (2007): “Network eﬀects and the dynamics of migration and
 inequality: Theory and evidence from Mexico,” Journal of development Economics, 84(1), 1–24.

        (2011): “Can migration reduce educational attainment? Evidence from Mexico,” Journal
  of Population Economics, 24(4), 1331–1358.

McKenzie, D., S. Stillman, and J. Gibson (2010): “How important is selection? Experimental
 vs non-experimental measures of the income gains from migration,” Journal of the European
 Economic Association, 8(4), 913–945.

Munshi, K. (2003): “Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the US labor market,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 549–599.

Paxson, C. H. (1993): “Consumption and income seasonality in Thailand,” Journal of political
  Economy, 101(1), 39–72.

Phadera, L. (2016): “International migration and its eﬀect on labor supply of the left-behind
 household members: Evidence from Nepal,” Working Paper.

Shrestha, M. (2017a): “Death scares: How potential work-migrants infer mortality rates from
  migrant deaths,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series WPS7946, The World Bank.


                                             17
         (2017b): “Get rich or die tryin’: Perceived earnings, perceived mortality rate and the
  value of a statistical life of potential work-migrants from Nepal,” World Bank Policy Research
  Working Paper Series WPS7945, The World Bank.

         (2017c): “Push and pull : A study of international migration from Nepal,” World Bank
  Policy Research Working Paper Series WPS7965, The World Bank.

The World Bank, . (2011): “Large-scale migration and remittance in Nepal: Issues, challenges
 and opportunities,” Discussion Paper 55390-NP, The World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Eco-
 nomic Management Sector Unit, South Asia Region.

        (2017): “World Development Indicators,” .

Yang, D. (2008): “International migration, remittances and household investment: Evidence from
 Philippine migrants’ exchange rate shocks*,” The Economic Journal, 118(528), 591–630.




                                              18
Figures and Tables
Figures


                                                                    Figure 1: International migration from Nepal

                                      8                                 All                                        7.43
                                                                        India
                                                                        Non-India
                    Migrant to population share, (percent)
                                                   6




                                                                                                                   4.63

                                                         3.49                             3.56
                                      4




                                                                                                       3.41
                                                                             2.68         3.17
                                                                                                       2.61        2.8
                                                                             2.48
                         2




                                                                                                        .78
                                                                              .19         .37
                                      0




                                                             1971            1981         1991          2001       2011
                                                                                          Year

Source: Census data for various years.
Note: This ﬁgure shows the migrant to population ratio for each of the census years. Destination breakdown was not
available for 1971.




                                                                                        19
                      Figure 2: Migrants in Gulf-Malaysia, and net remittance receipt




                                                               2
                      Estimated number of migrants (in millions)




                                                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                       Remittances (billions, in 2010 US$)
                                             1.6      1.8




                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                     1.4




                                                                                                                                                               4
                         1     1.2




                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                      2008m1                 2010m1          2012m1                     2014m1              2016m1
                                                                                              Month

                                                                                   Nepali migrant workers in Gulf-Malaysia
                                                                                   Net remittances received (right)


Source: Census 2011, DoFE database on migrant permit, and The World Development Indicators (The World Bank,
2017)
Note: Stock of migrants estimated from the stock in June 2011 from the census and migrant permit database at the
Department of Foreign Employment. Each migrant is estimated to remain in the destination for 2 years in case of
the Gulf countries, and 2.5 years in case of Malaysia.



                                                                   Figure 3: Distribution of migration rates by villages
                                                                                                               30
     50
     40




                                                                                                               20
       30
  Percent




                                                                                                         Percent
     20




                                                                                                               10
     10
     0




                                                                                                               0




            0   .02     .04          .06           .08                                .1      .12                   0            .05                 .1                .15                           .2
                      non-India migration rate in village                                                                              India migration rate in village

                                                                   2001     2011                                                              2001                                            2011


Source: Author’s calculations from the 2001 and 2011 Census.
Note: This ﬁgure shows the distribution of migration rates for each of the villages in 2001 and 2011, for India and
non-India migrants.




                                                                                                    20
                                                Figure 4: Changes in poverty rates and migration




                           .5
                Change in poverty rates
                  -.5      -1     0




                                                0            .1                 .2               .3     .4
                                                       Change in migration rates to Gulf and Malaysia

                                                                           Regression fit
                           .5
                Change in poverty rates
                  -.5      -1     0




                                          -.2          -.1          0               .1             .2   .3
                                                             Change in migration rates to India

                                                                           Regression fit


Source: Author’s calculations from the 2001 and 2011 Census and Small Area Estimates of poverty.
Note: This ﬁgure shows how changes in illaka level migration rates is associated with changes in illaka level poverty
rates. The top panel plots the changes in Gulf-Malaysia migration rates and the bottom panel plots changes in India
migration rates in the horizontal axes. Each point represents an illaka with the area proportional to the population
in 2001. The line shows linear regression estimate of the relationship.




                                                                         21
Tables


                   Table 1: Impact of migration on poverty at Village level
                             All                     Rural                      Urban
                                Log (PC-                Log (PC-                   Log (PC-
                       p0         cons)          p0        cons)            p0        cons)
                       (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)
                            Migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia
  to Gulf-Malaysia -0.659*** 1.071***        -0.574*** 0.594***         -1.387*** 5.142**
                    (0.097)      (0.332)      (0.087)    (0.123)         (0.506)    (2.554)
  Observations        1922         1922         1808        1808           114         114
  Adj R-squared      0.814         0.883       0.788       0.941          0.801       0.708
                                 Migration rates to India
  to India           0.203        -0.125       0.187       -0.142         0.379       0.072
                    (0.147)      (0.303)      (0.147)    (0.198)         (0.759)    (3.069)
  Observations        1922         1922         1808        1808           114         114
  Adj R-squared      0.790         0.874       0.765       0.938          0.724       0.606
Source: Author’s estimates using the Census 2001 and 2011 data, and small area poverty estimates for illakas.
Note: This table shows the impact of illaka level migration rates on illaka level estimates of poverty and per-capital
consumption. Reported coeﬃcients are the estimates of β from Equation (2). The column headings indicate the
outcome variables and sample restrictions. Migration rates at the illaka level is the dependent variables. The top
panel shows the impact of migration to Gulf-Malaysia and the bottom panel shows the impact of migration to India.
Standard errors, clustered at the illaka level, are reported in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1



                    Table 2: Impact of migration on poverty at Household                  level
                                 All                     Rural                                    Urban
                                    Log (PC-                 Log (PC-                                Log (PC-
                            p0        cons)          p0        cons)                          p0       cons)
                           (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                          (5)       (6)
                         Household has a migrant in Gulf-Malaysia
   in Gulf-Malaysia    -0.777*** 1.534***        -0.649*** 0.809***                        -1.527*       5.286
                         (0.188)     (0.433)      (0.182)     (0.276)                      (0.803)      (3.237)
   First stage F-stat     32.0         32.0         34.7        34.7                         4.4          4.4
   Observations           5988         5988         3900        3900                        2088         2088
                               Household has a migrant in India
   in India               0.049       -0.260       0.049       -0.208                       0.031        -0.975
                         (0.179)     (0.213)      (0.187)     (0.222)                      (0.324)      (0.760)
   First-Stage F-stat      34.2        34.2         30.2        30.2                         5.9           5.9
   Observations           3004         3004         2186        2186                         818          818
Source: Author’s estimates using the NLSS-III data.
Note: This table shows the impact of household migration status on poverty and consumption. Reported coeﬃcients
are the estimates of β from Equation (1). The column headings indicate the outcome variables and sample restrictions.
Dependent variable is an indicator of whether the household has a current migrant in Gulf-Malaysia (top panel) or
India (bottom panel), and is instrumented with the village level migration rates in 2001. Standard errors, clustered
at the ward level, are reported in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                          22
                           Table 3: Impact of remittances on consumption
                                 Log(            Breakdown of Log(consumption)
                                 cons)      food     durable non-durables education
                                   (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)
                                         All Households
           Log(remittances) 0.164*** 0.103*** 0.618***           0.179***      0.171
                                (0.046)   (0.031)    (0.187)      (0.052)    (0.130)
           implied MPC           0.494     0.178      0.088        0.104       0.036
           First-stage F-stat    17.83
           Observations          5988       5988       5988        5988        5988
                                        Rural Households
           Log(remittances)    0.146**    0.120**    0.634**      0.120*      -0.078
                                (0.064)   (0.052)    (0.319)      (0.072)    (0.223)
           implied MPC           0.399     0.205      0.064        0.060      -0.013
           First-stage F-stat     5.58
           Observations          3900       3900       3900        3900        3900
                                        Urban Households
           Log(remittances) 0.168*** 0.082** 0.538***            0.210***    0.367**
                                (0.056)   (0.034)    (0.182)      (0.064)    (0.148)
           implied MPC           0.718     0.149      0.184        0.201       0.167
           First-stage F-stat    20.89
           Observations          2088       2088       2088        2088        2088
Source: Author’s estimates using the NLSS-III data.
Note: This table shows the impact of remittances on consumption and expenditures. Reported coeﬃcients are the
estimates of β from Equation (1), and the corresponding estimates of the marginal propensity to consume (MPC).
The column headings indicate the outcome variables. Dependent variable is the natural logarithm of remittance
received by the household, and is instrumented with the village level migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia in 2001. The
MPC is computed for the average household. Standard errors, clustered at the ward level, are reported in parentheses.
∗∗∗
    : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                         23
                         Table 4: Impact of migration on children’s education
                                    Currently attends school       Completed years of schooling
                                     All      Rural    Urban          All    Rural     Urban
                                     (1)        (2)      (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)
                                       Children aged (5-14)
   has Gulf-Malaysia     migrant 0.422** 0.377** 0.539*             1.072     0.762     2.032
                                   (0.168)   (0.190) (0.322)       (0.811) (0.907)     (2.042)
   First-stage F-stat               14.72     10.69     3.90         14.72    10.69      3.90
   Observations                     7194      5322      1872         7194     5322       1872
                                    Male children aged (5-14)
   has Gulf-Malaysia     migrant    0.128     0.060     1.482        0.135    0.116     -1.020
                                   (0.138)   (0.134) (2.055)       (0.846) (0.830)     (7.371)
   First-stage F-stat               14.40     14.58     0.65         14.40    14.58      0.65
   Observations                     3558      2626       932         3558     2626        932
                                   Female children aged (5-14)
   has Gulf-Malaysia     migrant 0.866*** 1.131* 0.354*             2.614*    2.377    2.898*
                                   (0.324)   (0.611) (0.188)       (1.526) (2.415)     (1.683)
   First-stage F-stat                7.53      3.47     5.59          7.53    3.47       5.59
   Observations                     3636      2696       940         3636     2696       940
Source: Author’s estimates using the NLSS-III data.
Note: This table shows the impact of household migration on educational outcomes of children aged 5-14. Reported
coeﬃcients are the estimates of β from Equation (1). The column headings indicate the outcome variables and
sample restriction. Dependent variable is an indicator of whether the household has a migrant in Gulf-Malaysia, and
is instrumented with the village level migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia in 2001. Standard errors, clustered at the
ward level, are reported in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                        24
                             Table 5: Impact of migration on wages
                                                 Log(agric Log(non-agric                        Log(casual
                                     Log(wage)         wage)         wage)                           wage)
                                         (1)          (2)           (3)                            (4)
                                    Working age (15-64)
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate    2.338**     4.073***       2.025*                           2.297**
                                       (0.961)     (1.375)       (1.085)                          (1.005)
      First-stage F-stat               308.61       119.94       363.79                           175.11
      Observations                      5316         1729          3992                            3077
                                      Male sub-sample
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate     1.671*      3.492**        1.258                            1.547
                                       (1.011)     (1.713)       (1.091)                          (1.109)
      First-stage F-stat               307.97        88.87       327.50                           164.83
      Observations                      3297          723          2880                            1738
                                     Female sub-sample
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate 3.879***       4.426***        3.978                          3.537***
                                       (1.496)     (1.469)       (2.600)                          (1.170)
      First-stage F-stat               251.92       123.41       274.20                           159.28
      Observations                      2019         1006          1112                            1339
Source: Author’s estimates using the NLSS-III data.
Note: This table shows the impact of village migration rates on wages. Reported coeﬃcients are the estimates of β
from Equation (1). The column headings indicate the outcome variables. Dependent variable is the migration rates
in the village in 2011, and is instrumented with the village level migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia in 2001. Standard
errors, clustered at the ward level, are reported in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                         25
                    Table 6: Impact of migration on labor force characteristics
                                        Agric-     Participation in non-agriculture                        emplo-
                                LFP      ulture       All        Wage         self                          yer
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)                          (6)
                                      Working age (15-64)
  Village migration rate
       x migrant in HH        0.192** 0.400*** -0.207*** -0.126**          -0.081**                       0.076**
                              (0.095)   (0.087)    (0.075)      (0.058)     (0.032)                        (0.039)
       x no migrant in HH 0.353***       0.112    0.241*** 0.144*** 0.097***                              0.134***
                              (0.085)   (0.100)    (0.065)      (0.053)     (0.028)                        (0.043)
  Observations               3881384 3881384       3881384     3881384      3881384                       2270376
  Adj R-squared                 0.053    0.199      0.087        0.054       0.036                          0.024
                                       Male sub-sample
  Village migration rate
       x migrant in HH         -0.060  0.641*** -0.701*** -0.532*** -0.168***                             0.117***
                              (0.095)   (0.101)    (0.115)      (0.097)     (0.047)                        (0.043)
       x no migrant in HH 0.443*** 0.369***         0.074        0.010       0.065                        0.162***
                              (0.068)   (0.113)    (0.104)      (0.086)     (0.043)                        (0.046)
  Observations               1847306 1847306       1847306     1847306      1847306                       1344491
  Adj R-squared                 0.028    0.194      0.134        0.075       0.054                          0.022
                                      Female sub-sample
  Village migration rate
       x migrant in HH          0.138    0.079      0.059      0.113***    -0.055**                        0.089**
                              (0.117)   (0.109)    (0.049)      (0.038)     (0.026)                        (0.044)
       x no migrant in HH     0.214*     -0.110   0.323*** 0.221*** 0.102***                              0.134***
                              (0.129)   (0.120)    (0.052)      (0.041)     (0.024)                        (0.050)
  Observations               2034078 2034078       2034078     2034078      2034078                        925885
  Adj R-squared                 0.160    0.249      0.057        0.042       0.025                          0.035
Source: Author’s estimates using the Census 2001 and 2011 data.
Note: This table shows the impact of village migration rates on labor force participation for the working age population
(15-64) from households with and without a current migrant. Reported coeﬃcients are the estimates of β from
Equation (2). The column headings indicate the participation in various types of activities. Dependent variable
is the migration rates in the village. Standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in parentheses.
∗∗∗
    : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                          26
Appendix A            A model of labor supply response to migration
In this section, I describe a very simple theoretical model illustrating how the substitutabilty
between male and female labor in local production determines how they respond to male out-
migration.
   Consider a local economy, a village, with the aggregate production given by AK 1−α Lα , where
K is the amount of capital used, and L is the aggregate labor used in production. The aggregate
labor is a composite of male labor M and female labor F through a C.E.S relationship as follows:
                                                                       σ
                                                  σ −1        σ −1   σ −1
                                      L= M          σ    +F     σ



where σ represents the elasticity of substitution between male and female labor. A vale of σ = 0
means that male and female labor are perfect complements, a value of σ = ∞ means that male and
female labor are perfect substitutes.
   In this economy, rental price of capital r, and male and female wages wm and wf are given by
the ﬁrst-order conditions:
                                                     L α
                                      r =(1 − α)A
                                                     K
                                                                            1
                                                         (1−α)
                                                   K                 L      σ
                                     wm =αA
                                                   L                 M
                                                                         1
                                                         (1−α)
                                                   K                 L   σ
                                     wf =αA
                                                   L                 F
   Male out-migration is represented in this economy as a shock to M . To see how this aﬀects
males and female wages, we simply take the derivatives of the ﬁrst order condition. For female
wages,
                                                                     1
                                            (1−α)
                          ∂wf      K                     L2−σ        σ
                                                                         1
                              = αA                                         − (1 − α)
                          ∂M       L                     M ·F            σ
That is, an increase in male labor supply has two eﬀects. The ﬁrst eﬀect (ﬁrst term within the
square brackets) is through complementarity between the male and female labor supply: an increase
in one increases the demand for the other. This eﬀect is higher if the degree of complementarity
is higher. The second eﬀect comes the overall increase in labor supply, which reduces the price of
                                                1
labor. The net eﬀect is positive if and only if σ > (1 − α), that is when the elasticity of substitution
is suﬃciently low. That means, when male and female labor are less substitutable, a decrease in the
supply of male workers will also reduce the demand for female labor, hence lowering their wages.
    Now, consider the male wages,
                                                                 1
                                          (1−α)
                        ∂wm      K                  L2−σ         σ
                                                                         F 1
                            = αA                                     −       − (1 − α)
                        ∂M       L                  M ·F                 Mσ

which is always negative as both the eﬀects go in the same direction. That is, a decrease in the
supply of male workers will increase the male wages.




                                                     27
Appendix B               Additional Results
Tables


                         Table B.1: Impact of migration on rural wages
                                                 Log(agric Log(non-agric                        Log(casual
                                     Log(wage)         wage)          wage)                          wage)
                                         (1)         (2)            (3)                            (4)
                                 Rural working age (15-64)
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate    2.604**     3.689**         2.233*                           1.766
                                      (1.061)      (1.456)        (1.180)                         (1.167)
      First-stage F-stat               151.72       99.78         147.36                          121.23
      Observations                      3402        1542           2214                            2549
                                      Male sub-sample
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate    2.758**       2.525        2.614**                           1.280
                                      (1.161)      (1.548)        (1.330)                         (1.260)
      First-stage F-stat               152.25       74.27         149.06                          111.89
      Observations                      2081         661           1697                            1425
                                     Female sub-sample
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate     2.809*     4.462***         0.626                          2.670**
                                      (1.461)      (1.649)        (2.214)                         (1.318)
      First-stage F-stat               126.15      103.85          75.70                          115.12
      Observations                      1321         881            517                            1124
Source: Author’s estimates using the NLSS-III data.
Note: This table shows the impact of village migration rates on rural wages. Reported coeﬃcients are the estimates
of β from Equation (1). The column headings indicate the outcome variables. Dependent variable is the migration
rates in the village in 2011, and is instrumented with the village level migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia in 2001.
Standard errors, clustered at the ward level, are reported in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                         28
                         Table B.2: Impact of migration on urban wages
                                                  Log(agric Log(non-agric                       Log(casual
                                     Log(wage)          wage)         wage)                          wage)
                                         (1)          (2)           (3)                            (4)
                                Urban working age (15-64)
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate      2.136      6.305**         1.835                          3.991**
                                      (1.832)      (2.535)       (1.912)                          (1.747)
      First-stage F-stat               289.19        99.32       350.54                           133.20
      Observations                      1914          187          1778                             528
                                      Male sub-sample
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate      0.264      8.113**        -0.351                           2.818
                                      (1.490)      (3.849)       (1.462)                          (2.257)
      First-stage F-stat               255.65        59.79       280.71                           130.63
      Observations                      1216           62          1183                             313
                                     Female sub-sample
      Gulf-Malaysia migration rate      5.014       3.162*         5.807                         6.665***
                                      (3.596)      (1.735)       (4.934)                          (2.280)
      First-stage F-stat               281.80        75.65       317.01                            99.93
      Observations                       698          125           595                             215
Source: Author’s estimates using the NLSS-III data.
Note: This table shows the impact of village migration rates on urban wages. Reported coeﬃcients are the estimates
of β from Equation (1). The column headings indicate the outcome variables. Dependent variable is the migration
rates in the village in 2011, and is instrumented with the village level migration rates to Gulf-Malaysia in 2001.
Standard errors, clustered at the ward level, are reported in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                         29
                   Table B.3: Impact of migration on labor force in rural areas
                                        Agric-     Participation in non-agriculture                    emplo-
                               LFP       ulture       All       Wage           self                     yer
                                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)                      (6)
                                  Rural working age (15-64)
  Village migration rate
       x migrant in HH      0.283*** 0.487*** -0.204*** -0.127*** -0.077***                           0.102***
                             (0.074)    (0.080)    (0.052)     (0.047)      (0.022)                    (0.037)
       x no migrant in HH 0.322***      0.164*    0.157***       0.075     0.082***                   0.134***
                             (0.077)    (0.087)    (0.053)     (0.048)      (0.022)                    (0.040)
  Observations               2528447 2528447      2528447      2528447     2528447                    1587888
  Adj R-squared                0.051     0.136       0.069       0.053        0.025                     0.031
                                      Male sub-sample
  Village migration rate
       x migrant in HH         0.077   0.793*** -0.716*** -0.552*** -0.163***                         0.145***
                             (0.070)    (0.089)    (0.082)     (0.078)      (0.034)                    (0.040)
       x no migrant in HH 0.391*** 0.446***         -0.056      -0.096        0.040                   0.175***
                             (0.061)    (0.089)    (0.082)     (0.076)      (0.031)                    (0.042)
  Observations               1180178 1180178      1180178      1180178     1180178                     887826
  Adj R-squared                0.027     0.118       0.105       0.079        0.033                     0.029
                                     Female sub-sample
  Village migration rate
       x migrant in HH       0.230**     0.105    0.125*** 0.150***          -0.026                    0.084**
                             (0.108)    (0.104)    (0.041)     (0.035)      (0.021)                    (0.043)
       x no migrant in HH     0.229*     -0.094   0.323*** 0.211*** 0.112***                           0.106**
                             (0.121)    (0.116)    (0.043)     (0.036)      (0.021)                    (0.047)
  Observations               1348269 1348269      1348269      1348269     1348269                     700062
  Adj R-squared                0.152     0.201       0.050       0.041        0.023                     0.041
Source: Author’s estimates using the Census 2001 and 2011 data.
Note: This table shows the impact of village migration rates on labor force participation for the rural working age
population (15-64) from households with and without a current migrant. Reported coeﬃcients are the estimates of β
from Equation (2). The column headings indicate the participation in various types of activities. Dependent variable
is the migration rates in the village. Standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in parentheses.
∗∗∗
    : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                        30
                   Table B.4: Impact of migration on labor force in urban areas
                                           Agric- Participation in non-agriculture                    emplo-
                                  LFP       ulture      All     Wage          self                     yer
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)                      (6)
                                   Urban working age (15-64)
    Village migration rate
         x migrant in HH         -0.368      0.208    -0.576    -0.268     -0.309*                     0.019
                                (0.429)    (0.439)   (0.364)   (0.285)     (0.174)                    (0.220)
         x no migrant in HH 0.771**         0.007   0.764** 0.643**          0.121                     0.214
                                (0.369)    (0.494)   (0.355)   (0.262)     (0.166)                    (0.251)
    Observations               1352937 1352937 1352937 1352937            1352937                     682488
    Adj R-squared                 0.020     0.129      0.032    0.020        0.011                     0.006
                                         Male sub-sample
    Village migration rate
         x migrant in HH       -0.914**      0.302  -1.216**    -0.776      -0.440                     0.154
                                (0.397)    (0.426)   (0.540)   (0.469)     (0.269)                    (0.214)
         x no migrant in HH 0.966***        0.130     0.836      0.703       0.133                     0.126
                                (0.267)    (0.490)   (0.551)   (0.429)     (0.258)                    (0.217)
    Observations                667128     667128    667128    667128      667128                     456665
    Adj R-squared                 0.017     0.113      0.042    0.019        0.016                     0.006
                                        Female sub-sample
    Village migration rate
         x migrant in HH         -0.150      0.029    -0.179     0.109    -0.287**                     0.172
                                (0.583)    (0.526)   (0.269)   (0.183)     (0.143)                    (0.260)
         x no migrant in HH      0.437      -0.057   0.494*    0.462**       0.032                     0.507
                                (0.618)    (0.571)   (0.278)   (0.191)     (0.123)                    (0.310)
    Observations                685809     685809    685809    685809      685809                     225823
    Adj R-squared                 0.077     0.176      0.038    0.029        0.013                     0.014
Source: Author’s estimates using the Census 2001 and 2011 data.
Note: This table shows the impact of village migration rates on labor force participation for the urban working age
population (15-64) from households with and without a current migrant. Reported coeﬃcients are the estimates of β
from Equation (2). The column headings indicate the participation in various types of activities. Dependent variable
is the migration rates in the village. Standard errors, clustered at the village level, are reported in parentheses.
∗∗∗
    : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                        31
