                                                     WPS8142


Policy Research Working Paper                       8142




                Predicting School Dropout
                 with Administrative Data
         New Evidence from Guatemala and Honduras

                                Melissa Adelman
                              Francisco Haimovich
                                  Andres Ham
                              Emmanuel Vazquez




Education Global Practice Group
July 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8142


  Abstract
 Across Latin America, school dropout is a growing concern,                         with strong education system data. This paper makes
 because of its negative social and economic consequences.                          use of newly established administrative data systems in
 Although a wide range of interventions hold potential to                           Guatemala and Honduras, to estimate some of the first
 reduce dropout rates, policy makers in many countries must                         dropout prediction models for lower-middle-income coun-
 first address the basic question of how to target limited                          tries. These models can correctly identify 80 percent of
 resources effectively for such interventions. Identifying                          sixth grade students who will drop out in the transition
 who is most likely to drop out and, therefore, who should                          to lower secondary school, performing as well as models
 be prioritized for targeting, is a prediction problem that                         used in the United States and providing more accurate
 has been addressed in a rich set of research in countries                          results than other commonly used targeting approaches.




  This paper is a product of the Education Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at madelman@
  worldbank.org and fhaimovich@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
              Predicting School Dropout with Administrative Data:
                  New Evidence from Guatemala and Honduras

       Melissa Adelman, Francisco Haimovich, Andres Ham, and Emmanuel Vazquez*




Keywords: Dropout, Prediction, Early Warning, Guatemala, Honduras
JEL Classification: I20, I21, C51, C53


*The authors thank the Ministry of Education of Guatemala (Ministerio de Educación –
MINEDUC) and the Secretary of Education of Honduras (Secretaría de Educación – SEDUC) for
providing access to the anonymized administrative data on which this study is based.
   1. Introduction

As a result of sustained public and private investment in recent decades, primary net enrollment
rates across all low and middle-income countries now average 91%, while secondary and tertiary
enrollment rates are growing quickly. In the Latin America and Caribbean region, primary
enrollment is approaching universality, and secondary net enrollment has grown 50% in the last
two decades to over 75% (United Nations 2015; World Bank 2016). For many countries, however,
attainment continues to fall short of aspirations, as high rates of enrollment in early grades quickly
decline due to students dropping out before completing a full course of basic education (Bassi,
Busso, and Muñoz 2016). For example, in Guatemala and Honduras, the countries of focus in this
paper, education is de jure compulsory through ninth grade, but nearly 40% of sixth graders drop
out before getting there. For young people who drop out prematurely, global evidence suggests
that, on average, they will earn less and experience more social and economic challenges than their
peers with more years of completed education (Patrinos and Psacharopoulos 2004; Oreopoulos
and Salvanes 2011; Bentaouet-Kattan and Székely 2014).


Across Latin America, school dropout is a pipeline for expanding the population of underskilled
and underengaged youth, contributing to social and economic challenges (Cardenas, De Hoyos,
and Székely 2015). Several branches of research from North America, Latin America, and other
regions have focused on identifying the causes of dropout, and point to multiple, interacting factors
that affect learning, progression through grades, and ultimately dropout. Economics literature on
dropout starts from the foundational human capital theory, in which individuals decide whether to
persist or drop out of school by weighing the marginal expected costs of continuing investment in
education (such as school fees and the opportunity cost of lost earnings) against the marginal
expected benefits of acquiring more years of schooling (such as increased future wages from higher
skills) (Becker 1967). Several authors have identified a range of individual, community, and
broader factors that help shape these costs and benefits for each student, as well as the decision-
making processes used to compare them, such as household wealth, schooling quality, and labor
market conditions (Behrman, de Hoyos, and Szekely 2015; Adelman and Székely 2016). A large
education literature focuses on dropout as the ultimate outcome of a process of disengagement
from school, and demonstrates that dropouts can be grouped into distinct typologies, based on the
factors driving their decision (Fortin et al 2006; Ananga 2011; Bowers and Sprott 2012).

                                                  2
Consequently, a range of interventions can be effective at reducing dropout and increasing
attainment depending on the context, from conditional cash transfers to providing information on
returns to schooling, to training on socio-emotional skills (Barrera-Osorio et al 2011; Nguyen
2008; Jensen 2010; Fryer 2013; Avitabile and de Hoyos 2015; Heller et al 2016).


While understanding why students drop out is critical, the ability of policy makers to respond
effectively depends on answering an even more fundamental question – who is most likely to drop
out? This question may appear relatively easy to answer, particularly in countries, regions, or
localities with high dropout rates, as one might assume dropouts are concentrated in particularly
disadvantaged or dysfunctional schools, or among students with particular characteristics.
However, dropouts are often spread throughout schools and not readily identifiable by single
characteristics, reflecting the complexity of the issue as documented in the dropout typology
literature mentioned above. For example, in Guatemala, one of the countries in this study, over
half of sixth grade students who drop out in the transition to lower secondary are spread across
70% of the country’s primary schools, where the dropout rate is below 50%, and while 50% of
students who score in the lowest quartile of a sixth-grade standardized exam drop out, so do 20%
of those who score in the highest quartile.


Accurately identifying students at risk of dropping out in order to target effective interventions to
where they are most needed is particularly important in contexts of limited resources and
competing priorities, which describes most of the world’s education systems. Largely based on
the rich administrative data available in many U.S. school systems, research on dropout prediction
is providing an increasingly sound empirical base for accurately predicting who will drop out
several months to several years before dropout occurs, and over 30 U.S. states currently have in
place some form of “early warning” system (O’Cummings and Therriault 2015). Similarly, the
majority of European countries report monitoring “early warning” signs of potential dropout
through their management information systems, primarily at the school level, but in some cases
nationally (European Commission 2013).         For many middle-income countries, which have
invested in setting up information management systems in recent years, answering the prediction
problem of dropout is now becoming possible through the use of consistent student-level data. In
both Guatemala and Honduras, for example, student and school-level data are now digitalized in

                                                 3
networked administrative databases, including unique student identifiers that allow tracking
students over time, and, in the case of Guatemala, that can be directly linked to standardized test
data.


In this paper, we make use of these administrative data to estimate early warning models of dropout
in primary and secondary school.1 Using linear regressions and basic prediction concepts, we are
able to accurately predict approximately 80% of the sixth-grade students who dropped out within
the next year in Guatemala and Honduras, performing at comparable levels to models used in the
U.S. These early warning models, which are based on routinely collected data and relatively
simple analytical techniques, are feasible to implement in a wide range of country contexts. By
providing an accurate means of targeting, these models could substantially reduce the
misallocation of program resources: in a simple simulation of a modest dropout prevention
program, targeting students based on these models rather than targeting poor municipalities or
high-dropout schools could reduce misallocation of resources by 30 to 80%.


The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the concepts and
empirical evidence on early warning systems, which primarily come from the U.S. Section 3
describes the data and the current dropout situation in both Guatemala and Honduras, while Section
4 presents the results of constructing early warning models. Section 5 concludes with a brief
summary of the findings and suggestions for future research.

    2. Predicting dropout: Concepts and evidence

The quantitative literature on dropout prediction stretches back at least 30 years in the U.S. and
Canada, and includes a variety of methods ranging from using single variables (often called
“dropout flags”) to applied statistical learning (or “machine learning”) based on large data sets (in
terms of both number of variables and number of observations). This research has been primarily
concerned with using readily available data to provide accurate predictions to school system
managers on who is most likely to drop out prior to completing a full course of primary or
secondary education.        The variables used for prediction are based on both the conceptual

1
 The authors thank the Ministry of Education of Guatemala (Ministerio de Educación –MINEDUC) and the Secretary
of Education of Honduras (Secretaría de Educación – SEDUC) for providing access to the anonymized administrative
data on which this study is based.

                                                       4
underpinnings discussed in the previous section and on the types of data usually available in school
systems’ administrative information systems. This means that in practice most dropout prediction
is based on indicators of students’ engagement in school and learning – such as attendance,
behavioral infractions, course grades, and exam performance – as well as some socioeconomic
characteristics – such as race and qualification for support programs (e.g. free lunch).


While most papers on the subject assert that their preferred method yields accurate predictions, the
literature has been limited by use of inconsistent language and metrics for defining accuracy. In a
2013 systematic review, Bowers, Sprott, and Taff lay out a common set of prediction concepts and
measure the existing literature against these metrics, finding substantial variation in the accuracy
of prediction across methods. Below, we borrow from their review to describe the prediction
concepts upon which our results are based.


The accuracy of predicting a binary outcome like dropout is illustrated by the simple event table
in Table 1 (Bowers, Sprott, and Taff 2013; Stuit et al 2016). In order to provide useful information
to policy makers attempting to target resources, the objective of most dropout prediction is to
maximize sensitivity (the share of eventual dropouts correctly identified), while minimizing the
rate of false positives (students identified as likely to drop out who in fact will not) (Gleason and
Dynarski 2002). The rates of false positives and false negatives (students identified as likely to
graduate who in fact will drop out) corresponds to the concepts of Type I and Type II errors,
respectively, in statistical hypothesis testing (Sheskin 2004; Rogosa 2005).


These two objectives, of maximizing sensitivity and minimizing false positives, may be at odds
with each other, as predictions that identify the majority of dropouts can often also incorrectly
classify many students as dropouts. For example, several studies included in Bowers, Sprott, and
Taff’s review of single dropout flags achieve sensitivities of over 80% (e.g., correctly predicting
over 80% of eventual dropouts), but have false positive rates over 50% (e.g., incorrectly predicting
that over 50% of eventual graduates will drop out). The tradeoff between these two objectives can
be measured using a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve from the signal detection
literature, which simply plots sensitivity (or true-positive proportion) against the false-positive
proportion in x-y space for a given dropout prediction measure (Bowers, Sprott, and Taff 2013).

                                                 5
As Figure 1 illustrates, perfect dropout prediction would correctly classify all eventual dropouts
and graduates, while random guessing would on average produce an equal number of false
positives and false negatives. For any given dropout prediction measure, a ROC curve can be
plotted based on the cutoff value set to define who is classified as a future dropout, and the optimal
cutoff value determined through one of several related methods to trade off sensitivity and false-
positives, including by setting the value at the point closest to perfect prediction (Fluss, Faraggi,
and Reiser 2005; Liu 2012).


Based on these concepts of prediction accuracy, Bowers, Sprott, and Taff (2013) find that a large
share of dropout predictors (across methodologies) perform quite badly, either identifying only a
very small share of all eventual dropouts (clustering in the bottom right-hand corner of the ROC
graph) or being only marginally better than random guessing (close to the 45-degree line). The
most accurate predictors in their review all use growth mixture modeling, a form of multivariate
longitudinal analysis that follows the academic trajectory of individual students, for example
modeling learning outcomes over time (Muthen 2004; Janosz et al 2008; Bowers and Sprott 2012).
These prediction methods achieve 80-90% sensitivity (correctly identifying 80-90% of eventual
dropouts as being likely to drop out), and 10-20% false-positive rates (incorrectly identifying 10-
20% of eventual graduates as being likely to drop out). The relatively strong performance of these
approaches accords with intuition, as dropout is generally considered the manifestation of a
process of disengagement, rather than a discrete decision (Balfanz, Herzog, and MacIver 2007;
Programa Estado de la Nacion 2013; Frazelle and Nagel 2015).               However, the high data
requirements and relative complexity of these approaches limit their usefulness for most school
systems.


The next best performing methods are in fact much more simple and usable. The ‘On-Track
Indicator’ used in Chicago is a binary indicator of two underlying measures of students’
performance in the first grade of secondary school: earning the minimum number of course credits
required for promotion to the next grade, and not earning more than one semester ‘F’ in any core
courses. This indicator achieves 75% sensitivity and a 16% false-positive rate, and is in active use
in the Chicago public school system (Allensworth and Easton 2005, 2007). Similarly, Bowers
(2010) finds that logistic regressions including indicators of ever having repeated a grade and

                                                  6
annual grade point average are able to achieve 81% specificity and a 25% false-positive rate in
two school districts in the U.S.


While these results assess dropout prediction based on performance in-sample, the true test for the
accuracy of prediction models is performance outside of the sample on which the models are
estimated. Using administrative data on attendance, behavioral violations, standardized test
scores, and demographic characteristics from the state of Wisconsin, Knowles (2015) estimates a
range of models, from standard logistic regression to support vector machines, on a “training
sample” and then tests their accuracy out of sample, finding that logistic regression models perform
very well relative to more complex algorithms. Similarly, using rich administrative data in
Denmark, Sara et al (2015) show that machine learning algorithms “trained” on one data set can
achieve sensitivities over 90% (with false-positive rates around 20%) out of sample when
predicting high school dropout over three-month intervals.


Overall, then, evidence is substantial that who will drop out can be accurately predicted using high-
quality administrative data in the U.S. as well as Europe. We are not aware, however, of any
studies investigating this question in the context of a developing country, where data requirements
have only recently been met and dropout is often a much more widespread issue. This paper
therefore provides one of the first applications of dropout prediction methodologies in lower
middle-income education systems, made possible by the remarkable efforts of the ministries of
education in both Guatemala and Honduras. Furthermore, unlike much of the existing U.S.
research, we estimate models at the national level instead that at the state/province level. This is
possible because in both countries the administrative data are harmonized, aggregated, and
analyzed at the federal level.




                                                 7
    3. Administrative data and dropouts in Guatemala and Honduras

    3.1 Guatemala
Over the last several years, the Guatemalan Ministry of Education (Ministerio de Educación -
MINEDUC) has substantially improved and expanded their administrative information system
based on student-level records. One of the main innovations was the implementation of a unique
student identifier, which started in upper secondary in 2009 and was progressively expanded until
all students in primary and secondary schools were assigned unique identifiers in 2011. These
identifiers are used by each school at the beginning of the school year to provide data on enrollment
to the Ministry. Specifically, schools provide a list of all students who are enrolled in each grade,
with their unique identifiers, and the Ministry centralizes and consolidates this information in a
database that contains the annual enrollment status of all students (nearly 4 million each year) from
2011 to 2016. This data structure allows the educational trajectories of students to be followed
through time, and specifically enables the identification of those who drop out and the year in
which they left school. In addition to students’ unique identifiers, the data also include information
on student’s gender, school year, and results of their October final examination (promoted, not
promoted, withdrew), as well as school’s sector (formal public, private, cooperative, municipal),
teaching modality (bilingual, monolingual), municipality, department, and school identifier. 2,3


These basic administrative microdata on enrollment can then be matched with additional data on
student and school characteristics from the National Evaluation of Students. These assessments
have been conducted in the first, third and sixth grades of primary education, the last grade of
lower secondary education (ninth grade), and the last grade of upper secondary, with variable
frequency.4 The evaluations in secondary education are applied to all the students in the



2 The formal public sector is the group of schools that are under the direct administration of MINEDUC. The municipal
sector is composed of public schools administered by municipalities. The cooperative sector comprises public schools
with a tripartite administration that involves the participation of MINEDUC, the municipality, and student’s parents.
3
  Bilingual schools are institutions where instruction is offered in both Spanish and an indigenous language.
4
  The National Evaluations are conducted every year in the last grade of upper secondary, but the implementation in
other grades has been less regular: 2006, 2009, and 2013 for ninth grade; 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2013, and
2014 for third and sixth grade; and 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2010 for first grade. While this could limit the capacity of
implementing an early warning system every year, the Government of Guatemala and the World Bank are working
on replicating the analysis but using students‘ grades collected on a yearly basis.

                                                         8
corresponding grade, while the assessments in primary school only cover a random sample of the
students in the formal public sector, excluding those children attending private, cooperative, and
municipal schools.


In this paper, we combine information from the enrollment database and the National Evaluations
conducted in sixth and ninth grades in 2013 to follow the educational trajectories of the cohort of
students evaluated that year. Specifically, we focus on the random sample of 19,000 students in
public schools assessed in sixth grade (6.5% of the sixth graders in the sector, 5.7% of all sixth
graders) and the census of 196,000 students in all schools evaluated in ninth grade. As discussed
later, these are critical grades for school dropout in both Guatemala and Honduras. National
Evaluations provide data not only on students’ reading and math abilities, but also on several self-
reported characteristics including their motivation and interest in learning, parents’ characteristics
(e.g. education, occupation), and household resources. While these data are quite rich, records are
only complete for about 60% of the random sample, as many students do not fully complete the
questionnaires – in all the analysis presented, we drop all incomplete records.5 Because the analysis
is done at the national level, we complement these data with information at the department level
on the gender-specific high school wage premium from Guatemala’s national household survey,
the Encuesta de Condiciones de Vida (ENCOVI) 2014, as an attempt to capture some basic
characteristics of the local labor market that may affect the decision to drop out of school. Table
A1 in the Appendix presents the definitions of all the variables that are used in the analysis, as
well as some descriptive statistics for the cohort of students who were evaluated in sixth and ninth
grades in 2013.


Dropout rates calculated using the administrative enrollment data confirm that a large proportion
of youth leave school before graduating from secondary school in Guatemala. In particular, we
focus on three different periods in which dropout is particularly high: the transition from primary
to lower secondary education (Ciclo Básico), during lower secondary education, and the transition
from lower to upper secondary education (Ciclo Diversificado). Figure 2 shows the dropout rates
in each of these periods for the cohort of students under analysis. Fully one-quarter of the students


5
  In results that are not presented, multiple imputation techniques for the missing data are used, producing results
that are highly consistent with those presented.

                                                           9
evaluated in the last grade of primary education (sixth grade) dropped out in the transition from
primary to lower secondary, 18% of the remaining three-quarters (14% overall) left during lower
secondary school, and 32% of the students who managed to reach the last year of lower secondary
dropped out in the transition to upper secondary. Taken altogether, these figures imply a survival
rate from sixth to tenth grade of 42%, meaning that the majority of sixth grade students drop out
during this four-year period.6 This pattern is consistent with the information that emerges from
household surveys in Guatemala: for example, Adelman and Székely (2016) find that for the cohort
reaching age 18 in 2012-2014, the percentage of youth enrolled in any grade falls from 80% to
47% from age 12 to 16.


While administrative enrollment data have several advantages for the study of school dropout, the
records are still in an incipient phase of development and therefore subject to some error. In
Guatemala, school principals (and teachers) manually enter information into a web-based
information system, creating the possibility of typographical mistakes, incomplete data, and other
human errors. Therefore, it is possible that some students who are not listed as enrolled in a
particular year are not real dropouts (i.e. our data could overestimate the dropout rate). Some
inconsistencies in the educational trajectories of the students have also been found (e.g., students
skipping grades from one year to the next). To address this, a new data platform was implemented
in 2015, with automatic flags to substantially reduce inconsistencies and improve the quality of
data entered. Nevertheless, as we discussed above, when we compare the survival rates estimated
with both administrative and household survey data we find similar rates, suggesting that the
measurement error of dropout is relatively small in our data set.

    3.2 Honduras
In Honduras, the Secretaría de Educación (SEDUC) began collecting administrative records in
2013. Student information is reported by teachers in both public and private institutions, who input
their rosters into a web-based system. These records gather information for all formal sector
students in Honduras and allow the tracking of the same children over time (about 1.5 million).



6
  As previously mentioned, the dropout rates in the transition from primary to lower secondary education and within
lower secondary are based on a sample of students in the official sector, which represents 87% of all the students in
sixth grade in 2013.

                                                         10
SEDUC estimates a coverage rate of 97%, which has improved in the two subsequent years for
which data are available.


Given the recent implementation of the database, it contains limited information. Besides
individual enrollment status, the data include some demographics (gender and age), attendance
rates, whether the child attends a public or private institution, and current grade. Unlike in
Guatemala, more detailed socioeconomic information for students or their household is
unavailable. While recent data exist on exam scores, they cannot be matched to our sample because
they use different individual identifiers, an issue that has only recently been addressed by SEDUC.


We therefore augment SEDUC’s student data with municipal-level indicators from several
sources. First, we add a set of school supply and quality indicators. The number of schools per
municipality is included to measure educational supply at the extensive margin. These indicators
are weighted by their target population using data from the National Statistics Institute. We first
calculate the number of children in each municipality of primary (6-11) and secondary (12-18)
age. Then, the number of primary and secondary schools is divided by the target population (in
thousands). To measure intensive-margin educational supply, we take the number of available
teaching positions in 2015 and weigh them by the target population in each municipality.7 Quality
indicators correspond to municipality-level infrastructure indices from the 2013 school census
collected for the School Infrastructure Master Plan (Plan Maestro de Infraestructura Educativa).
These indices are on a scale from zero to one, and we include a summary measure that is a weighted
average of six dimensions: furnishings, basic services, natural disasters, social threats, hydro-
sanitary issues, and physical infrastructure.8


Second, we add a set of municipal-level socioeconomic indicators. Honduras is classified as one
of the most violent countries in the world (World Bank 2011), but there remains limited evidence

7
  Available teaching positions do not necessarily correspond to filled vacancies. For instance, a municipality may have
10 available positions, but only 8 employed teachers. The data do not allow us to make this distinction.
8
  Each index is comprised of multiple indicators (Secretary of Education, 2014). The furnishings index captures the
number of desks and blackboards. The basic services index is an average of access to electricity, running water, and
sewers. The natural disaster index measures how unlikely it is that a school is affected by floods, landslides strong
winds, and earthquakes. The social threat index measures how difficult it is to access and consume alcohol, cigarettes,
and illicit drugs. The hydro-sanitary index captures the state of sinks, toilets, and urinals. The physical infrastructure
index evaluates how well the building, classrooms, and environments are suited for students to receive lessons.

                                                           11
on how crime correlates with schooling outcomes. Students are assigned the annual homicide rate
for their municipality (per 100,000 population), taken from the Online Police Statistical System
(Sistema Estadístico Policial en Línea - SEPOL).9 We also include the following municipal-level
indicators from the 2001 Population Census: unsatisfied basic needs (UBNs) poverty, the share of
ethnic minority population, average years of education, average pre-school enrollment rates,
average rates of child labor, the adolescent birth rate, and the share of households with migrants
outside Honduras.


Dropout rates in Honduras vary across the school cycle. While only 8.8% of children drop out in
primary school, this fraction increases substantially thereafter. Like Guatemala, dropout is
particularly high in the transition from primary to lower secondary education (Ciclo Básico),
during lower secondary education, and in the transition from lower to upper secondary education
(Ciclo Diversificado). Figure 3 shows that 37.4% abandon school in the transition from primary
to lower secondary, 18.4% drop out within lower secondary, and about 33.2% do not continue into
upper secondary. Taken altogether, these figures imply a survival rate from sixth to tenth grade of
34%, meaning that the majority of sixth grade students drop out during this four-year period.

These rates are somewhat higher than household survey estimates but follow the same pattern. For
the last available household survey in 2014, which collects data on children’s grade progression,
the dropout rate for the transition into lower secondary is 27%, 13% within lower secondary, and
21% during the transition from lower to upper secondary. Adelman and Székely (2016) also report
similar trends when using age groups.

As with the Guatemalan data, this method of data collection has only been recently implemented
and there remains room for improvement. Teacher reporting of student outcomes is potentially
prone to input errors, which may result in measurement bias, although we are unable to determine
their extent or direction. As noted in the previous paragraph, one potential outcome is that we may
overestimate dropout rates. However, the administrative data present many advantages over
household surveys, mainly sample size and nationwide coverage. Data collection is also constantly
improving, due to efforts from USINIEH to ensure correct data input and quality control at


9
    Municipal-level homicide rates are publicly available at the SEPOL website: www.sepol.hn.

                                                         12
different stages. Furthermore, as long as the inflated dropout rates are driven by classical (random)
measurement error, this would just lower the accuracy of our model. In that scenario, our estimates
give us a lower bound of the accuracy levels of the model, and hence we would expect a better
performance as the quality of the panel improves over time. Indeed, as we will show in the next
section, the models work better in Guatemala, where the measurement error of dropout is much
lower.

   4. Who will drop out: Empirical predictions

   4.1 Results
In our analysis, we focus on three periods during which both Guatemala and Honduras lose the
majority of students to dropout: the transition between primary and lower secondary school, within
lower secondary, and the transition from lower secondary to upper secondary. For ease of
exposition, below we present the results of using data available in year t to predict who will drop
out in the transition from primary to lower secondary in year t+1. Additional results on predicting
dropouts within lower secondary and in the transition from lower to upper secondary, are presented
in the Appendix.


We follow the method of Knowles (2015) and Stuit et al (2016) in estimating dropout models in
three steps. These prediction models are based on the conceptual framing of dropout as a decision
that can be affected by a broad range of underlying factors discussed in Section 1, and include all
of the available covariates that could reasonably capture one of these factors. In this way,
prediction modeling differs from other exercises that estimate the correlational or causal
relationships between specific factors and dropout. First, we estimate linear probability models
with     dropout   as   a   binary   outcome,   using   the   individual/household,    school,   and
municipality/department-level covariates described in the previous section.           However, for
Guatemala, given the large number of variables available to include in the models we add a ‘zero
step’: we combine the information from several highly correlated variables that measure similar
characteristics and construct indices using a Principal Component Analysis (Pearson 1901;
Hotelling 1933; Jolliffe 2002). These indices were obtained as component scores for the first




                                                 13
principal component and enable us to estimate a parsimonious model with almost no loss in the
accuracy of the prediction. 10 Table 2 shows the different specifications used in each country.11


Treating the estimated y-hats as dropout probabilities, we then construct a ROC curve by varying
the cutoff point above which a student is identified as a predicted dropout. Each possible cutoff
has a particular sensitivity and false-positive proportion associated to it. Therefore, in the third
step we select the point that minimizes the distance from perfect prediction (the (0,1) point) and
evaluate the models at this optimal cutoff.


Figure 4 shows the ROC curves for each model. The graphs show that even simple models work
much better than random guesses (represented by the 45-degree line). In Honduras, model 1—
which only includes basic demographic variables and a few municipal-level covariates— is
noticeably above of the 45-degree line. For example, if we consider a 25% false-positive
proportion, we could gain almost 40 percentage points of sensitivity by including these basic
variables. Similar results are observed in Guatemala when we consider individual-level data
(including test scores). As we include more information, not surprisingly, the models become more
accurate. In particular, adding school fixed effects improves the performance of the models
substantially.


Figure 5 tests whether the specification that uses all available variables is statistically different
than a random guess. We estimate sensitivity and false positives at 100 different cutoffs by
bootstrap to obtain a 95% confidence interval. In both Guatemala and Honduras, we find that these
models are significantly better than a random guess.

Table 3 assesses the models in terms of sensitivity, false-positive proportion, and overall accuracy
at the optimal cutoff value. In our preferred specification, we are able to correctly identify 80%
of sixth grade students who will drop out in the transition to lower secondary, with a false-positive
proportion close to 20%. Importantly, these accuracy levels are comparable to those observed in



10
  See Tables A1(a) and A1(b) in the Appendix and the notes below these tables for a description of the variables
involved in their computation.
11
     Estimation results are presented in the Appendix.

                                                         14
developed countries. Furthermore, as will be discussed later, these models allow targeting
mechanisms that are more accurate than other commonly used approaches.

     4.2 Out-of-sample performance


While these models perform very well on the data on which they are constructed, we conduct two
validation exercises to assess their performance out of sample. First, following the prediction
literature, for each country we conduct a K-fold cross-validation, where the data is randomly
divided into K “folds” or sub-samples (Knowles 2015). We present the results here for K=5 folds,
but obtain similar results varying K between 3 and 8.12 The prediction models are then estimated
on four of the folds, and predictions made based on the models for each of the five folds. We then
calculate sensitivity and false-positive proportions in sample (the four folds on which the model is
estimated) and out of sample (the left-out fifth fold). This procedure, starting with the random
division of the data into folds, is repeated 100 times to obtain the statistics presented in Table 4.
While the models’ out-of-sample performance is worse than in-sample, it remains reasonably good
compared to other prediction models used in the U.S. context and significantly better than random
guessing (Bowers, Sprott, and Taff 2013).


In Honduras, we can also perform what is arguably the best type of validation exercise for the
model’s out of sample prediction. Specifically, we estimate Model 3 in 2014 to predict the
likelihood of dropping out in 2015. We use the optimal cutoff for 2013 and classify students at risk
and not at risk. Then we check the efficiency of the early warning system. Results are shown in
Figure 6. The method performs quite well out of sample, with a sensitivity rate of 76.3% and a
false-positive proportion of 15.9%.



Finally, we consider the accuracy of the targeting facilitated by these models in relation to other
potential targeting approaches through a simple simulation. In the scenario considered, a dropout
prevention program for sixth graders has a fixed budget of either $1M, $2M, or $4M US in total
and costs $200 US per student to implement, meaning that 5,000, 10,000, or 20,000 students can

12
  While no hard-and-fast rules exist around the optimal K, tradeoffs between bias and variance can help guide the
choice, and K= 5 and K = 10 are commonly used (Kohavi 1995; Borra and Di Ciaccio 2010).

                                                        15
participate. In Guatemala, approximately 90,000 sixth graders drop out before enrolling in seventh
grade, while in Honduras, approximately 40,000 do. How should students be targeted for this
program in each country? In Table 5, we compare the early warning models to two other possible
targeting approaches – targeting students in the poorest municipalities and targeting schools with
the highest dropout rates. In both countries, the early warning models perform substantially better
than the other options in identifying students who will eventually drop out, particularly for the
smaller program sizes, and targeting students based on these models rather than targeting poor
municipalities or high-dropout schools could reduce misallocation of resources by 30 to 80%.13
However, school-level targeting also performs well and could be the most suitable targeting
approach for interventions with substantial economies of scale.


     5. Conclusions

Many developing countries, including Guatemala and Honduras, are approaching universal
primary school enrollment and have also made substantial progress in expanding access to
secondary school. However, dropout is a pressing concern for policy makers in both countries, as
fewer than 50% of young people succeed in completing a full course of basic education. Policies
and programs aimed at reducing dropout may be made more effective when education systems are
able to identify with reasonable accuracy the students who are most likely to leave school early.


In both Guatemala and Honduras, substantial advances in the scope and reliability of education
administrative data have created an opportunity to do just that, as illustrated in this paper. Using
routinely collected administrative data and relatively simple analytical techniques, we show that
early warning models can accurately predict which students will drop out, providing potentially
actionable information to system and school leaders. The results immediately suggest two areas
for further exploration: improving the early warning analysis and moving from early warning
analysis to “early warning systems”.




13
   The calculation on reduced misallocation is based on comparing the dollars wasted in Table 3. In Guatemala, due
to the presence of missing data in the covariates used in the early warning system, the sample has been restricted to
be exactly the same across the three methods to allocate resources.

                                                        16
Our analysis augments the most basic administrative data with additional data to improve the
quality of prediction (in the case of Guatemala, with periodic national exam data for primary
students; in the case of Honduras, with household survey and census data). This augmentation
could affect the consistency of the prediction from year to year, as the availability of household
survey and other data varies over time. It could also make the approach more difficult to replicate
for practitioners within ministries of education, who may not be familiar with accessing and
analyzing these other data sources. However, as mentioned above, in both countries more and
more variables are being routinely collected over time, which will reduce the need to pull data
from other sources and also could serve to improve the quality of prediction. In addition, as
mentioned for Guatemala, a greater focus on obtaining complete data for each student would be
critical to improving the quality and usefulness of the predictions.


While this paper has focused on the feasibility of making accurate and replicable predictions of
who is most likely to drop out, this is only a first step towards developing an effective early
warning system, and a natural question immediately arises – what to do with the data? Maintaining
confidentiality, avoiding negative labeling of students, and identifying resources to act
appropriately on the predictions are all among the potential important concerns. Moreover, the
predictions in and of themselves do not identify the main factors that put any given student at risk
of dropping out, information which is critical to providing effective interventions. A complete
discussion about setting up an effective early warning system merits its own paper, but many
lessons learned have emerged from the experiences of school districts in the U.S. These include
clearly communicating the meaning of the predictions; defining roles at all levels in terms of who
should receive what information and who is responsible for taking what actions; empowering local
school officials to identify and implement relevant, customized prevention measures; and taking
an iterative approach to facilitate learning from initial pilots (O’Cummings and Therriault 2015).
These and other lessons learned from international experiences, combined with a strong knowledge
of local contexts, show a path forward for responding effectively to the dropout crisis in
Guatemala, Honduras, and many other countries.




                                                 17
References

Adelman, Melissa and Miguel Székely. 2016. “School Dropout in Central America: An
Overview of Trends, Causes, Consequences, and Promising Interventions.” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 7561. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Allensworth, E. M., & J.Q. Easton. 2007. What Matters for Staying On-track and Graduating in
Chicago Public High Schools: A Close Look at Course Grades, Failures, and Attendance in the
Freshman Year. Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School Research.

Avitabile, Ciro and Rafael de Hoyos. 2014. “Heterogeneous Effects of Information about the
Returns to Schooling on Student Learning: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial in
Mexico.” World Bank Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Balfanz, Robert, Liza Herzog, and Douglas MacIver. 2007. “Preventing Student Disengagement
and Keeping Students on the Graduation Path in Urban Middle-Grades Schools: Early
Identification and Effective Interventions.” Educational Psychologist 42(4): 223-235.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle. 2011.
“Improving the Design of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized
Education Experiment in Colombia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(2):
167-195.

Bassi, Marina, Matias Busso, and Juan Muñoz. 2016. “Is the Glass Half Empty or Half Full?
School Enrollment, Graduation, and Dropout Rates in Latin America.” Economia (forthcoming).

Becker, Gary. Human Capital. New York: Columbia University Press, 1964.

Behrman, Jere, Rafael de Hoyos, and Miguel Székely. 2015. “Out of School and Out of Work: A
Conceptual Framework for Investigating “Ninis” in Latin America and the Caribbean.”
Washington, DC: World Bank. Background paper for the “Out of School, Out of Work” study.

Bentaouet-Kattan, R., and Székely, M. 2015. “Patterns, Consequences and Possible Causes of
Dropout in Upper Secondary Education in Mexico.” Education Research International, Volume
2015, Article ID 676472.

Borra, Simone and Agostino Di Ciaccio. 2010. “Measuring the Prediction Error: A Comparison
of Cross-Validation, Bootstrap and Covariance Penalty Methods.” Computational Statistics &
Data Analysis 54(12): 2976-2989.

Bowers, Alex. 2010. “Grades and Graduation: A Longitudinal Risk Perspective to Identify
Student Dropouts.” Journal of Educational Research 103(3): 191–207.

Bowers, Alex and Ryan Sprott. 2012. “Why Tenth Graders Fail to Finish High School: A
Dropout Typology Latent Class Analysis.” The Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk
(JESPAR) 17(3): 129-148.

                                             18
Bowers, Alex, Ryan Sprott, and Sherry Taff. 2013. “Do We Know Who Will Drop Out? A
Review of the Predictors of Dropping out of High School: Precision, Sensitivity, and
Specificity.” The High School Journal 96(2): 77-100.

Cardenas, Mauricio, Rafael de Hoyos, and Miguel Székely. 2015. “Out of School and Out of
Work Youth in Latin America: a Persistent Problem in a Decade of Prosperity.” Economia 16(1).

Estado de la Nación. 2013. Estado de la Educación Costarricense. San José, Costa Rica: Estado
de la Nación.

European Commission. 2013. Early Warning Systems in Europe: Practice, Methods, and
Lessons. Thematic Working Group on Early School Leaving. Brussels: European Commission.

Frazelle, Sarah and Aisling Nagel. 2015. A Practitioner’s Guide to Implementing Early Warning
Systems. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences,
National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educaitonal
Laboratory Northwest.

Hotelling, H. 1933. “Analysis of a Complex of Statistical Variables Into Principal Components.”
Journal of Educational Psychology, 24: 417-441 and 498-520.

Jensen, Robert. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2): 515-548.

Jolliffe, I.T. 2002. Principal Component Analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.

Fryer, Roland. 2013. “Information and Student Achievement: Evidence from a Cellular Phone
Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 19113.

Gleason, P., and M. Dynarski. 2002. “Do We Know Whom to Serve? Issues in Using Risk
Factors to Identify Dropouts.” Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk 7(1): 25–41.

Heller, Sara, Anuj Shah, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Harold
Pollack. “Thinking, Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime and Dropout in
Chicago.” NBER Working Paper No.21178. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER).

Janosz, M., I. Archambault, J. Morizot, and L.S. Pagani. 2008. “School Engagement Trajectories
and their Differential Predictive Relations.” Journal of Social Issues 64(1): 21–40.

Knowles, Jared. 2015. “Of Needles and Haystacks: Building an Accurate Statewide Dropout
Early Warning System in Wisconsin.” Journal of Educational Data Mining 7(3): 18-67.

Kohavi, Ron. 1995. “A Study of Cross-Validation and Bootstrap for Accuracy Estimation and
Model Selection.” Presented at the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

                                               19
Muthén, B. O. 2004. Latent Variable Analysis: Growth Mixture Modeling and Related
Techniques for Longitudinal Data. In D. Kaplan (Ed.), The Sage handbook of quantitative
methodology for the social sciences (pp. 345–370). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Nguyen, Trang. 2008. “Information, Role Models, and the Perceived Returns to Education.”
Unpublished manuscript.

O’Cummings, Mindee and Susan Therriault. 2015. “From Accountability to Prevention: Early
Warning Systems Put Data to Work for Struggling Students.” AIR Early Warning Systems in
Education Program. Washington, D.C.: American Institutes for Research (AIR).

Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell Salvanes. 2011. “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of
Schooling.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 159-184.

Patrinos, Harry and George Psacharopoulos. 2004. “Returns to Investment in Education: a
Further Update.” Education Economics 12(2): 111-134.

Pearson, Karl. 1901. “On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space.”
Philosophical Magazine, Series 6, 2(11): 559-572.

Rogosa, David. 2005. “Statistical Misunderstandings of the Properties of School Scores and
School Accountability.” Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education 104(2):
147-174.

Sara, Nicolae-Bogdan, Rasmus Halland, Christian Igel, and Stephen Alstrup. 2015. “High-
School Dropout Prediction Using Machine Learning: A Danish Large-Scale Study.” The
European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks (ESANN) Proceedings 2015.

Sheskin, David. Handbook of Parametric and Nonparametric Statistical Procedures. Boca
Raton: Chapman & Hall / CRC Press, 2004.

Stuit, David, Mindee O’Cummings, Heather Norbury, Jessica Heppen, Sonica Dhillon, Jim
Lindsay, and Bo Zhu. 2016. Identifying Early Warning Indicators in Three Ohio School
Districts. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences,
National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional Educaitonal
Laboratory Midwest.

United Nations. 2015. The Millennium Development Goals Report. New York: United Nations.

World Bank. 2016. EdStats. Retrieved from: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/education/




                                                20
Table 1. Event table
                                                                                                            Actual event
                                                                                                 Drop out                  Graduate
                                        Prediction             Drop out                  A (True positive)         B (False positive)
                                                               Graduate                  C (False negative)        D (True negative)


Sensitivity = A / (A+C)
Precision = A / (A+B)
Specificity = D / (B+D)
False-Positive Proportion = 1-Specificity = B / (B+D)



Figure 1. ROC curve illustration

                                                Perfect prediction
                       1
   True positive proportion (Sensitivity)
               .4         .6        .8




                                                                           Random guessing: 45-degree line
    .2                 0




                                            0             .2             .4             .6             .8              1
                                                                     False positive proportion




                                                                                    21
Figure 2. Dropout rates in Guatemala

                                    35%                                                                              31.9%
  Percentage of students who



                                    30%
                                                                              24.0%
                                    25%
         dropped out




                                    20%                                                          18.4%

                                    15%
                                    10%
                                                       5%
                                                       0%
                                                                        Primary to lower      Within lower      Lower to upper
                                                                         sec. transition       secondary      secondary transition

Source: Author calculations based on administrative data on enrollment and the 2013 National Evaluations of
students
Notes: (1) Dropout rates in primary to lower secondary transition computed as the percentage of sixth grade students
evaluated in 2013 who did not enroll in 2014, 2015 and 2016. (2) Dropout rates within lower secondary computed as
the percentage of sixth grade students evaluated in 2013 who were enrolled in 2014 but did not enroll in 2015 or 2016,
excluding students who dropped out in the transition from primary to lower secondary from the calculation. (3)
Dropout rates in lower to upper secondary transition computed as the percentage of ninth grade students evaluated in
2013 who did not enroll in 2014, 2015 and 2016.


Figure 3. Dropout rates in Honduras

                                                                        40%           37.4%
                               Percentage of students who dropped out




                                                                        35%                                                          33.2%

                                                                        30%

                                                                        25%

                                                                        20%                                  18.4%

                                                                        15%

                                                                        10%

                                                                        5%

                                                                        0%
                                                                               Primary to lower sec. Within lower secondary   Lower to upper
                                                                                    transition                              secondary transition

Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH administrative data from 2013-2015
Notes: A dropout is a student who was enrolled in the previous year but did not enroll the following year.




                                                                                                             22
Table 2. Covariates included in the models of dropout in the primary to lower secondary
transition


  Specification                Guatemala                                Honduras
  Model 1         Individual level:                       Individual-level, supply-side, and
                  female, age, indigenous, works,         municipal-level:
                  housework, repeater, preschool,         male, age, attendance rate, public
                  all_school_supplies, motivation,        school, rural school, number of
                  test_score                              secondary schools, number of
                                                          teachers, summary infrastructure
                                                          index, homicide rate, poverty
                                                          (UBN), share of ethnic population,
                                                          average years of education, average
                                                          pre-school enrollment, average rate
                                                          of child labor, adolescent birth rate,
                                                          share of household with migrants
  Model 2         Individual and household level:         Individual-level and municipality
                  covariates in model 1, parents'         fixed effects:
                  maximum educational attainment          male, age, attendance rate, public
                  (dummies), help_homework,               school, rural school, municipality
                  low_quality_housing, electricity, pc,   fixed effects
                  books, goods_availability_index

  Model 3         Individual, household, and              Individual-level and school fixed
                  school/area of residence level:         effects:
                  covariates in model 2, school fixed     male, age, attendance rate, school
                  effects, hs_wage_premium                fixed effects




                                              23
Figure 4. ROC curves of the different models of dropout in the primary to lower secondary
transition
                 Guatemala                                          Honduras
        1.00
        0.75
   Sensitivity
     0.50
        0.25
        0.00




                 0.00   0.25          0.50              0.75   1.00
                                   1-Specificity

                               Model 1             Model 2
                               Model 3             Reference


 Source: Author calculations based on administrative                   Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH
 data on enrollment, National Evaluations of students                  administrative data from 2013-2015.
 (2013), and ENCOVI (2014).                                            Notes: Model 1: model with covariates at the individual,
 Notes: Model 1: model with covariates at the individual               supply-side and municipal-level variables. Model 2:
 level. Model 2: model with covariates at the individual               model with covariates at the individual and school-level,
 and household level. Model 3: model with covariates at                with municipality fixed effects. Model 3: model with
 the individual, household, and school/area of residence               covariates at the individual-level with school fixed
 level.                                                                effects.


Figure 5. ROC curves for full models of dropout in the primary to lower secondary transition:
bootstrap confidence intervals
                  Guatemala                                          Honduras




 Source: Author calculations based on administrative                   Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH
 data on enrollment, National Evaluations of students                  administrative data from 2013-2015.
 (2013), and ENCOVI (2014).                                            Notes: ROC curve for Model 3. Confidence intervals are
 Notes: ROC curve for Model 3. Confidence intervals are                calculated by 100 block bootstrap repetitions that
 calculated by 100 block bootstrap repetitions that                    resample students from schools.
 resample students from departments.




                                                                  24
Table 3. Performance of the models of dropout in the primary to lower secondary transition
                                                       False-positive
  Country and                    Sensitivity                               Overall accuracy1
                                                        proportion
  specification                   (percent)                                  (proportion)
                                                         (percent)
  Guatemala
  Model 1                            67.8                   32.9                  0.67
  Model 2                            71.6                   30.7                  0.70
  Model 3                            80.0                   21.2                  0.79
  Honduras
  Model 1                            68.8                   28.9                  0.70
  Model 2                            69.1                   27.2                  0.71
  Model 3                            78.2                   19.8                  0.79

Source: Author calculations on administrative data from Guatemala and Honduras.
Note: This is the area-under-the-curve statistic, which ranges from .50 to 1.00, with higher values associated with
higher accuracy (higher sensitivity and lower false-positive proportion).




                                                         25
Table 4. Out-of-sample performance in Guatemala and Honduras based on K-fold cross validation

                   Mean               SD                Min                Max

 Transition from primary to lower secondary: Guatemala

 Sensitivity

 In sample         81.27              0.52              80.10              82.40

 Out of sample     69.26              0.72              67.95              70.67



 False-Positive Proportion

 In sample         20.94              0.47              19.90              21.98

 Out of sample     24.51              0.52              23.54              25.74

 Transition from primary to lower secondary: Honduras

 Sensitivity

 In sample         78.26              0.16              77.94              78.64

 Out of sample     72.27              0.19              71.87              72.73



 False-Positive Proportion

 In sample         19.04              0.18              18.68              19.48

 Out of sample     21.73              0.19              21.37              22.17




                                             26
Figure 6. Out-of-sample performance of early warning system in Honduras
             90.0
                          78.2          76.3
             80.0

             70.0

             60.0
   Percent




             50.0

             40.0

             30.0
                                                                              19.8
             20.0                                                                               15.9

             10.0

              0.0
                             Sensitivity                                       False alarm rate

                        In sample (2013-2014)              Out of sample (2014-2015)


Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH administrative data from 2013-2015


Table 5. Relative performance of the early warning system as a method to allocate limited
resources ($200 US per student)
                                                                               Method of allocation
                      Number of        Municipality poverty rates              School dropout rates                           EWS
Country
                       students        True     False        Dollars        True     False         Dollars        True     False      Dollars
                                     positives positives     wasted       positives positives      wasted       positives positives   wasted
Guatemala                    5,000     45%       55%          $ 552,022     93%        7%            $ 72,772     99%        1%         $ 8,319
                            10,000     43%       57%       $ 1,143,022      86%       14%           $ 277,037     89%       11%       $ 210,860
                            20,000     35%       65%       $ 2,609,953      73%       27%         $ 1,086,566     78%       22%       $ 898,115
Honduras                     5,000     58%       42%        $ 418,000       87%       13%           $ 129,000     99%        1%         $ 6,200
                            10,000     60%       40%        $ 798,200       82%       18%           $ 364,000     99%        1%        $ 12,400
                            20,000     56%       44%       $ 1,748,000      74%       26%         $ 1,046,800     95%       5%        $ 188,200
Source: Author calculations based on administrative data from Guatemala and Honduras.
Notes: The allocation of resources by municipality poverty rates selects the students who live in the municipalities
with the highest poverty rates. The allocation of resources by school dropout rates selects the students who are in the
schools with highest dropout rates in the sixth to seventh grade transition. The allocation of resources using the early
warning system selects the students who have the highest predicted probability of dropout according to the model in
Table A6. True positives are the percentage of hypothetical beneficiaries who dropout in the transition from primary
to lower secondary, and false positives are the percentage who do not dropout in this transition. Dollars wasted are
computed as $200 x Number of students x False positives.




                                                                  27
Appendix
Table A1. Variable definitions and summary statistics, Guatemala
(a) Guatemala: cohort of students evaluated in sixth grade in 2013

Name of variable           Definition                                                                       Observations   Mean     Std. Dev.
female                     1 = Female                                                                          18197        0.50      0.50
age                        Age (in years)                                                                      18176       13.02      1.17
indigenous                 1 = Indigenous (speaks maya, xinka or garifuna)                                     18196        0.20      0.40
works                      1 = works                                                                           17591        0.34      0.47
housework                  1 = helps with housework                                                            17725        0.96      0.20
repeater                   1 = Repeated a grade                                                                17918        0.30      0.46
preschool                  1 = Attended preprimary education                                                   17643        0.73      0.44
all_school_supplies        1 = Student has all the school supplies (books, exercise books, pencil, etc.)       18197        0.56      0.50
motivated_bylearning       1 = Student attends school because she is motivated by learning                     18099        0.68      0.47
likes_reading              1 = Student likes reading                                                           16385        0.97      0.17
                                                           1
motivation                 Index of motivation at school                                                       16309        0.00      1.00
reading_score              Measure of student's ability in reading (expressed in logits)                       18147        0.06      0.94
math_score                 Measure of student's ability in math (expressed in logits)                          17908        0.17      0.83
                                                                   1
test_score                 Index of reading and math test scores                                               17872        0.00      1.00
noschool                   1 = Parents did not attend school                                                   15828        0.26      0.44
primary                    1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is primary                              15828        0.44      0.50
lowersecondary             1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is lower secondary                      15828        0.14      0.35
uppersecondary             1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is upper secondary                      15828        0.06      0.23
some_college               1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is some college                         15828        0.03      0.17
college                    1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is complete college                     15828        0.07      0.26
help_homework              1 = Someone at home helps the student with homework                                 17531        0.43      0.50
low_quality_floor          1 = Floor made of low quality materials (soil)                                      18016        0.25      0.43
low_quality_walls          1 = Walls made of low quality materials (sheet)                                     18061        0.06      0.24
low_quality_water          1 = Water source is of low quality (natural source or well)                         17957        0.29      0.45
                                                         1
low_quality_housing        Index of low quality housing                                                        17684        0.00      1.00
electricity                1 = Electricity at home                                                             17967        0.85      0.36
pc                         1 = Personal computer at home                                                       18120        0.31      0.46
books                      1 = Presence of books at home for reading                                           16723        0.92      0.26
car                        1 = Car at home                                                                     18120        0.26      0.44
cell_phone                 1 = Cell phone at home                                                              18120        0.83      0.38
tv                         1 = tv at home                                                                      18120        0.78      0.42
refrigerator               1 = Refrigerator at home                                                            18120        0.43      0.49
sound_system               1 = Sound system at home                                                            18120        0.52      0.50
dvd_vhs                    1 = Dvd/VHS at home                                                                 18120        0.57      0.50
washer                     1 = Washer at home                                                                  18120        0.17      0.38
gas_stove                  1 = Gas stove at home                                                               18120        0.36      0.48
iron                       1 = Iron at home                                                                    18120        0.56      0.50
truck                      1 = Truck/tractor at home                                                           18120        0.03      0.17
                                                       1
goods_availability_index   Index of goods availability                                                         18123        0.00      1.00
hs_wage_premium            Gender specific high-school wage premium in the department (percentage points)      18197       120.40     80.09
Note: 1. Indices are computed combining the information of several variables by using a principal component analysis.
These variables are: motivated_bylearning and likes_reading for motivation; reading_score and math_score for
test_score, low_quality_floor, low_quality_walls, and low_quality_water for low_quality_housing; car, cell_phone,
tv, refrigerator, sound_system, dvd_vhs, washer, gas_stove, iron, and truck for goods_availability_index.




                                                                         28
(b) Guatemala: cohort of students evaluated in ninth grade in 2013

Name of variable           Description                                                            Observations   Mean    Std. Dev.
female                     1 = Female                                                               196516        0.48      0.50
age                        Age (in years)                                                           196334       16.50     3.64
indigenous                 1 = Indigenous (mother tongue is maya, xinka or garifuna)                195992       0.18      0.38
preschool                  1 = Attended preprimary education                                        194167        0.84      0.37
repeater                   1 = Repeated a grade in primary                                          192498        0.34      0.47
more1hour_to_school        1 = Time from home to school: more than one hour                         195652       0.05      0.22
works                      1 = works                                                                191315        0.33      0.47
read_newspaper             1 = Reads the newspaper                                                  195733        0.96      0.19
read_books                 1 = Reads books for pleasure or personal interest                        195040       0.80      0.40
                                                           1
motivation                 Index of motivation at school                                            194612       0.00      1.00
reading_score              Measure of student's ability in reading (expressed in logits)            195726       -0.46     0.78
math_score                 Measure of student's ability in math (expressed in logits)               196011       0.00      0.66
                                                                   1
test_score                 Index of reading and math test scores                                    195608       0.00      1.00
noschool                   1 = Parents did not attend school                                        193846        0.12      0.33
primary                    1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is primary                   193846       0.48      0.50
lowersecondary             1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is lower secondary           193846       0.14      0.35
uppersecondary             1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is upper secondary           193846       0.14      0.34
college                    1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is complete college          193846        0.09     0.28
postgraduate               1 = Parents' maximum educational attainment is posgraduate education     193846       0.02       0.15
low_quality_floor          1 = Floor made of low quality materials (soil)                           195967       0.15      0.36
low_quality_walls          1 = Walls made of low quality materials (sheet)                          196074       0.05      0.21
low_quality_roof           1 = Roof made of low quality materials (fragile or perishable)           195886       0.01      0.08
low_quality_water          1 = Water source is of low quality (natural source or well)              194945        0.17      0.38
                                                         1
low_quality_housing        Index of low quality housing                                             193683       0.00      1.00
electricity                1 = Electricity at home                                                  195764        0.95      0.22
pc                         1 = Personal computer at home                                            187903        0.49      0.50
car                        1 = Car at home                                                          184132        0.43      0.49
cell_phone                 1 = Cell phone at home                                                   195906        0.94      0.24
tv                         1 = tv at home                                                           187903        0.94      0.23
refrigerator               1 = Refrigerator at home                                                 187903        0.65      0.48
sound_system               1 = Sound system at home                                                 187903        0.69      0.46
dvd_vhs                    1 = Dvd/VHS at home                                                      187903        0.59      0.49
washer                     1 = Washer at home                                                       187903        0.25      0.43
                                                       1
goods_availability_index   Index of goods availability                                              176146       0.00      1.00
hs_wage_premium            Gender specific high-school wage premium in the local labor market       196511       95.96     74.03
Note: 1. Indices are computed combining the information of several variables by using a principal component analysis.
These variables are: read_newspaper and read_books for motivation; reading_score and math_score for test_score,
low_quality_floor, low_quality_walls, low_quality_roof, and low_quality_water for low_quality_housing; car,
cell_phone, tv, refrigerator, sound_system, dvd_vhs, and washer for goods_availability_index.




                                                                         29
Table A2. Variable definitions and summary statistics, Honduras
                                                                                Observ            Std.
  Name of variable        Definition                                            ations    Mean    Dev.
  male                    =1 if male                                            613,973   0.49    0.50
  age                     Age (in years)                                        613,973   14.09   1.58
  attendance rate         Attendance rate                                       613,973   1.00    0.02
  public school           =1 if attends a public school                         445,777   0.78    0.42
  rural school            =1 if the school is classified as rural               445,777   0.31    0.46
                          Number of secondary schools per 1,000 secondary-
  schools                 age children in municipality                          445,777   5.84    3.22
                          Number of teaching positions per 1,000 school-age
  teachers                children in municipality                              445,777   36.46   19.56
  summary
  infrastructure index    Average school infrastructure index by municipality   445,777   0.53    0.06
  homicide rate           Municipality homicide rate (per 100,000 people)       445,777   70.63   51.96
  poverty                 Unsatisfied basic needs poverty rate (2001 census)    613,973   53.64   15.88
  ethnic                  Share of Ethnic Population (2001 census)              613,973   0.06    0.15
  years of education      Average Years of Education (2001 census)              613,973   6.38    1.48
  pre-school enrollment   Average Pre-school Enrollment (2001 census)           613,973   0.34    0.12
  child labor             Average Child Labor Rate (2001 census)                613,973   0.12    0.04
  adolescent birthrate    Average Adolescent Birth Rate (2001 census)           613,973   92.90   16.00
                          Average Share of Household with Migrants (2001
  migrants                census)                                               613,973   0.03    0.02




                                                          30
Table A3. Model of dropout in the primary to lower secondary transition in Guatemala.
                                                    Model
                                          (1)        (2)              (3)
 Individual level variables:
 female                                 0.064***   0.057***         0.068***
                                         (0.008)    (0.008)          (0.009)
 age                                    0.056***   0.042***         0.044***
                                         (0.004)    (0.004)          (0.004)
 indigenous                             0.116***   0.068***          -0.022
                                         (0.018)    (0.018)          (0.020)
 works                                  0.075***   0.053***         0.042***
                                         (0.011)    (0.012)          (0.011)
 housework                                -0.009     -0.020          -0.028
                                         (0.019)    (0.022)          (0.023)
 repeater                                -0.019*    -0.020*          -0.011
                                         (0.010)    (0.011)          (0.010)
 preschool                             -0.085***   -0.056***       -0.051***
                                         (0.010)    (0.011)          (0.011)
 all_school_supplies                      -0.010      0.009          -0.002
                                         (0.008)    (0.009)          (0.008)
 motivation                            -0.013***   -0.012***       -0.012***
                                         (0.004)    (0.004)          (0.004)
 test_score                            -0.063***   -0.042***       -0.023***
                                         (0.005)    (0.005)          (0.005)
 Household level variables:
 primary                                           -0.086***       -0.050***
                                                    (0.013)          (0.011)
 lowersecondary                                    -0.142***       -0.067***
                                                    (0.015)          (0.014)
 uppersecondary                                    -0.130***       -0.068***
                                                    (0.017)          (0.016)
 some_college                                      -0.108***        -0.043**
                                                    (0.021)          (0.021)
 college                                           -0.122***       -0.056***
                                                    (0.016)          (0.015)
 help_homework                                     -0.034***         -0.000
                                                    (0.008)          (0.008)
 low_quality_housing                               0.021***         0.023***
                                                    (0.006)          (0.005)
 electricity                                         -0.028         -0.041**
                                                    (0.018)          (0.017)
 pc                                                -0.054***       -0.041***
                                                    (0.008)          (0.009)
 books                                               -0.022           0.001
                                                    (0.017)          (0.017)
 goods_availability_index                          -0.035***       -0.019***
                                                    (0.006)          (0.006)
 School/area of residence variables:
 hs_wage_premium                                                     0.000
                                                                    (0.000)
 Constant                              -0.490***   -0.156**        -0.367***
                                         (0.057)    (0.066)         (0.062)

 Observations                           13,918      10,785          10,785
 R-squared                               0.115       0.155          0.363
Source: Author calculations based on administrative data on enrollment, National Evaluations of students (2013),
and ENCOVI (2014).
Notes: (1) Standard errors clustered by department in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3)
Dependent variable: 1 = dropout in the sixth to seventh grade transition. (4) School/area of residence variables
include school fixed effects.

                                                              31
Table A4. Model of dropout in the primary to lower secondary transition in Honduras.

                                                                             Model
                                                             (1)                (2)                (3)
  Male                                                     -0.000             -0.000              0.004
                                                          (0.003)            (0.003)            (0.003)
  Age                                                       0.098              0.099              0.086
                                                       (0.003)***          (0.003)***         (0.002)***
  Attendance rate                                          -0.887             -1.013             -1.477
                                                       (0.153)***          (0.150)***         (0.117)***
  Public School                                            -0.018             -0.019
                                                          (0.014)            (0.014)
  Rural school                                              0.220              0.236
                                                       (0.019)***          (0.022)***
  Number of Schools                                         0.005
                                                          (0.010)
  Number of Teachers                                       -0.001
                                                          (0.001)
  School Infrastructure Index                               0.209
                                                          (0.132)
  Homicide rate                                             0.000
                                                        (0.000)**
  UBN Poverty Rate                                          0.003
                                                       (0.001)***
  Average share of Ethnic Population (2001)                -0.084
                                                         (0.044)*
  Average Years of Education (2001)                        -0.041
                                                       (0.014)***
  Average Pre-school Enrollment (2001)                      0.108
                                                         (0.062)*
  Average Child Labor Rate (2001)                           0.927
                                                       (0.130)***
  Average Adolescent Birth Rate (2001)                     -0.000
                                                          (0.000)
  Average Share of Household with Migrants
  (2001)                                                   0.566
                                                        (0.253)**
  Constant                                                -0.224              0.092              0.809
                                                         (0.184)             (0.132)          (0.120)***

  Grade Fixed Effects                                      Yes                Yes                 Yes
  Population Polynomial                                   Cubic               No                  No

  R2                                                      0.193              0.214                0.379
  Observations                                           109,226            109,226             109,226
Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH administrative data from 2013-2015. Notes: Clustered Standard
Errors by Municipality in Parentheses
Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%



                                                     32
Figure A1. ROC curves of the different models of dropout within lower secondary.
                Guatemala                                      Honduras




 Source: Author calculations based on administrative        Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH
 data on enrollment, National Evaluations of students       administrative data from 2013-2015.
 (2013), and ENCOVI (2014).                                 Notes: Model 1: model with covariates at the individual,
 Notes: Model 1: model with covariates at the individual    supply-side and municipal-level variables. Model 2:
 level. Model 2: model with covariates at the individual    model with covariates at the individual and school-level,
 and household level. Model 3: model with covariates at     with municipality fixed effects. Model 3: model with
 the individual, household, and school/area of residence    covariates at the individual-level with school fixed
 level.                                                     effects.




                                                       33
Table A5. Performance of the models of dropout within lower secondary.
                                          Sensitivity              False-positive            Overall accuracy1
  Country and specification
                                           (percent)            proportion (percent)           (proportion)

  Guatemala
  Model 1                                     58.2                       33.8                        0.62
  Model 2                                     61.6                       35.3                        0.63
  Model 3                                     74.2                       27.4                        0.73
  Honduras
  Model 1                                     60.5                       32.1                        0.64
  Model 2                                     62.8                       33.0                        0.65
  Model 3                                     68.1                       29.6                        0.69

Source: Author calculations based on administrative data from Guatemala and Honduras.
Notes: 1. The area-under-the-curve statistic, which ranges from .50 to 1.00, with higher values associated with
higher accuracy (higher sensitivity and lower false-positive proportion).




                                                         34
Table A6. Model of dropout within lower secondary in Guatemala.
                                                    Model
                                          (1)        (2)               (3)
 Individual level variables:
 female                                   0.005       0.014            0.009
                                        (0.008)      (0.009)          (0.011)
 age                                   0.056***     0.058***         0.065***
                                        (0.005)      (0.005)          (0.006)
 indigenous                             0.025**       0.019           -0.032
                                        (0.013)      (0.014)          (0.023)
 works                                   0.015        0.010            0.014
                                        (0.009)      (0.011)          (0.013)
 housework                                0.004       0.017            0.024
                                        (0.019)      (0.022)          (0.025)
 repeater                              0.027***     0.028**            0.019
                                        (0.010)      (0.011)          (0.013)
 preschool                             -0.048***   -0.038***         -0.028**
                                        (0.010)      (0.011)          (0.013)
 all_school_supplies                     -0.000      -0.006           -0.003
                                        (0.008)      (0.009)          (0.011)
 motivation                              -0.004      -0.002           -0.001
                                        (0.004)      (0.004)          (0.005)
 test_score                            -0.022***   -0.020***        -0.022***
                                        (0.004)      (0.005)          (0.006)
 Household level variables:
 primary                                            -0.022*           -0.018
                                                    (0.013)          (0.014)
 lowersecondary                                      -0.022           -0.015
                                                    (0.016)          (0.017)
 uppersecondary                                     -0.035*           -0.025
                                                    (0.018)          (0.021)
 some_college                                        -0.023           -0.007
                                                    (0.023)          (0.026)
 college                                             -0.026           -0.019
                                                    (0.017)          (0.019)
 help_homework                                     -0.018**         -0.019**
                                                    (0.008)          (0.010)
 low_quality_housing                                  0.006            0.009
                                                    (0.006)          (0.006)
 electricity                                        0.029*             0.020
                                                    (0.017)          (0.020)
 pc                                                -0.021**          -0.019*
                                                    (0.010)          (0.011)
 books                                               -0.013           -0.019
                                                    (0.017)          (0.019)
 goods_availability_index                             0.007            0.005
                                                    (0.006)          (0.007)
 School/area of residence variables:
 hs_wage_premium                                                      -0.000
                                                                     (0.000)
 Constant                              -0.523***   -0.554***        -0.539***
                                        (0.061)     (0.075)          (0.085)

 Observations                           10,879       8,375            8,375
 R-squared                              0.048        0.054            0.205
Source: Author calculations based on administrative data on enrollment, National Evaluations of students (2013),
and ENCOVI (2014).
Notes: (1) Standard errors clustered by department in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3)
Dependent variable: 1 = dropout within lower secondary. (4) School/area of residence variables include school fixed
effects. (5) Students who dropped out in the transition from primary to lower secondary are excluded from the
sample.

                                                               35
Table A7. Model of dropout within lower secondary in Honduras.

                                                                             Model
                                                               (1)             (2)         (3)
  Male                                                        0.012           0.012       0.013
                                                         (0.003)***       (0.003)***   (0.002)***
  Age                                                         0.078           0.077       0.074
                                                         (0.002)***       (0.002)***   (0.002)***
  Attendance rate                                            -0.323          -0.347      -0.334
                                                         (0.107)***       (0.111)***   (0.115)***
  Public School                                               0.045           0.049
                                                         (0.010)***       (0.011)***
  Rural school                                               -0.017          -0.022
                                                          (0.009)**        (0.010)**
  Number of Schools                                           0.022
                                                         (0.005)***
  Number of Teachers                                         -0.001
                                                         (0.000)***
  School Infrastructure Index                                -0.019
                                                            (0.069)
  Homicide rate                                               0.000
                                                            (0.000)
  UBN Poverty Rate                                            0.001
                                                           (0.000)*
  Average share of Ethnic Population (2001)                  -0.011
                                                            (0.021)
  Average Years of Education (2001)                           0.002
                                                            (0.007)
  Average Pre-school Enrollment (2001)                        0.009
                                                            (0.033)
  Average Child Labor Rate (2001)                            -0.090
                                                            (0.080)
  Average Adolescent Birth Rate (2001)                        0.000
                                                            (0.000)
  Average Share of Household with Migrants
  (2001)                                                    0.606
                                                         (0.146)***
  Constant                                                 -0.665           -0.527       -0.465
                                                         (0.151)***       (0.129)***   (0.123)***

  Grade Fixed Effects                                        Yes             Yes          Yes
  Population Polynomial                                     Cubic            No           No

  R2                                                      0.077              0.086       0.153
  Observations                                           156,842            156,842     156,842
Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH administrative data from 2013-2015.
Notes: Clustered Standard Errors by Municipality in Parentheses
Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%



                                                       36
Figure A2. ROC curves of the different models of dropout in the lower to upper secondary
transition.
                Guatemala                                        Honduras




 Source: Author calculations based on administrative        Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH
 data on enrollment, National Evaluations of students       administrative data from 2013-2015.
 (2013), and ENCOVI (2014).                                 Notes: Model 1: model with covariates at the individual,
 Notes: Model 1: model with covariates at the individual    supply-side and municipal-level variables. Model 2:
 level. Model 2: model with covariates at the individual    model with covariates at the individual and school-level,
 and household level. Model 3: model with covariates at     with municipality fixed effects. Model 3: model with
 the individual, household, and school/area of residence    covariates at the individual-level with school fixed
 level.                                                     effects.




                                                       37
Table A8. Performance of the models of dropout in the lower to upper secondary
transition.
                                          Sensitivity              False-positive            Overall accuracy1
  Country and specification
                                           (percent)            proportion (percent)           (proportion)

  Guatemala
  Model 1                                     60.2                       39.0                        0.61
  Model 2                                     62.6                       38.3                        0.62
  Model 3                                     72.9                       27.7                        0.73
  Honduras
  Model 1                                     62.9                       33.6                        0.65
  Model 2                                     64.8                       31.7                        0.67
  Model 3                                     73.5                       27.0                        0.73

Source: Author calculations based on administrative data from Guatemala and Honduras.
Notes: 1. The area-under-the-curve statistic, which ranges from .50 to 1.00, with higher values associated with
higher accuracy (higher sensitivity and lower false-positive proportion).




                                                         38
Table A9. Model of dropout in the lower to upper secondary transition in Guatemala.
                                                        Model
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)
Individual level variables:
female                                -0.015***       -0.014***        -0.008***
                                        (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.003)
age                                      0.003            0.002          0.004*
                                        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.003)
indigenous                             0.120***       0.062***         0.018***
                                        (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.006)
preschool                             -0.037***          -0.002          0.002
                                        (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.004)
repeater                               0.046***        0.033***        0.029***
                                        (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.003)
more1hour_to_school                    0.031***       0.025***         0.032***
                                        (0.011)         (0.009)         (0.007)
works                                 0.082***        0.054***         0.028***
                                        (0.013)         (0.011)         (0.003)
motivation                               0.000          -0.002*          -0.001
                                        (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)
test_score                            -0.050***       -0.021***        -0.009***
                                        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.001)
Household level variables:
primary                                               -0.037***        -0.030***
                                                        (0.006)          (0.005)
lowersecondary                                        -0.096***        -0.058***
                                                        (0.008)          (0.005)
uppersecondary                                        -0.124***        -0.068***
                                                        (0.010)          (0.005)
college                                               -0.128***        -0.058***
                                                        (0.010)          (0.006)
postgraduate                                          -0.143***        -0.058***
                                                        (0.012)          (0.008)
low_quality_housing                                    0.024***         0.012***
                                                        (0.002)          (0.002)
electricity                                           -0.102***        -0.055***
                                                        (0.011)          (0.009)
pc                                                    -0.052***        -0.034***
                                                        (0.005)          (0.003)
goods_availability_index                              -0.010***          -0.002
                                                        (0.002)          (0.002)
School/area of residence variables:
hs_wage_premium                                                         -0.000
                                                                        (0.000)
Constant                              0.249***        0.439***         0.171***
                                       (0.026)         (0.027)          (0.038)

Observations                          181,225          160,441          160,441
R-squared                              0.052            0.067            0.263
Source: Author calculations based on administrative data on enrollment, National Evaluations of students (2013),
and ENCOVI (2014).
Notes: (1) Standard errors clustered by department in parentheses. (2) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (3)
Dependent variable: 1 = dropout in the lower to upper secondary transition. (4) School/area of residence variables
include school fixed effects.

                                                         39
Table A10. Model of dropout in the lower to upper secondary transition in Honduras.

                                                                            Model
                                                              (1)              (2)          (3)
  Male                                                       0.023            0.023        0.021
                                                         (0.005)***       (0.005)***   (0.004)***
  Age                                                        0.092            0.090        0.082
                                                         (0.004)***       (0.004)***   (0.003)***
  Attendance rate                                           -0.114           -0.031       -0.135
                                                           (0.143)          (0.166)      (0.096)
  Public School                                              0.054            0.068
                                                         (0.018)***       (0.016)***
  Rural school                                               0.166            0.175
                                                         (0.017)***       (0.020)***
  Number of Schools                                          0.006
                                                           (0.011)
  Number of Teachers                                        -0.001
                                                           (0.001)
  School Infrastructure Index                                0.076
                                                           (0.174)
  Homicide rate                                             -0.000
                                                           (0.000)
  UBN Poverty Rate                                          -0.000
                                                           (0.001)
  Average share of Ethnic Population (2001)                  0.157
                                                         (0.046)***
  Average Years of Education (2001)                         -0.042
                                                         (0.015)***
  Average Pre-school Enrollment (2001)                       0.031
                                                           (0.075)
  Average Child Labor Rate (2001)                            0.128
                                                           (0.170)
  Average Adolescent Birth Rate (2001)                      -0.001
                                                         (0.000)***
  Average Share of Household with Migrants
  (2001)                                                    -0.411
                                                           (0.328)
  Constant                                                  -0.715          -1.073       -0.753
                                                         (0.237)***       (0.165)***   (0.106)***

  Grade Fixed Effects                                        Yes             Yes          Yes
  Population Polynomial                                     Cubic            No           No

  R2                                                      0.099              0.133      0.256
  Observations                                           53,142              53,142     53,142
Source: Author calculations based on USINIEH administrative data from 2013-2015.
Notes: Clustered Standard Errors by Municipality in Parentheses
Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%



                                                       40
