                                                                WPS8191


Policy Research Working Paper                                  8191




 Optimal Targeting under Budget Constraints
         in a Humanitarian Context
                                  Chiara Gigliarano
                                    Paolo Verme




Fragility, Conflict and Violence Cross Cutting Solution Area
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8191


  Abstract
 The combination of conflict, food insecurity, and displace-                         the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
 ment generates competing claims for financial resources                             Based on a poverty model, Receiver Operating Charac-
 that stretch the donors’ ability to provide funding and                             teristic curves are used to optimize coverage and leakage
 the humanitarian organizations’ capacity to provide social                          rates under budget constraints. The paper shows how
 assistance. The paper uses Receiver Operating Character-                            policy makers can use these instruments to fine-tune tar-
 istic curves and related indexes to determine the optimal                           geting using coverage rates, budgets, or poverty lines as
 targeting strategy of a food voucher program for refu-                              guiding principles to increase the overall efficiency of a
 gees. The estimations focus on the 2014 food vouchers                               program. As humanitarian organizations operate under
 administered by the World Food Programme to Syrian                                  increasing budget constraints and increasing demands for
 refugees in Jordan. The analysis uses data collected by                             efficiency, the proposed approach addresses both concerns.




  This paper is a product of the Fragility, Conflict and Violence Cross Cutting Solution Area. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at pverme@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
        Optimal Targeting under Budget Constraints in a Humanitarian Context

                                         Chiara Gigliarano1 and Paolo Verme2




JEL: I31; I32; I38

Keywords: Food vouchers; Refugees; Receiver Operating Characteristics Curves; Targeting.




1 Department of Economics, Università dell'Insubria, Varese, Italy.
2 Fragility, Conflict and Violence,World Bank Group. This work is part of the program “Building the Evidence on Protracted Forced
Displacement: A Multi-Stakeholder Partnership”. The program is funded by UK aid from the United Kingdom’s Department for
International Development (DFID), it is managed by the World Bank Group (WBG) and was established in partnership with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees” (UNHCR). The scope of the program is to expand the global knowledge on forced
displacement by funding quality research and disseminating results for the use of practitioners and policy makers. This work does
not necessarily reflect the views of DFID, the WBG or UNHCR. The authors would like to thank Lidia Ceriani, Xavier Devictor, Ugo
Gentilini and Phillippe Leite for very useful comments.
     1. Introduction
The United Nations has estimated the number of forcibly displaced people in the world at 65.6 million in
2016, most of them located in the Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa.3 More recently, it estimated that
up to 20 million people may be at risk of famine in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East by the end of
2017.4 As it is well established in the literature, droughts lead to constrained food supply in drought
affected areas but they are not, per se, the cause of famines. Famines occur where the capability of
obtaining food is constrained and where there is an inability to redistribute food from high supply to low
supply areas (Dreze and Sen, 1989), an activity that the international aid community can do effectively
under normal circumstances.5

Forced displacement is largely the consequence of conflict as shown by countries such as Nigeria, South
Sudan, Somalia and the Republic of Yemen. Northern Nigeria has over 2 million internally displaced
persons (IDPs) as a direct consequence of the conflict with Boko Haram; South Sudan may now have up
to 80 percent of its population either displaced or hosting displaced people as a consequence of the civil
war; Somalia has generated millions of refugees over decades of instability who settled in neighboring
countries or moved to third countries; the Republic of Yemen now has almost 3 million people counted
as either refugees or IDPs as a consequence of the civil war.6 In these countries, conflict has been the main
driver of displacement. However, more recently, conflict has contributed to turn droughts into famines
and further displacement as it constrains the free movement of food to areas in need.

In these contexts, humanitarian organizations are facing increasing budget constraints. Donors find
themselves pulled between the necessity to mitigate starvation and save lives and provide for shelter,
services and any other needs of displaced populations in countries where host governments have scarce
means of their own to face these challenges. Budgets are very stretched and humanitarian organizations
face tough choices on the ground. Universal coverage of assistance programs such as cash or food
assistance becomes the exception rather than the rule and humanitarian organizations are forced to




3 http://www.unhcr.org/en-us/figures-at-a-glance.html.
4 http://www.cnn.com/2017/03/11/africa/un-famine-starvation-aid/
5 See also Martin-Shields and Stojetz (2017) for a recent review of the literature on conflict and food security, van Weezel (2017)

for a global study of the impact of conflict on food security covering 106 countries and
 Brück et al. (2017) for a study of the impact of conflict on food security in Gaza. For a study that looks at food security as a means
to address conflict, see Fatema and Kibriva (2017).
6 For more details of these crises, see www.unhcr.org (country updates) and www.iom.int (particularly the Displacement Tracking

Matrix – DTM – at http://www.globaldtm.info/).

                                                                                                                                     2
ration and target resources. This is where targeting becomes a very relevant activity for donors and
humanitarian organizations alike.

This paper is a contribution in the direction of making targeting more effective when budgets are
stretched. It exploits Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curves and related indices to devise a
relatively simple methodology for optimizing coverage, poverty reduction and leakage in the presence of
budget constraints. We therefore focus on optimizing outcomes of social protection programs based on
cash transfers.

ROC curves are one of the most common statistical tools employed to assess the performance of a
diagnostic rule based on a predictive model (Lusted, 1971). They are generated by plotting the fraction of
true positives out of the positives (true positive rate) versus the fraction of false positives out of the
negatives (false positive rate), at various probability thresholds. For example, one can estimate from
microdata the probability of an individual to be poor, which varies between 0 and 1 or between 0 and
100. To classify these same individuals as poor or nonpoor based on these predictions, one must then
decide the probability threshold to use as cut point between poor and nonpoor. We may classify as “poor”
all those who have a probability of being poor above, say, 60 percent and “nonpoor” all individuals whose
probability is below or equal to 60 percent. This choice affects the true positive and negative rates.
Therefore, by changing the cut point, one can plot the curve that describes all combinations of true and
false positive rates that correspond to different probability thresholds. This is the ROC curve. It is useful
because it allows researchers to select the probability threshold that optimizes the combination of true
and false positive rates.

The main applications of the ROC curves are in medicine (see, e.g, Hand, 2010) or more generally in
diagnostics (see, e.g, Hand and Anagnostopoulos, 2013) and in credit risk analysis (see, e.g. Thomas, 2009;
Gigliarano et al, 2014), and the Area Under the Curve (AUC) is a popular measure to evaluate the
discriminative power of a predictive model (see, e.g. Hand, 2009; Krzanowski and Hand, 2009; Hand,
2012). The use of these curves in economics has been less frequent (see Wodon, 1997 for an early
application) and, to our knowledge, these curves have not been used in the context of humanitarian
programs, with the exception of our previous contribution on which this paper builds (Verme et al. 2016).

In the context of a welfare program such as cash assistance or food vouchers, the approach proposed can
be used when policy makers work with a coverage, poverty or budget target. It answers questions such
as: i) What is the budget required to reduce poverty (or mitigate famine) by X percent? ii) What is the


                                                                                                           3
budget required to increase household coverage by Y percent? iii) What is the coverage or poverty
reduction we can obtain with a given Z budget? iv) Can the program’s efficiency be improved by shifting
the poverty line?

The answers to these questions can help donors make funding decisions and humanitarian organizations
make targeting choices. We show that this approach can be applied to existing programs such as food
voucher programs administered by the World Food Program (WFP) relying on available micro data
collected by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Our main contribution is to
show how to operationalize such approach in the context of welfare improving humanitarian operations
using relatively simple visual devices suitable for policy makers. In this respect, the paper is a complement
to the broader and relatively new literature on targeting food and cash programs in humanitarian contexts
(Mollis et al., 1999, Maxwell et al., 2011, Coll-Black et al., 2012).

The paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the food voucher program that we use to
illustrate the methodology proposed. Section 3 describes the data, Section 4 outlines the models
employed to caliber the methodology, section 5 outlines results and section 6 concludes.


       2. The 2014 food voucher program for refugees in Jordan
As a case study, the paper uses the 2014 food voucher program administered by WFP to Syrian refugees
in Jordan in 2014. Similarly to the populations mentioned in the introduction, this is a population that
experienced multiple shocks that eventually led to poverty and refugee status in neighboring countries
(Verme et al, 2016). There are also some important differences. Jordan is a middle-income country and
has a very different capacity to provide for displaced populations as compared to countries such as South
Sudan or Somalia. The quality of data available for refugees in Jordan was also superior to the quality of
data that is currently available in Sub Saharan Africa. However, we will show that the approach proposed
can be implemented using micro data that the WFP and UNHCR routinely collect and that this is a method
not beyond the existing capacity of these organizations.

The material assistance provided to refugees in Jordan in 2014 was essentially structured in two programs:
i) a cash program administered by the UNHCR and ii) a food voucher program administered by the WFP.
In 2014, the UNHCR cash program provided 50 Jordanian Dinars (JD)7 per month to cases8 including one
or two members, 100 JD to cases with 3 to 5 members and 120 JD to cases with more than five members.

7   A Jordanian Dinar in 2014 was roughly equivalent to one Euro.
8   In the UNHCR jargon, a “case” is the household or family unit used to register refugees.

                                                                                                           4
The WFP program included two bi-weekly vouchers for a total value of 24 JD per person per month. The
voucher was provided to the principal applicant and it could be spent via a network of 652 stores
distributed across all governorates of Jordan. In this paper, we focus on the food voucher program but
the approach proposed can be equally used for any cash program.

By the end of 2013, the food voucher program reached almost universal coverage and was assessed
positively by both its administrator and external organizations. In addition to the benefits accrued to the
direct beneficiaries, the WFP found that “The program has also led to some US$2.5 million investment in
physical infrastructure by the participating retailers; created over 350 jobs in the food retail sector; and
generated about US$6 million in additional tax receipts for the Jordanian government. In terms of indirect
effects, this study finds a predictive multiplier ranging from 1.019 to 1.234. In other words, WFP’s plan to
distribute US$250 million in vouchers during 2014 would lead to some US$255-US$308 million of indirect
benefits for the Jordanian economy.” (WFP, 2014a, p. 1) The World Bank and the UNHCR jointly evaluated
the poverty reduction and targeting capacity of the program and found it to be effective on both fronts at
a time when targeting was universal (Verme et al., 2016).

Towards the end of 2014, the humanitarian community started to face budget shortages that forced the
WFP to scale down its food voucher program. The organization found itself with the difficult choice of
how to prioritize beneficiaries and opted to follow a welfare approach whereby income or consumption
would be used to assess welfare and target households. Welfare targeting is a well-developed
methodology in welfare economics and has produced important tools like Proxy Means Targeting (PMT)
that help organizations such as the World Bank or governments to target cash-based programs. However,
this is not an exact science and it is known that this approach invariably results in sizeable leakage and
undercoverage errors. In the case of humanitarian organizations, this task is even more daunting because
these organizations are not typically staffed by economists and the adoption itself of these methodologies
requires a lengthy process.


    3. Data
The paper uses a combination of the UNHCR proGres (PG) registry data and the UNHCR Home Visits (HV)
data. The PG database is the official global registration system of the UNHCR. Most of the published
statistics on refugees derive from this database and any survey or home visit targeting refugees is usually
based on this database. ProGres contains information collected from refugees at different stages starting
from the first brief interview administered when refugees cross the border to more extended interviews


                                                                                                          5
carried out when refugees are settled. Data are updated on a continuous basis and they are principally
used to identify beneficiaries of the various protection and cash programs that the UNHCR and other
organizations administer to refugees. It is, in short, the refugee “census” and contains individual and
household (case) socio-economic information but does not contain information on welfare. The second
data set is the Home Visits database (HV), which has been administered in Jordan in successive rounds
starting from 2013 for the purpose of targeting the cash assistance program. The HV questionnaire results
in almost 200 variables that can be used for analysis and includes questions on income and expenditure,
which we use to construct our welfare aggregate. For the purpose of this paper, we use the second round
implemented between November 1, 2013 and September 30, 2014.

The unit of observation used by the study is the “case”. The UNHCR defines a case as: “A processing unit
similar to a family headed by a Principal Applicant. It comprises (biological and non-biological sons and
daughters up to the age 18 (or 21) years, but also includes first degree family members emotionally and/or
economically dependent and for whom a living on their own and whose ability to function independently
in society/in the community and/or to pursue an occupation is not granted, and/or who require assistance
from a caregiver.”9 The case identifier is present in both PG and HV data and for this reason it was possible
to merge the PG and HV data into one dataset. The final sample used for this paper included over 43,000
observations, about a third of all cases registered in Jordan in 2014. This sample is not a random sample
of the refugee population but Verme et al. (2016) showed that it is the closest approximation to a random
sample that one could have with existing data.

The welfare aggregate was constructed using two questions on expenditure present in the HV data. The
HV data contain questions on income and expenditure. The income question was clearly underreported
and, as customary when measuring welfare in poor and middle-income countries, expenditure or
consumption is preferred as a measure of welfare. The two expenditure questions backed each other up
and by combining them into one indicator it was possible to correct for possible underreporting. The
resulting welfare aggregate showed common properties to consumption aggregates in terms of
distribution. We had also knowledge of the households (cases) that received assistance via the UNHCR
cash program. For these households, the value of the programs was subtracted from the aggregate to
obtain expenditure net of social assistance. Most households were also receiving food vouchers but
interviewers and respondents to the home visits questionnaire were instructed to exclude these



9   Information provided by the UNHCR Jordan office.

                                                                                                           6
expenditures when filling the questionnaire. Finally and for the purpose of poverty modeling, the welfare
aggregate was transformed into per capita basis.

Table 1 provides the summary statistics for income and expenditure. It is clearly visible that income per
capita is underreported when compared to expenditure. It is also evident that the UNHCR cash program
contributes, on average and per capita, with about 7 JD per month, which is in line with what we should
expect given the coverage of the program in 2014. Figure 1 also shows how the shape of the welfare
aggregate of choice (expenditure per capita net of UNHCR cash) exhibits the expected suitable
characteristics of a bell-shaped distribution.

The poverty line adopted for the study is 50 JD per capita per month. This threshold was selected because
it was the poverty line adopted by the UNHCR for providing cash assistance. At the end of 2013, this line
was equivalent to 71 USD and 160 USD at Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) per capita per month. This latter
amount corresponded to 5.25 USD PPP per day, a significantly higher amount than the international
poverty line of 1.9 USD PPP recommended for poor countries. Considering that Jordan is a middle-income
country and that most refugees live in urban areas, this poverty line is not farfetched. Based on the sample
used for this study, a poverty line of 50 JD/capita/month results in a poverty rate of 52.5 percent for cases
and 69.2 percent for the population. In other words, 7 in 10 refugees were estimated to be poor based on
a 50 JD per person poverty line.

Table 1 - Summary statistics of the main case welfare aggregates (in JD)

 Variable                                                  Mean    Std. Dev.   Mi    Max
 Income per capita                                         34.95   64.41       0     3000
 Income per capita with no zeroes                          65.50   75.99       0.5   3000
 Expenditure per capita                                    77.92   74.72       1     1675
 Expenditure per capita net of UNHCR cash                  70.60   76.29       0     1675
Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.




                                                                                                           7
Figure 1 - Income and Expenditure Distributions
    .8
    .6
    .4
    .2
    0




         -2                  0                      2                 4            6                 8
                                                            x

                          kdensity Wexp_lncap                             kdensity Winc_lncap
                          kdensity Wexp_unhcr_lncap


Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data. On the x-axis is the log of income or expenditure per capita. On the
y-axis is the density (percentage of population).


     4. Models


The underlying model of the predictions and simulations that will follow is a simple poverty model
described as follows:

                                                        =       + 	   +                                                 (1)

where Pi =1 if the case is under the poverty line and Pi =0 if the case is on the poverty line or above;
Xi=vector of case characteristics that derive from merging the UNHCR proGres registry data and the home
visits data; ε = normally distributed error term with zero mean; and i=case.

The model is estimated with a probit function and the main objective is to maximize its poverty prediction
capacity. In order to achieve this objective, we followed a systematic procedure to optimize the
construction of the independent variables and the explanatory power of the model. For the variables


                                                                                                                           8
construction, we made the most of individual variables by constructing case indicators and turned
categorical variables into dichotomous variables. This avoided the question of discontinuity between
categorical variables. To maximize the explanatory power of the model, we first explored the explanatory
capacity of each individual variable with binomial models to prepare a first shortlist of variables and then
used this shortlist with a backward and forward stepwise selection method to identify the best model.

The optimal prediction model is then used to predict poverty as follows:

                                               =    + 	                                                (2)

where    can be interpreted as the expected probability of being poor given a set of X characteristics and
based on the estimated parameters      and    from Equation (1).

To determine whether a household is expected (predicted) to be poor or not, the standard approach is to
assign a prediction of “i=non-poor” to households with 0 ≤         ≤ 0.5 and “i=poor” to households with
0.5 <    ≤ 1. This is not particularly efficient because a cut point of 0.5 may not be the cut point that
maximizes the coverage rate (i.e. the fraction of poor correctly predicted as poor) and minimizes the
leakage rate (i.e. the fraction of nonpoor predicted as poor), when these are the objectives of the
program’s administrators. One approach to solve this problem is to use indices that promise to optimize
coverage and leakage. Two popular indices are the Younden Index (YI) and the Distance Index (DI)
described as follows:

                                         YI = max     −                                                (3)


                                                                                                       (4)
                                         =            +


where N=population; P=number of poor; NP=Number of non-poor; t=targeted; nt=non-targeted.

Consequently: coverage rate =     ; undercoverage rate =     ; and leakage rate =     .

Similarly, one can draw the ROC curve, which plots for each possible cut point between 0 and 1 the
corresponding leakage rate (x-axis) and coverage rate (y-axis), thus determining the optimal trade-off
between these two indicators (see also Wodon, 1997). This is represented in Figure 2 below. In such a
graph, the diagonal represents an equal probability of coverage and leakage, which is what one would
obtain if targeting was random (blind assignment of the program). All the points on the left of the diagonal
show the performance of models that do better than random draws. The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC)

                                                                                                          9
becomes therefore an indicator of the predicting capability of the model and it can be used in conjunction
with the R-Squared statistics of a model to assess its predicting capacity. Differently from the R-squared,
the AUC value varies between 0.5 and 1 where 1 represents perfect prediction capacity.

The example illustrated in Figure 2 shows that the model does better than a random assignment. The
curve also shows that there is one point where the distance between the diagonal (random assignment)
and the curve (the model) is maximized (vertical line in the figure). This is the point that offers the best
coverage while minimizing leakage, given the selected model. To this point corresponds a particular
probability threshold (equal to 0.703), which is what can be used to maximize the targeting performance
of the model. The AUC value of the particular example in Figure 2 is 0.8751, which indicates that the model
is capable of predicting poverty correctly 87.5 percent of the time. As shown above, it is important to note
that the probability threshold that provides optimal targeting may well be different from 50 percent.

This is precisely what ROC curves can help to do. Each threshold corresponds to a specific coverage rate
and leakage rate and there is clearly a different trade-off between coverage and leakage in
correspondence of each probability threshold. Changing the threshold may improve on one of the two
rates while making the other rate worse. By knowing preferences for minimizing leakage (save money) or
maximizing coverage (reduce poverty) and the corresponding trade-offs depicted by the ROC curves,
policy makers can evaluate and compare alternative outcomes in anticipation of implementing a program.




                                                                                                         10
Figure 2 - Coverage and Leakage rates with different Probability Thresholds (ROC curve)




Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.


       5. Results
As in any other econometric effort, the key to a successful implementation of the methodology proposed
is to find a poverty model with good explanatory power. Table A in the annex shows the results of
alternative poverty models based on the 2014 UNHCR Jordan data. The dependent variable is the dummy
variable that indicates whether a case’s expenditure per capita is below the poverty line (equal to 50 JD),10
whereas the independent variables are divided into groups of variables. In Model 1 we consider only socio-
demographic variables such as case size, proportion of children, age, education, employment and marital
status of the Principal Applicant (PA)11, as well as place of destination and origin of the household. In
Model 2 we also add variables related to characteristics of the house and of the WASH12 system, and
Model 3 includes also variables related to coping strategies implemented by the refugees as well as
information on whether the case (household) receives humanitarian assistance.


10   See Verme et al. (2016) for a sensitivity analysis based on different poverty lines.
11 The principal applicant is the reference case person for the UNHCR, similarly to head of household in household budget surveys.
12   WASH is an acronym frequently used by humanitarian organizations to describe the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene sectors.

                                                                                                                              11
In Table A, the three models are compared in terms of pseudo R-squared and Area Under the ROC Curve
(AUC). These indicators show that Model 3 shows the best performance followed by models 2 and 1 in
this order. Regressors related to housing and WASH included in models 2 and 3 seem to make the
difference with model 1 and contribute significantly in explaining the probability of being poor. Figure 3
shows graphically the same results using the ROC curves. The AUC is almost the same in models 2 and 3
and the corresponding ROC curves practically overlap (the green line in Figure 3), whereas the ROC curve
corresponding to model 1 (the blue line in Figure 3) is clearly below.

Figure 3 - Comparing poverty models’ ROC curves
        1
        .8 .6
    Coverage
    .4  .2
        0




                0           .2                .4             .6            .8         1
                                                   Leakage

                                        Model 1               Model 2
                                        Model 3               45 degree line


Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.

Considering Model 3 as our best poverty model, we can now test its capacity to predict poverty correctly.
The exercise consists in using the parameters estimated by the models to predict the dependent variable
of the model (poor/non-poor) as if we did not have information on this variable. Table 2 shows the results
using different probabilities thresholds. For any given cut point between 0 and 1, we can evaluate the
corresponding coverage rate (that is the probability of correctly classifying the poor) and leakage rate
(that is the probability of classifying as poor a non-poor). The table compares coverage and leakage rates



                                                                                                       12
for three arbitrary cut point values (0.3, 0.5 and 0.6), revealing that in correspondence to a low cut point
we obtain a very high coverage rate but also a high leakage rate.

In particular, the central panel of Table 2 shows that, using a poverty line of 50 JD and a 50 percent
threshold, the model would be able to predict correctly if an individual is poor 90.4 percent of the time,
which implies that 9.6 percent of the time the model would predict poor individuals as non-poor (under-
coverage rate or exclusion error). The model would also predict correctly if an individual is non-poor 61
percent of the time, which means that 39 percent of the time the model would predict as poor nonpoor
individuals (leakage rate or inclusion error). Evidently, the first type of error (under-coverage) is more
problematic from a policy and welfare perspective, whereas the second type of error (leakage) is more
problematic from a budget perspective.

The first and the last panels repeat the exercise with a probability threshold of 30 percent and 60 percent,
respectively. In the former case, the under-coverage rate improves (2.9 percent) while the leakage rate
worsens (62.4 percent). In the latter case, the under-coverage rate worsens (15.6 percent) while the
leakage rate decreases considerably (28.8 percent). Clearly, changing probability threshold affects
targeting results. Hence, it is important to fine tune the parameter related to the probability threshold to
obtain results the closest as possible to the error we want to minimize (under-coverage or leakage).

Table 2 - Coverage and Leakage rates for different choices of cut point

                                                      Observed poor
                                             no            yes         Total
                                                       cut point 30%
                            no                 37.64           2.92      13.59
                            yes                62.36         97.08       86.41
                                                       cut point 50%
 Predicted poor             no                 61.01           9.59      25.39
                            yes                38.99         90.41       74.61
                                                       cut point 60%
                            no                 71.20         15.63       32.71
                            yes                28.80         84.37       67.29
Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.



                                                                                                         13
We now determine the optimal probability threshold that maximizes coverage and minimize leakage, by
computing the Youden and the Distance indices (Figure 4). In general, the two indicators may suggest
different optimal thresholds (indicated in Figure 4 by the two vertical lines). In our case, we find the two
values rather close: 0.703 for the Youden index (corresponding coverage, 0.766; corresponding leakage,
0.184), and 0.685 for the Distance index (corresponding coverage, 0.782; corresponding leakage, 0.201).
Also noteworthy and from a graphical perspective, one could consider as an optimal choice, the maximum
vertical distance between the Youden and Distance indices curves. This falls indeed within the two optimal
thresholds indicated respectively by the two indices and could solve the issue of choosing between two
optimal values.

Figure 4 - Youden and Distance indices for different cut point
                  1
    Youden and Distance indices
    .2     .4     0 .6       .8




                                  0   .2      .4              .6          .8           1
                                                   Cutpoint

                                               youden              dist



Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.

As an alternative, it is possible to select the optimal probability threshold using the available budget for
the food voucher program as baseline. The WFP would normally know the budget available for targeting
and this is what frequently drives targeting decisions. The WFP or the UNHCR do not have large regular
annual budgets and they rely on donors’ contributions pledged in correspondence of humanitarian crises.
Based on the effective contributions received following the pledges, these organizations take targeting

                                                                                                         14
decisions accordingly. Therefore, the targeting decisions are largely based on budget rather than coverage
criteria. Indeed, if programs were to be administered based on purely legal and entitlements criteria,
these organizations should cover the totality of refugees and coverage would be universal. Targeting is
therefore a second best option determined by budget constraints.

As an example of targeting based on budget criteria, Figure 5 plots cut points (or probability thresholds)
corresponding to different mixes of coverage and leakage rates on the y-axis versus different budget
scenarios on the x-axis. For simplicity, the budget on the x-axis varies between 0 and 100, where 100
corresponds to the budget needed for universal coverage. For example, if we assume that the WFP has a
budget sufficient to cover only 80 percent of the refugee population (the vertical line in the figure), the
probability threshold that would achieve that outcome is 0.42 (the horizontal line in the figure).

Figure 5 - Probability threshold for different budget scenarios




Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.




Vice-versa, one can focus on optimizing coverage and leakage. This can serve organizations that do not
have a sufficient budget to cover all potential beneficiaries but can choose between different levels of
expenditure based on efficiency criteria. In this case, one can plot coverage and leakage rates against


                                                                                                        15
different budget scenarios as shown in Figure 6. By drawing a vertical line in correspondence of the
maximum distance between coverage and leakage rates, we can derive the optimal budget. In the
example proposed, this budget is equivalent to 58.7% of the budget necessary for universal coverage. This
is the budget that simultaneously maximizes coverage and minimizes leakage.



Figure 6 - Coverage rate and Leakage rate for different budget scenarios




Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.

On the contrary, a decision maker may prefer to fix a priori the percentage of coverage. This is shown in
Table 3 where, for a given coverage rate, the corresponding percentage of the universal budget, as well
as the leakage rate and the cut point are given. For example, in order to reach 80% of coverage, one needs
to use 62.25% of the universal budget, which corresponds to 22% of leakage and to a probability threshold
equal to 66%.




                                                                                                       16
Table 3 - Budget, leakage, probability threshold for different % of the universal coverage

                                   Budget (as % of
       % Coverage                 universal budget)          Leakage            Probability threshold
           100%                         100.00                 1.00                      0.00
            80%                          62.25                 0.22                      0.66
            60%                          43.81                 0.07                      0.83
            50%                           3.47                 0.00                      1.00
Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.




Summarizing alternative options, Table 4 shows the change in coverage, leakage, probability threshold
and poverty rates in correspondence of different budgets (represented as different percentages of the
universal budget). The first line shows that, in case of universal budget, every case receives assistance
(coverage and leakage are equal to one and cut point is equal to zero) and the poverty rate corresponds
to 32.3%. Moreover, 69.2% of the overall budget is used for coverage whereas leakage costs 30.8%. When,
instead, only 80% of the universal budget is used, the poverty rate increases to 38.4%, and the budget is
split between 81.2% for coverage and 18.8% for leakage. Reducing again the percentage of the universal
budget to 50%, the poverty rate raises to 50.1%, coverage absorbs 93.1% of the budget and leakage 6.9%.
Therefore, this approach provides a costing of leakage in addition to coverage and the corresponding
outcomes in terms of poverty rates. A table like Table 4 is a useful tool for donors and decision makers
engaged in taking difficult budget choices.

Table 4 - Coverage, leakage, probability threshold and poverty rate for different % of the universal
budget

  % Universal Coverage Leakage Probability Poverty % Budget for % Budget for
    budget      rate     rate   threshold rate (%)  coverage      leakage
        100%       1.00    1.00       0.00   32.30       69.2%         30.8%
         80%       0.94    0.49       0.42   38.39       81.2%         18.8%
         60%       0.78    0.20       0.69   45.65       89.8%         10.2%
         50%       0.67    0.11       0.78   50.10       93.1%          6.9%
           0%      0.00    0.00       1.00   69.18
Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.




                                                                                                      17
Adjusting the poverty line may be a further device to optimize coverage and leakage. One can repeat the
whole exercise of estimating the poverty model for a set of different poverty lines, thus obtaining the
corresponding predicted probabilities and the cut point that optimizes coverage and leakage, and see
whether adjusting marginally the poverty line can result in significant gains in terms of coverage and/or
leakage. This is illustrated in Figure 7. As an example, we use ten alternative poverty lines in
correspondence of each decile of expenditure per capita and estimate the optimal probability threshold
and the corresponding coverage and leakage rate for each poverty line. We then connect these ten points
to show the resulting curves. A policy maker would normally seek the maximum distance between the
coverage and leakage rate and, as one would expect, this distance grows as we increase the poverty line.

However, the increase in this distance is not linear. For example, using the second decile’s mean value as
poverty line (23.3 JD), would result in a coverage rate of 72 percent and a leakage rate of 26 percent. If
the poverty line is increased to the third decile’s mean value (39.9 JD), this would not change the coverage
rate and would decrease the leakage rate by only 1 percent. In other words, there is almost no gain in
increasing the poverty line from 23.3 to 30.9 JD. Instead, shifting the poverty line from the sixth to the
seventh decile’s mean value would increase the coverage rate by 2 percentage points while decreasing
leakage by 4 percentage points, a significant gain. Poverty lines established for targeting are generally of
an absolute nature and based on basic needs assessments. However, targeting or budget considerations
may justify adjusting the poverty line to optimize the use of resources. For this purpose, Figure 7 can be a
useful instrument for policy makers.

Figure 7 also shows the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) built on deciles of expenditure per capita
(a straight line by construction). The CDF is useful in that it shows the poverty rate on the (y-axis) for each
possible poverty line (x-axis). For example, with a poverty line of approximately 42 JD, about 50 percent
of the population would be under the poverty line. Therefore, when one adjusts the poverty line to
optimize coverage and budget, it is also possible to monitor what the effect of this change would be on
the poverty rate and, consequently, on the number of people under the poverty line. Again, this is a
relatively simple device that supplies a set of critical information for policy makers aiming to fine-tune
targeting decisions.




                                                                                                            18
Figure 7 - Optimal Coverage rate, Leakage rate and Cut point (%)



 1.0
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 0.0
           14.6       23.3       30.9       38.5     46.8      57.5     73.3   100.0   155.0   1675.0
                                                   Poverty line (in JD)

               Optimal coverage                Optimal leakage         Optimal cutpoint        CDF

Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data.




    6. Conclusions
Humanitarian organizations such as the WFP and the UNHCR rely entirely on donors’ contributions to
administer programs for refugees and IDPs. These contributions are increasingly hard to come by and,
when crises are multi-dimensional, contributions are typically below the needs generated by the sum of
these dimensions. This is the case, for example, of the recent crises in Nigeria, South Sudan, Somalia and
the Republic of Yemen. The conflicts that affected these countries generated the displacement of millions
of people who became IDPs or refugees. The more recent droughts that affected all these countries are
contributing to further misery and the combination of conflict and droughts led to food shortages that are
resulting in famine.

The needs of the affected populations, whether refugees and IDPs or host populations, grow
disproportionally when these calamities occur simultaneously, donors find themselves stretched between


                                                                                                        19
different calls for funds and humanitarian organizations remain under-funded. In these cases, targeting is
an obliged choice and optimal and efficient targeting can make the difference between life and death for
some of the displaced populations. This justifies refining targeting techniques making the most of the
available technology.

In addition to being technically sound, targeting requires tools that make choice and implementation
relatively simple for policy makers and field staff. One cannot expect all humanitarian staff working on the
field to be knowledgeable in econometrics or statistics techniques. Hence the need for relatively simple
visual devices that can be used for making normative targeting choices based on positive criteria without
necessarily be cognizant of the econometrics and statistics that lie behind these devices.

This paper has proposed the use of ROC curves and related indices to refine targeting when budgets are
constrained and has developed relatively simple graphs that can be used by policy makers to make
decisions on coverage, budgets and poverty lines when targeting is based on welfare criteria. We show
existing trade-offs between optimal coverage and leakage rates, the optimal use of existing budgets and
small adjustments that can result in large gains in terms of poverty reduction. The methods proposed can
be applied to food voucher programs as illustrated in this paper or to any other cash program. We also
showed that such methods can be applied using existing data collected by the UNHCR in the framework
of existing programs such as the WFP food voucher program. In other words, these are tools that can be
readily applied and do not necessarily require the collection of new data or the administration of special
programs.

It is also clear that the method proposed cannot be applied in all contexts. The Jordan example provided
in this paper relies on a set of data (proGres and home visits data) that is atypical in humanitarian contexts.
While proGres data are available in most countries where the UNHCR operates, the quality of these data
is very variable (the Jordan data are known to be among the best quality data available). Also, home visits
data that contain information on income or expenditure are the exception rather than the rule in
humanitarian contexts. Therefore, at present, the replicability of the method proposed elsewhere is
limited to selected areas and countries. However, all humanitarian operations with budget limitations that
use cash or food vouchers as a form of social protection face the same targeting challenges described in
this paper. In the absence of quality data on income or consumption, these operations have to rely on
alternative and less accurate targeting criteria the outcomes of which (in terms of poverty, coverage and
leakage) are non-measurable. This paper has implicitly shown that the collection of income or



                                                                                                            20
consumption data can lead to improvements in the measurement of outcomes and in the effectiveness
of targeting.

This paper has also ignored aspects of political economy, administration and other outcomes that may be
equally important for beneficiaries. Governments have often a bias for geographical targeting covering
areas relevant for selected constituencies rather than focusing on the poor. Administrative constraints
such as complex logistics or lack of administrative budgets can make reaching the poor impossible in some
cases making geographical or other forms of targeting more appealing. Outcomes different from poverty
reduction such as nutrition levels may be as important or more important than poverty reduction in a
humanitarian and emergency context. These are all elements to factor in when considering the method
proposed in this paper.




References

Brück, T., d’Errico, M. and Pietrelli, R. (2017) The Effects of Violent Conflict on Household Resilience and
Food Security: Evidence from the 2014 Gaza Conflict, World Development, forthcoming.

Coll-Black, S., Gilligan, D. O., Hoddinott, J. F., Kumar, N., Taffesse, A. S., Wiseman, W. (2012) in: Food and
agriculture in Ethiopia: Progress and policy challenges, chapter 10 International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI).

Dreze, J and Sen, A. (1989) Hunger and Public Action, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Fatema, N. and Kibriva. S. (2017) Givers of great dinners know few enemies: The impact of household food
security on micro-level communal conflict in Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, World Development,
forthcoming.

Hand, D.J., 2009. Measuring classifier performance: a coherent alternative to the area under the ROC
curve. Machine Learning 77, 103–123.

Hand, D.J., 2010. Evaluating diagnostic tests: the area under the ROC curve and the balance of errors.
Statistics in Medicine 29, 1502–1510.

Hand, D.J., 2012. Assessing the performance of classification methods. International Statistical Review 80,
400–414.



                                                                                                           21
Hand, D.J., Anagnostopoulos, C., 2013. When is the area under the receiver characteristic curve an
appropriate measure of classifier performance? Pattern Recognition 80, 400–414.

Krzanowski, W.J., Hand, D.J., 2009. ROC Curves for Continuous Data. CRC Press—Chapman and Hall, New
York.

Gigliarano, C., Figini, S. and Muliere P. (2014) Making classifier performance comparisons when ROC
curves intersect, Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 77, 300-312.

Lusted, L.B., 1971. Signal detectability and medical decision-making. Science 171, 1217–1219.

Martin-Shields, C. and Stojetz, W. (2017) Framing the Relationship Between Food Security and Violent
Conflict Data: A Clustering and Typology Approach, World Development, forthcoming.

Maxwell, D. Young, H., Jaspars, S., Burns, J. and Frize, J. (2011) “Targeting and Distribution in Complex
Emergencies: Participatory Management of Humanitarian Food Assistance.” Food Policy Vol. 36(4), pp.
535–543.

Morris, S., Levin, C., Armar-Klemesu, M., Maxwell, D. and Ruel, M.T. (1999). “Does Geographic Targeting
of Nutrition Interventions Make Sense in Cities? Evidence from Abidjan and Accra.” World Development
Vol. 27(11), pp. 2011–2019.

Thomas, L.C. (2009). Consumer Credit Models: Pricing, Profit, and Portfolios. Oxford University Press.

van Weezel, S. (2017) Food, Drought and Conflict: Evidence from a Case-Study on Somalia.

Verme, P.; Gigliarano, C.; Wieser, C.; Hedlund, K.; Petzoldt, M.; Santacroce, M.. 2016. The Welfare of
Syrian Refugees : Evidence from Jordan and Lebanon. Washington, DC: World Bank. World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23228 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”

Wodon, Q. (1997) Targeting the Poor using ROC Curves. World Development, Vol. 25, Issue 12, pp. 2083-
2092.




                                                                                                         22
Table A - Poverty Models




Source: Authors’ estimations based on Jordan UNHCR data. Note: PA=Principal Applicant.

                                                                                         23
