                                                     WPS8238


Policy Research Working Paper                       8238




  Learning the Impact of Financial Education
            When Take-Up Is Low
                              Gabriel Lara Ibarra
                               David McKenzie
                              Claudia Ruiz Ortega




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
  &
Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
November 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8238


  Abstract
  Financial education programs are increasingly offered by                           data allows combining nonexperimental methods with the
  governments, nonprofits, and financial institutions. How-                          experiment to yield credible measures of impact, even with
  ever, voluntary participation rates in such programs are often                     take-up rates below 1 percent. The findings show that a
  very low, posing a severe challenge for randomized experi-                         financial education workshop and personalized coaching
  ments attempting to measure their impact. This study uses                          result in a higher likelihood of paying credit cards on time,
  a large experiment on more than 100,000 credit card clients                        and of making more than the minimum payment, but do not
  in Mexico. The study shows how the richness of financial                           reduce spending, resulting in higher profitability for the bank.




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group and the
  Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its
  research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers
  are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at glaraibarra@worldbank.org,
  dmckenzie@worldbank.org and cruizortega@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
               Learning the Impact of Financial Education When Take-Up Is Low#


                                                Gabriel Lara Ibarra
                                                   World Bank
                                                 David McKenzie
                                                   World Bank
                                               Claudia Ruiz Ortega
                                                   World Bank




JEL Classification Codes: D14, G21, G28, O12.
Keywords: financial literacy; credit-card behavior; low take-up




#
  We thank Adolfo Albo, Juan Luis Ordaz, David Cervantes and the BBVA Bancomer Financial Education Team for
their collaboration on the experiment and for providing us with the anonymized customer data used in this paper. We
would also like to thank the participants at the EduFin Summit 2017 in Mexico City for comments and suggestions.
The authors of the paper received no funding for this work from BBVA Bancomer, and maintained independence in
their analysis and reporting of the results. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its affiliated organizations, or those
of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
    1. Introduction
Low levels of financial literacy are pervasive in both developed and developing countries. Higher
financial literacy is associated with a wide range of better financial decisions, including more
retirement planning, greater stock market participation, and higher savings (Lusardi and Mitchell,
2014). Credit card users with low levels of financial literacy are more likely to carry balances, pay
only the minimum payment, or incur late fees (Mottola, 2013; Lusardi and Tufano, 2015). As a
result, a large number of governments, international organizations, non-profits, and financial
institutions have launched efforts to provide financial education in many countries around the
world (Fernandes et al, 2014; Miller et al, 2015).
However, voluntary participation in many financial education efforts is often very low. Willis
(2011, p. 230) notes that “voluntary financial education is widely available today, yet seldom
used”. For example, Brown and Gartner (2007) report on experimental efforts by different credit
card providers in the United States that aimed to provide online financial literacy training to
delinquent and at-risk credit card holders: Target Financial Services made calls to 80,982
cardholders, reached only 6,417 of them, offered half of them the program, and had only 28 log
in, and only 2 people completed the course; U.S. Bank had only 384 cardholders out of the 42,000
it attempted to reach complete its online program. In Mexico, Bruhn et al. (2014) sent 40,000
letters to bank clients to get them to enroll in a financial education course, of which only 42
responded with interest in the course; they also displayed 16 million Facebook ads, to receive only
119 responses. In Peru, Chong et al. (2010) abandoned a randomized experiment after only 7
percent of their treatment group listened regularly to a radio program with financial education
messages, despite being given financial incentives to do so. Low take-up rates are not unique to
financial education, but are common among many offers of financial products and services by
financial institutions. For example, in the United States the response rate to direct mail credit card
solicitations fell from 2.2 percent to 0.6 percent between 1991 and 2012 (Grodzicki, 2015).1
Such low take-up rates present a severe challenge to randomized experiments attempting to
measure the impact of financial education on those who do participate. Due to the inverse-square
rule, an experiment with 1 percent take-up requires 10,000 times the sample as an experiment with
100 percent take-up in order to have the same statistical power. This can be one reason why many
experimental evaluations of financial literacy training struggle to find a significant effect
(Fernandes et al, 2014; Miller et al, 2015). Yet there is often still interest on the part of researchers
and financial institutions in learning whether the program had impacts for those individuals who
do choose to participate. Moreover, while take-up rates may be low in response to specific offers,
widespread availability can still mean the total number of program participants can be large – just
as many people have credit cards despite few people responding to any particular credit card offer.

1
  Take-up rates can be substantially higher in underdeveloped economies in which consumers have few alternatives
for the product or service. For example, Bursztyn et al. (2017) report 21 percent take-up for a platinum credit card
offer in Indonesia. Nevertheless, Karlan et al. (2010) note that low take-up is an issue for many evaluations attempting
to measure impacts of savings, loan, and insurance products offered by microfinance institutions. Crépon et al. (2015)
use a pilot phase to then over-sample households with a higher ex-ante propensity to borrow, but find that take-up is
not that much higher in this group than in the average population, highlighting the difficulty of predicting in advance
who will take-up borrowing.

                                                           2
The key question this paper attempts to address is whether we can still obtain reliable measures of
the impact of financial education when take-up rates are too low to enable estimation by
experimental methods alone. Our context is an experiment in Mexico, whereby the bank BBVA
Bancomer worked with over 100,000 of its credit card clients, inviting the treatment group to
attend its financial education program Adelante con tu futuro (Go ahead with your future). The
program has had over 1.2 million participants between 2008 and 2016, yet only 0.8 percent of the
clients in the treatment group attended the workshop. A second experiment which tested
personalized financial coaching also had low take-up, with 6.8 percent of the treatment group
actually receiving coaching. Standard experimental estimation then finds no significant impact of
either treatment, but with very wide confidence intervals for the estimated treatment effect on the
treated (the impact of actually receiving training or coaching).
Nevertheless, we argue that the richness of financial data allows combining non-experimental
methods with the random assignment from the experiment in a way that yields credible estimates
of the treatment impact for those who do take up financial education. We show that those who
participate in financial education tend to pay more than the minimum payment on their credit cards,
which is in line with the claim of Willis (2011) that those who participate voluntarily tend to
already have more financial knowledge and better financial practices than those who do not. This
means that simple comparisons of those who participate to those who do not will be biased. Instead,
we use the rich time-series data we have on credit card clients to match those who take up the
workshops or coaching in the treatment group to clients in the control group who display similar
levels and trends in key outcomes month-after-month for 16 months pre-treatment. Matched
difference-in-differences are then used to estimate the treatment impacts. This approach helps
overcome several common concerns about the use of matching and difference-in-differences: the
assumption of common trends becomes more plausible when we can show the two groups we
select displayed similar behavior for 16 time periods beforehand; while the question of why
matched individuals in the control group did not take up treatment if they are so similar to the
treated has a ready answer in that they were randomly assigned to not be invited.
We find that both attending the financial education workshops, and receiving personalized
coaching, do lead to changes in financial outcomes for participants. Attending the workshop or
receiving coaching results in a 6 to 11 percentage point increase in the likelihood of paying more
than the minimum payment, a 3 percentage point lower likelihood of not paying by the payment
due date, and a 3 percentage point increase in the likelihood of also having a deposit account at
the bank. While paying more responsibly, clients do not reduce the amount of credit card spending,
and actually spend more. The result is that financial education of either type leads to an increase
in the likelihood that the client is considered profitable by the bank. This demonstrates an
additional motive for financial institutions to offer financial education to their clients, beyond the
social responsibility motives typically given.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the context of the
experiment, details of the two interventions, the experimental assignment, and the low take-up;
Section 3 provides the treatment impacts using pure experimental methods, showing these to be



                                                  3
uninformative; Section 4 then discusses our methodology for combining experimental with non-
experimental methods and the resulting estimates of treatment impact; and Section 5 concludes.
    2. The Intervention, Samples, and Take-up

    2.1 Context
Mexico has experienced a remarkable increase in the penetration of financial services in the
population in recent years. For instance, the number of credit cards owned was estimated at 27.5
million in December of 2016 – a number 12.4 percent higher than that registered at the end of
2015.2 In a country with 76 million adults, this implies that there is one credit card for every three
adults.3 As of June 2016, the balance in credit card debts represented 39.4 percent of the total credit
to personal consumption issued in the country.4
This rapid growth in credit card usage in Mexico may clash with the amount of time that people
have had to learn what an appropriate use of the cards may be. In Mexico, only 32 percent of adults
were found to be financially literate, positioning it around the 85th place in a worldwide survey of
142 countries (Klapper et al. 2015). Equally worrying, Ponce et al. (2017) illustrate how Mexican
cardholders with more than one card typically leave money on the table by using the higher rate
card, and experience 31 percent higher cost than the minimum to finance their existing debt.
The experiment of our study was rolled out in several cities across Mexico by BBVA Bancomer,
our partner bank. BBVA Bancomer has a dominant position in the credit card market in Mexico.
In 2016, BBVA Bancomer and Citigroup Banamex held more than half the credit card market in
Mexico and around the same share of the total balance in such credits.5
Clients of our partner bank appear to be good candidates for improvement in their financial literacy
skills. More than half are classified as either medium or high risk, and practically one in five is
considered by BBVA Bancomer to be high-risk. BBVA Bancomer credit card clients also appear
to use their cards regularly and heavily: they spend on their credit cards about 6,600 Mexican pesos
(MXP) per month, which is not far from the 7,365 MXP monthly salary in 2014.6
2.2 The Interventions
In this paper, we tackle the question of how effective is financial literacy in improving financial
behavior through two distinct treatments. One treatment arm is based on providing the typical
approach to financial training: a classroom setting. Since this is the most common tool used by
private and public institutions alike to promote financial education, understanding the potential
effects and benefits remains an important question. The second treatment arm is based on
personalized coaching sessions. This arm responds to the concern in Willis (2011) that due to the
heterogeneity of households’ circumstances and needs, effective financial education needs to be

2
  https://www.publimetro.com.mx/mx/economia/2017/05/03/numero-tarjetas-credito-se-dispara-12-4-condusef.html
3
  Based on INEGI’s population Count 2015 and including those 20 years and older.
4
  http://www.banxico.org.mx/sistema-financiero/publicaciones/reporte-de-tasas-de-interes-efectivas-de-tarjetas-
/%7B3A787547-BAAA-A0F2-4D1A-151E96D32321%7D.pdf
5
  Based on comparable market of credit cards (Banxico, 2016).
6
  Informe Anual del Observatorio de Salarios 2016 “Los salarios y la desigualdad en México” IBERO/EQUIDE

                                                       4
structured “in a one-on-one setting, with content personalized for each consumer”. Due to the more
personal approach, individuals may internalize better the information provided and receive more
actionable recommendations based on their own situation and thus be more likely to change their
financial behavior than in a situation where only generic advice was provided. However, such an
approach can be costlier to provide and scale. We now describe each of the treatment arms in
detail.
Financial Literacy course
The first treatment arm is a financial literacy training course that is made freely available by our
partner bank at a large-scale throughout Mexico and online. BBVA Bancomer launched the
financial literacy courses in 2008, winning an award for innovativeness in fostering financial
education in 2011. The courses offered include savings, retirement savings, credit card use,
mortgages, life insurance, as well as a series of workshops for small and medium enterprises. As
of November 2016, over 4.8 million workshop sessions have provided training to about 1.2 million
participants.
The courses are offered in person and online. All courses follow generally the same structure: two-
hour-long interactive sessions, with material being provided in multimedia: a facilitator presents
the material, some videos are shown, and each participant receives a notebook to conduct personal
evaluations of their financial knowledge and behaviors, as well as a personal computer to work on.
Participants get to take home the notebook that also contains all the information reviewed, and a
CD with exercises. Participants are evaluated at the end of the workshop and receive a certificate
of completion.
Under this treatment arm, we focus on the provision of the course covering modules on Credit
Card Use and Financial Health. The first module of this two-hour course delves into the use of
credit cards, associated fees, and how to decipher a credit card statement. Hands-on exercises make
participants go through the explanation of what the different parts of a credit card are (digits,
expiration date, the security code in the back of the card), understand and differentiate between the
payment period and the closing-date of purchases, and read all the elements of a bank credit card
statement. The second module focuses on good credit card debt management practices. In this
module, individuals learn about the credit score and credit history and their determinants, including
failure to pay old debts or keeping high balances frequently. Participants are asked to go through
a self-evaluation of their financial health, and based on this assessment a discussion is held on the
steps individuals can take to preserve and improve their credit management.7 Throughout the
modules, participants are reminded of rules of thumb labeled “golden rules” for good credit card
behavior as a way to make the messages and advice concrete and easy to remember. These rules
are presented in Appendix 3b, and emphasis the importance of paying on time, and paying more
than the minimum payment.
Invitations and attendance to the workshops were conducted from July through December 2016.
Invitations were done through email and BBVA Bancomer call center. Given the scope of the
study, participants were contacted and invited to participate in the face-to-face training in their city

7
    The detailed topics covered by the training are included in Appendix 3a.

                                                            5
of residency. Clients from Mexico City, Puebla, Guadalajara, Morelia, Cuernavaca, Mérida and
Tijuana were included in the workshop treatment arm. They were offered BBVA Bancomer
rewards points for completing the course, which could be redeemed towards small rewards like a
meal or merchandise.8
Personalized coaching
A second treatment arm was based on a series of personalized coaching sessions. The content was
developed by BBVA Bancomer with the objective of “bringing information and tools to
participants so that they have the capacity to make an adequate use of their credit card and to keep
an excellent credit health”. This coaching entailed calling and scheduling a series of conversations
with the participant to discuss her credit history, health, and behavior and help solve any issues or
doubts she may have. The coaching was provided by highly trained asesores (financial advisers).
Each of these asesores was assigned a group of individuals who they would call and invite to
engage in these coaching sessions. If an individual agreed to participate, the asesores would ask
them about the doubts and questions they may have about their credit card and credit card use.
Asesores were equipped to provide suggestions on how to improve the individual’s credit and help
them pursue healthy financial behavior. The recommendations followed closely the contents and
advice that the workshops had, such as: payment more than the minimum to lessen the total interest
payment overall, remembering the payment date, and budgeting as to avoid unnecessary use of
credit: “the credit is not an extension of your salary”.
After the initial call and introduction, the asesores would discuss and agree on a follow-up call
with the participant at a time that fitted her schedule. The calls were aimed to be roughly two
weeks apart, with a total of four calls with each participant. The calls were intended to be thematic
and follow a specific progression: diagnostic, budget, credit, and credit health. Each call was
planned to last about 10 minutes. Overall, participants were expected to be engaged in this
treatment in a span of two calendar months. The list of topics and guide for the discussion are
presented in appendix 3c.
As with the workshops, coaching sessions took place between June and December 2016. While
the call center was situated in Mexico City, participants of the coaching sessions could be residing
in any of the nine cities that were part of the study. As with the workshops, participants were
offered rewards points for completing the program.
It is worth noting that the delivery methods studied in our treatment arms are easily scalable and
of relatively low cost from the point of view of a financial institution. Each participant in the
workshop cost BBVA Bancomer 86 MXP or around 5 USD, while the cost per person coached
was estimated at 131 MXP (7 USD). To put this cost in perspective, the annual fee for a set of
BBVA Bancomer’s credit cards is between 631 and 5,275 MXP. The average yearly profitability
of BBVA Bancomer credit card clients is 1,056 MXP. Thus, expanding the provision of such
interventions should not be necessarily seen as a high toll to pay. While credit card holders are
already profitable to the bank, the expected effects of financial education through better (and


8
    They were given up to 4,000 points, which are valued at approximately 300 pesos (US$16).

                                                          6
increased) use of their credit cards may further strengthen the business case to continue BBVA
Bancomer financial literacy program.
2.3 Outcomes and Measurement
We obtained administrative data from BBVA Bancomer on 136,104 credit card clients from
December 2014 to February 2017. The data set contains a rich set of information summarizing the
monthly evolution of each client’s credit card balance, payments, purchases, delays, profitability
for the bank and ownership of basic deposit accounts with the bank. The data set also includes the
seniority of clients with our partner bank and their background characteristics such as age and
gender.
We center our analysis on a set of outcomes that we believe are more likely to be affected by the
interventions, based on the material covered both in the workshops and coaching. More concretely,
there are three rules that the workshops and coaching emphasize to help participants achieve a
more responsible use of their credit cards and avoid extra fees and future over-indebtedness. The
first rule is to cover at least the minimum payment required by the bank. The second one is to
identify from the credit card statements the payment due date and make sure to pay before that
date. A third advice is to limit the use of credit to an amount that the client can comfortably pay
later. Along these three rules, the importance of saving and better managing expenses is frequently
discussed.
We first test whether participants of the interventions are more likely to follow these rules by
analyzing key outcomes directly related to them. These outcomes are: i) the likelihood of paying
more than the minimum payment; ii) the likelihood of paying past the payment due date; and iii)
total credit card purchases. As the interventions highlight the importance of saving, we also analyze
whether participants are more likely to own a basic deposit account after the interventions. Finally,
we investigate how profitable these financial education interventions are for our partner bank. We
do this by analyzing a variable that measures the profitability of each client for the bank at every
month.9,10
2.4 Samples and Random Assignment
Given that we expect financial education interventions to have a greater impact among participants
with riskier credit card management practices, we stratified the sample into six groups based on
two risk measures of the clients. The first measure corresponds to the risk classification of each
client. Every client is classified by our partner bank as low risk, medium risk and high risk. Since
clients who struggle to cover the minimum payment are at a higher risk of facing credit card
management issues in the future, we produce a complementary risk measure that classifies clients


9
   Our profitability variable corresponds to the difference between the revenue obtained from a client and the
expenditures he or she generated for the bank. The revenue is measured as the interest income plus paid commissions
and fees. The expenditures include operational costs, cost of capital, loan losses and reserves.
10
   On one hand, profits to the bank may increase if clients spend more on their credit cards and thus the revenues from
commissions and interest income rise. In addition, if clients are more likely to pay on time, the costs of monitoring
and recovering loans drop. On the other hand, profits may decline if better credit card management translates in lower
interest payments and fees.

                                                          7
according to how often their payment exceeds the minimum required by the bank. We define
clients as “with frequent low payments” if more than one-third of the time they pay the required
minimum or less.11
While our partner bank had no capacity constraints to deliver the financial education workshops,
only 300 coaching interventions could be given.12 Therefore, we decided to restrict the coaching
group to clients belonging to the stratum with the highest-risk clients (i.e., clients with frequent
low payments and classified by the bank as high risk). The highest-risk clients were randomly
assigned into three groups: workshops, coaching and the control group. For all other strata, clients
were randomly assigned into either the workshop or the control group.
Clients in the coaching group were also randomly divided into three lists: the main list and two
wait lists. Clients in the first wait list would only be contacted if there were still sessions available
after coaching was offered to clients in the first list.13 After contacting clients from the first two
lists, all coaching sessions were exhausted. Therefore, 1,354 clients that were assigned to the third
list were never contacted to participate in the intervention and were dropped from the sample.
To have at least one year of pre-intervention data to get accurate counterfactuals, we also dropped
from the sample 20,524 clients. These clients were new to the bank and only had six months of
data before the interventions. Therefore, our final sample consists of 114,226 clients.
Table 1 presents the summary statistics of our sample, divided by the group of clients assigned to
the workshops (Panel A) and the set of clients assigned to coaching (Panel B). We divide each
panel in four columns. The first column presents the characteristics of clients in the control group.
The second and third columns of each panel show the characteristics of clients assigned to and that
effectively attended each intervention. The fourth column presents the mean differential of the
characteristics of clients assigned to the control group with clients taking up each intervention.
Clients in the sample are on average 46 years old and about half of them are women. Most clients
live in Mexico City and have been clients with our partner bank for about 12 years. In terms of
their risk profile, 19 percent of clients are classified by the bank as being high-risk, 37 percent as
medium-risk and 44 percent as low-risk. Per our definition, 26 percent of clients struggle to pay
more than the minimum required. That is, their payments do not exceed the minimum payment
required in at least 4 of the 12 months that we observe them before the intervention. Each month,
clients tend to spend about 7,000 Mexican pesos on their credit cards. On average, 86 percent of
clients pay more than the minimum payment required by the bank and only 1 percent make their
payments past the due date. 70 percent of clients own a deposit account with our partner bank. In
terms of profitability, each month the bank obtains approximately 1,000 Mexican pesos for each
client in the sample.


11
   On average, 27 percent of individuals in the sample paid the minimum required payment or less in the pre-
intervention period.
12
   From the institution’s point of view, the intervention was thought as a pilot that could be scaled up based on the
results and lessons learned.
13
   Likewise, clients from the second list would only be contacted if there were still coaching sessions available after
having invited all clients from the first wait list.

                                                          8
Currently, BBVA Bancomer offers eleven different credit cards in Mexico (Appendix 4). After the
closing date (the last day of the monthly billing cycle), all clients have 20 days to pay at least the
minimum payment (typically 20% of the balance) before incurring late fees. Even though the terms
vary across credit cards, APRs on BBVA Bancomer cards range from 18.6 to 115.6 percent, with
those for the most common cards ranging from 68.2% to 91.6%. The fixed penalty for not paying
on time is approximately 377 MXP (or 24 dollars) without counting the added interest. The annual
fee of BBVA Bancomer credit cards is about 631 MXP (33 dollars), though it can be much higher
for certain types of cards.
2.5 Take-up
As in many other settings analyzing financial behavior, the implementation of the study faced a
major challenge regarding take-up rates. From a total of 114,226 clients, 36,946 were assigned to
the control group, 73,654 were assigned to the workshop treatment arm and 3,636 were assigned
to the coaching treatment arm. At the end, only 0.8 percent of the workshop treatment arm clients
actually received the treatment, and 6.8 percent of the clients in the coaching treatment arm
participated in the sessions (table 2). There are several reasons explaining this low take-up rate.
In the case of the workshop treatment arm, the resources needed to reach out to such a large number
of clients were underestimated. Thus, during the implementation phase that lasted about six
months, of the original group assigned to the workshop treatment, contact was attempted only to
about 47.3 percent (34,818 clients). Next, despite repeated efforts to contact the individuals in this
group, only 8,900 clients were effectively contacted. This means that over 25,000 clients did not
pick up the phone during the outreach or that they answered and asked to be called later (without
success). Thus, only a little over 12% of the group assigned to the workshops could be contacted
and actually invited to participate in the treatment. From this group, 2,672 clients agreed to
participate in the workshop and a mere 583 attended and completed the workshop.
Similar challenges were faced in the roll out of the coaching intervention. Due to the relatively
low number of clients assigned to the treatment arm, the vast majority had at least one attempted
contact (88.5%). From these, only about a third picked up the phone and less than a sixth agreed
to participate in the coaching sessions (14% of the original treatment group). Finally, 246 clients
completed at least one session with the coach, translating to a take-up rate of 6.8%. While these
take-up rates seem dire, as discussed in the introduction, they are unfortunately not unusual in the
RCT universe, nor in the marketing reach out campaigns of financial institutions. Anecdotal
evidence from BBVA Bancomer deposits department puts the typical response rate of the bank’s
marketing campaigns at 2%.
The challenge of low take-up rates can pose an even bigger problem if it is selective. For instance,
it is easy to argue that bank clients will be less likely to answer a call from their bank if they are
having trouble keeping their finances in order, are often late in paying their cards, or have typically
large balances on their cards. Thus, when such clients get a call from the bank to be invited to take
a training, a coaching session or any other reason, they are less likely to answer the call in the first
place. If good (i.e. more financially literate) clients self-select into participating in the treatment,
while bad clients tend to self-select out of the treatment, a direct comparison of their outcomes

                                                   9
with the control group will yield biased results. Financially literate clients are expected to have
less to learn from more financial education, thus hinting that the workshops or coaching sessions
may not affect individuals’ financial behavior significantly.
We find evidence of selective participation in our study. Clients that end up taking the workshop
or the coaching sessions appear to be in lower need of financial education than the average client.
The more often an individual paid above the minimum payment in her card, the higher the
likelihood she signed up for the workshop (figure 1 panel A) or the coaching (Figure 1 panel B).
For instance, an individual assigned to the coaching group who paid more than the minimum for
six months is more than twice as likely to complete the coaching session than an individual who
paid more than the minimum in three months only. Other characteristics also hint at positive
selection among treatment takers. Clients who were contacted, accepted participating and actually
took the workshop (or coaching) are more likely to make payments above the minimum required,
less likely to pay late, and more likely to also own a deposit account than those who were assigned
to the same treatment group but did not sign up and received the treatment (table 1). Within the
workshop treatment group, the takers are also more likely to avoid making low payments on a
regular basis.
We now turn to the description of the methodological approaches used to estimate the effects of
the treatment arms on financial behavior. We first describe the pure experimental approach that is
applied in most RCTs. Next, to overcome the low take-up rate problem, we apply a combination
of non-experimental methods to get at a cleaner estimate of the impact of the workshops and
coaching sessions. We describe these approaches in detail below.
   3. Pure Experimental Results
3.1 The Challenge of Low Take-up for Statistical Power
Consider a simple comparison of treatment and control means in a randomized experiment which
allocates a proportion P of subjects to the treatment, and 1-P to the control. This intent-to-treat
effect can then be estimated in a regression of the form:
  =    +     +                                                                      (1)
Where Ti is a dummy variable denoting assignment to treatment, and the error ε is i.i.d. with
variance . Let c be the take-up rate in the treatment group, s the take-up rate in the control group
(s=0 if no one in the control group gets the treatment), and E the impact of treatment for those who
actually receive the treatment (the treatment effect on the treated). The sample size N needed to
detect effect size E at significance level α and power β is then (e.g. Duflo et al, 2008):

              /
  =                                                                                 (2)

With more rounds of data and the use of difference-in-differences or Ancova estimation, the
variance term becomes more complicated, but the influence of the take-up rates remains the same
(McKenzie, 2012).


                                                10
We see that the sample size required is proportional to the inverse of the difference in take-up rates
squared 1/(c-s)2. The consequence is that low take-up rates dramatically increase the sample size
required to detect the impact of training: if take-up is 10 percent, 100 times the sample is needed
than with full take-up; if it is 5 percent, 400 times the sample is needed; and if it is the 0.5 percent
that is common in responses to bank direct mail promotions, 40,000 times the sample is needed.
This makes it extremely challenging for experimental methods to detect the impact of interventions
when take-up rates are very low.
3.2 Experimental Treatment Impacts
The offer of a financial education workshop or of coaching was randomly assigned, and so
comparing post-treatment outcomes for the treatment group to the control group gives an unbiased
estimate of the intention-to-treat (ITT) effect, which is the effect of being offered the program.
Consider outcome Yi,t measured for client i in period t. McKenzie (2012) shows that with multiple
rounds of follow-up data, maximum power comes from estimating an average effect γ over the
entire nine-month post-intervention period t=1,2,…,9 via the following Ancova specification:

 ,   =                          +∑         1    =        +   ,   +∑      1       +    ,        (3)

Where ,     is the mean of the outcome over the pre-treatment periods, are strata fixed effects,
 are time period fixed effects, and the standard errors , are clustered at the client-level.
Under the assumption that the invitation to financial education or coaching has no impact on
outcomes for those who do not take-up the treatment, we can also estimate the local-average
treatment effect (LATE) by replacing OfferedTreatment with ReceivedTreatment in equation (3),
and then instrumenting the receipt of treatment with its randomly assigned offer. This identifies
the local-average treatment effect (LATE), which is the effect of receiving training or coaching
when offered it, and not otherwise. If no one in the control group takes up the treatment, then this
also gives the treatment-effect-on-the-treated (TOT). This is the case for the coaching intervention,
but it is possible that a few individuals in the control group for the training intervention may have
attended a workshop without being invited.
Figure 2 plots the trajectory of two key outcomes – paying more than the minimum payment, and
having a delay in payment – over time by treatment status. The top two figures show this for the
sample assigned to workshops, and the bottom two figures for the sample assigned to coaching. In
both cases we see that the treatment and control groups track each other very closely over time
before the intervention (as would be expected by randomization with a large sample), and continue
to track each other closely after the intervention. With such low take-up, the average for the
treatment group as a whole is dominated by the behavior of those who do not receive the treatment.
Table 3 then reports the results of estimating the ITT effect in equation (3) of being offered the
financial education workshop (panel A), and of being offered the coaching (panel B). These
estimates are all small in magnitude, and very close to zero. That is, the offer of treatment has a
very small, and insignificant impact on financial behavior. Underneath each ITT, we then report
the LATE/TOT and a 95 percent confidence interval around it. We see that the confidence intervals
are very wide for the impact of actually taking up either treatment, as a result, the experiment is

                                                    11
not very informative about the impact of these interventions. For example, the 95 percent
confidence interval for the impact of coaching on whether or not the client pays more than the
minimum payment ranges from -25 percentage points to +18 percentage points. The control mean
is 54 percent, so this is equivalent to almost halving the percent paying on time, or increasing it by
one-third.
This is where standard analysis using experimental methods would stop. We would conclude that
there is no significant impact of either intervention, but that we have insufficient power to rule out
a wide range of positive and negative impacts. We therefore turn to combining non-experimental
methods with the experiment to obtain more informative results.
   4. Combining Experimental and Non-Experimental Methods to Measure Impact for
      Those Who Actually Take Up Treatment
4.1 Empirical Approach
The basic challenge for identifying the impact of training and coaching for those who actually took
part in these interventions is that take-up is not random. Section 2 showed that those who attended
the workshops or received coaching differ in current and past financial behaviors from those who
did not. As a result, simply comparing those who took-up the interventions to the full set of
individuals in the control group would yield biased results.
Our solution is to use the richness of the financial data available on credit card clients to combine
experimental and non-experimental methods. We use propensity score matching to match
individuals in the treatment group who took up the treatment to similar individuals in the control
group, and then difference-in-differences on this matched sample to estimate the impact of
attending the workshop or receiving coaching. That is, we estimate the following equation for the
matched sample:

                         ,   =                            ,   +

                      +∑          1    =    +∑        1           +   ,     (4)
Where ReceivedTreatmenti,t takes on value one for individuals in the treatment group in post-
intervention periods, and zero otherwise; EverTreatedi is an indicator of whether individual i is in
the treatment group and ever took-up the treatment; and the time fixed effects are now included
for up to 18 months pre-treatment, as well as 9 months post-treatment. The standard errors are
again clustered at the client level.
There are several concerns that typically apply when applying propensity score matching. The first
is a concern of omitted variables: individuals who look similar in terms of baseline observable
variables might differ in terms of unobserved characteristics that also matter for client outcomes.
A particular concern here is that of dynamic selection, similar to the problem of an Ashenfelter dip
in labor economics experiments. For example, people might be more willing to engage in financial
education if they suddenly find themselves struggling with their credit card, whereas those who
have been experiencing problems for a while may be less likely to participate. Matching on current
behavior only would not be able to distinguish between these two types. Secondly, a critique

                                                 12
underlying all matching studies is to explain why, if these two groups are so similar, only one
group ended up taking the intervention. Our rich data and experiment help in addressing both
concerns. We have up to 18 months of pre-intervention financial data for these clients, so can
match not only on current financial behavior, but on the monthly trajectory of this behavior over
many months. This helps alleviate concerns about dynamic selection. Moreover, by only matching
to individuals in the control group (and not those in the treatment group who did not take up
treatment), we have a plausible reason why some individuals do not take up treatment – they were
not invited to under the random invitations.
Difference-in-differences further enables us to difference out any time-invariant unobservable
differences between the two groups. Thus, if those who participate in training or coaching always
tend to be better re-payers than those who do not, we can difference this out. The underlying
assumption for difference-in-difference analysis is that of a common trend, so that the two groups
would follow the same time paths as each other in the absence of an intervention. This assumption
is more credible if the individuals are more similar to begin with (which is where matching helps),
and if we see the two groups have the same dynamics prior to the intervention. Researchers relying
on survey data typically do not have multiple rounds of pre-intervention data with which to test
this assumption. In contrast, the monthly administrative data enables us to not only test whether
the two groups follow similar linear trends prior to the intervention, but also to test whether they
follow the same non-linear trend. To test this, we estimate over the pre-intervention period:

    ,   =∑          1   =                     +∑         1    =    +∑       1       +   ,      (5)
And test that all the β’s are jointly zero.
As we move away from the pure experiment, there is no one universally agreed control group. We
examine several different plausible ways of choosing this control group. We then view the
resulting estimates as more credible if these different methods give similar results, even though
they end up choosing different individuals from the control group to match to those who actually
take up treatment in the treatment group.
We begin by estimating the difference-in-differences estimator using the full control group. If there
is self-selection into treatment, those receiving training or coaching will differ in levels, and
potentially trends, from this full control group. A first step towards refining the control group to
more comparable individuals is to restrict the analysis to individuals in the common support of the
propensity score. For this approach, we estimate the propensity score as a function of gender, and
pre-treatment monthly levels of all five outcomes. This involves matching on 73 variables in total,
and eliminates 38% of the control group and 22% of the treatment group for coaching. We then go
further by choosing the nearest neighbor within this common support for each client who received
treatment. Using all the outcomes simultaneously to form these matches has the advantage of
making clients similar on average in terms of existing financial behavior, but, because it is
attempting to match on so many variables, may not match especially well on any particular single
outcome. We therefore also consider two alternatives to forming the propensity score and then
matching on the nearest neighbor. The first is to use Lasso to choose a parsimonious set of variables
to match on. This chooses 8 of the 73 variables to use in forming the match. The second, and our

                                                   13
most preferred approach, is to match just on the month-by-month pre-intervention data for an
outcome at a time. This last method ensures that the control individuals look as similar as possible
on levels and dynamics as those receiving treatment, but does mean, in contrast to the other
approaches, that different controls are used for each outcome.
Figure 3 illustrates how the five different approaches define counterfactuals for the coaching
treatment and outcome of paying more than the minimum payment owed. The top left panel
compares the full control group to those receiving treatment. We see that the group which received
coaching starts from a much higher mean level than the control group, reflecting positive selection
into training in terms of pre-existing credit behavior. The trends seem broadly similar pre-
intervention, suggesting difference-in-differences may be able to control for this selection. This
difference in baseline means becomes smaller, but is still there, when we condition on being in the
common support. In contrast, all three nearest neighbor approaches look much more similar on
baseline levels, and appear to match reasonably well on baseline trends. These different nearest
neighbor approaches do select different individuals from the control group: only 2 clients are
selected by all three methods, so we are forming multiple plausible counterfactuals.
Appendix Table 1 shows how these three nearest neighbor matches achieve samples from the
control group which are much more comparable on baseline observables to those who took up
treatment than is the case for the full control sample. The first column shows baseline means for
those who took-up treatment. We then follow Imbens and Rubin (2015) in considering the
normalized difference      −      /    ̅   + ̅   /2 as a measure of balance, where      and ̅   are
the sample mean and variance of the variable for those receiving treatment (j=T) and the
comparison subsample from the control group (j=C) respectively. These normalized differences
provide a scale-invariant measure of the difference in locations, with differences less than 0.2
standard deviations typically considered to indicate balance. We see that normalized differences
exceed this level for pre-intervention averages in our key outcomes when using the full control
sample, or the sample within the common support, but are all less than this when using any of our
three nearest neighbor methods. As a result, we cannot reject equality of means of our financial
outcomes averaged over all pre-intervention periods when using nearest neighbor.
4.2 Impacts of Workshops
Table 4 presents the difference-in-difference estimates of the impact of workshops on our five
outcomes of interest (Panels A through E). Each column presents the results of one of the five
approaches we use to form a control group. For each outcome and approach, we test whether the
treated and control groups followed common linear and non-linear trends in the pre-intervention
period. The p-values of the tests are included in the table. In Figure 3, we show a graphic
representation of the different approaches. The figure shows the trajectory of the outcome of
paying more than the minimum payment for the clients that participated in the workshops and the
clients assigned to the different control groups.
The last column of the table presents our preferred specification, the nearest neighbor approach
that matches on the monthly pre-intervention data for a specific outcome of interest. As Figure 4

                                                 14
shows, this approach allows us to generate a control group that tracks very closely the evolution
of each outcome for the treated group in the pre-intervention period. After the intervention, the
mean outcomes of the clients that participated in the workshops begin to separate from the mean
outcomes of the control group. While the outcomes of clients in the control group deteriorate over
time (i.e., lower fraction of clients paying more than the minimum required and increased
likelihood of delayed payment), the outcomes of clients who took the workshops remained stable.
The results from Table 4 show that these differences are statistically significant for all outcomes,
except for bank profitability. The p-values of the common trends tests suggest that we cannot reject
that the outcomes of clients who took the workshop and the control group formed by our preferred
approach followed common linear and non-linear trends before the interventions. The economic
impact of the estimates is also robust across the different matching approaches. The results of our
preferred specification suggest that participating in the workshop results in an 11 percentage point
increase in the likelihood of paying more than the minimum payment, a 3.4 percentage point
reduction in the likelihood of delaying payment, 63.7 percent higher monthly spending on the
credit card, and a 2.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of owning a deposit account with
our partner bank.
4.3 Impacts of Coaching
Table 5 provides the difference-in-difference results for our five different approaches to forming
a control group, along with tests of whether the two groups follow a common linear trend, and a
common non-linear trend, before the intervention. Figure 5 shows the trajectory of mean outcomes
for the group that received coaching, compared to our different matched control groups.
Figure 6 shows that after the time of the intervention, the control group is becoming progressively
more likely to not pay more than the minimum payment, to delay in their credit card payments, to
no longer have a deposit account with the bank, to cut back on spending, and are becoming less
profitable clients for the bank. The coaching treatment is halting these trends from occurring, so
that those who receive coaching appear more similar to their pre-intervention levels.
Table 5 shows that these impacts are statistically significant after matching for all but having a
deposit account, are reasonably robust in magnitude to different plausible ways of defining this
matched control group, and that we cannot reject that the matched control groups display parallel
linear or non-linear trends pre-intervention. Using our preferred specification in the last column
(which matches Figure 5), we find that receiving coaching results in a 5.9 percentage point increase
in the likelihood of paying more than the minimum payment, a 2.6 percentage point reduction in
the likelihood of delaying payment, 51.9 percent higher monthly spending on the credit card, and
a 7.8 percentage point increase in the likelihood that the client is profitable for the bank.
4.4 Discussion
This combination of nearest neighbor matching, difference-in-differences, and the random
assignment enables us to find a subset of clients within the full experimental control group who
look similar on baseline observables to those who take up the interventions, and who also follow
similar pre-intervention trends. Using this strategy, we detect treatment effects of the interventions

                                                 15
that were not able to be detected using experimental methods alone. It is worth re-iterating how
little power experimental methods will have to detect treatment effects of the size we find, given
the low take-up levels. For example, our power to detect the 5.9 percentage point improvement in
the likelihood of paying more than the minimum that we see for the coaching treatment, given that
take-up is 6.8 percent, is only 17.9 percent.14 Note that our estimated treatment effects are all
within the (very wide) confidence intervals seen for the LATE in Table 3.
It is important to note that these treatment effects are for the set of clients who will take up the
interventions when invited. We have seen there is positive selection into participation, so that
individuals who have the worst initial financial behavior in terms of late payments, not paying
more than the minimum required, etc., are less likely to participate. The treatment effect may be
larger for these individuals if they could be induced to participate, since they have more room for
improvement, or potentially smaller if such individuals are less likely to implement the changes
suggested in the workshops.
Finally, the cost per client of providing these programs was 131 MXP (7 USD) per person coached,
and 86 MXP (5 USD) per person participating in the workshop. Using the impact on paying on
time, this equates to a cost of 7 MXP/0.026 = 269 MXP per additional client induced by coaching
to pay on time. If this were the only impact, this would appear an expensive way for banks to get
clients to pay in a timelier manner. However, we see that the training and coaching get clients to
pay their accounts on time and pay more of their bills, but do not get them to cut back on spending.
In fact, perhaps because they are not experiencing as many payment problems, they spend more
on their cards. The result is that this training does increase the likelihood these clients remain
profitable for the bank.
5. Conclusions
The reliable estimation of treatment effects in impact evaluations relies heavily on the
implementation efforts of teams to get individuals assigned to a treatment to be effectively treated
(and to the extent possible ensure those assigned to the control group do not receive treatment). In
settings where individuals have little incentive to participate and those that do tend to be self-
selected, the identification of the program effects through experimental methods is challenging.
Unfortunately, and despite their recent popularity, financial education programs constitute a
perfect example of these issues.
In this study, we take advantage of the richness of administrative data from a financial institution
to implement a novel approach that overcomes the low-take-up problem in RCTs. The availability
of monthly administrative data over a two-year period for a large pool of individuals assigned to
the control group allows for a clearer estimation of the impacts of the workshops and coaching
sessions. By selecting a group of individuals within the control group that is statistically
comparable in their financial behavior (previous to the treatment) to that of the effectively treated
group, our approach improves the empirical evaluation of the treatment in several ways. The
approach improves upon the simple application of experimental methods. The experimental

14
  This uses the autocorrelation of approximately 0.4 in our data, and the following command in Stata: sampsi 0.69
0.694012, n1(2504) n2(3626) sd1(0.46) pre(14) post(9) r01(0.4) r1(0.4) r0(0.4).

                                                       16
method estimate gets “diluted” as it compares a large pool of individuals assigned to the treatment
group where only a handful were effectively treated, to a large pool of individuals assigned to the
control group. By using several rounds of administrative data, our approach also allows the
verification of the parallel trends assumption required for the application of non-experimental
approaches.
The combination of experimental and non-experimental methods along with rich administrative
data present a new avenue for empirical applications of impact evaluations when take-up is low.
Examples of widespread reach out efforts with small response rates include credit card offers in
the U.S. where response rates were estimated to reach 0.2% in 2006,15 and the banking/finance
industry in the U.K., where the overall click rate (i.e. the percent of clicks that are made among all
the emails sent) of email marketing campaigns was estimated at 0.48% in 2016.16




15
   Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation “Credit Card Activities Manual”
https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/examinations/credit_card/ch5.html [accessed October 15h 2017].
16
   Sign-up.to 2017 report https://www.signupto.com/email-marketing-benchmarks/email-benchmark-2017/ [accessed
October 15th 2017].

                                                     17
References
Banco de México (2016) “Indicadores Básicos de Tarjetas de Crédito. Datos a junio de 2016”
http://www.banxico.org.mx/sistema-financiero/publicaciones/reporte-de-tasas-de-interes-
efectivas-de-tarjetas-/%7B3A787547-BAAA-A0F2-4D1A-151E96D32321%7D.pdf [accessed
October 20th 2017].
Brown, Amy and Kimberly Gartner (2007) “Early Intervention and Credit Cardholders”, Center
for Financial Services Innovation, Chicago, IL.
http://cfsinnovation.com/system/files/imported/managed_documents/earlyintervention.pdf
[accessed 15 March, 2013].

Bruhn, Miriam, Gabriel Lara Ibarra and David McKenzie (2014) "The Minimal Impact of a
Large-Scale Financial Education Program in Mexico City.” Journal of Development Economics,
108: 184-89, 2014.

Bursztyn, Leonardo Bruno Ferman, Stefano Fiorin, Martin Kanz and Gautam Rao (2017) “Status
Goods: Experimental Evidence from Platinum Credit Cards”. Mimeo. World Bank.
Chong, Alberto, Dean Karlan, and Martin Valdivia (2010) “Using radio and video as a means for
financial education in Peru.” Innovations for Poverty Action. Accessed: 4 September 2017
http://www.povertyactionlab.org/evaluation/using-radio-and-video-means-financial-education-
peru.
Crépon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo and William Pariente (2015) “Estimating the
Impact of Microcredit on those who take it up: Evidence from a randomized experiment in
Morocco”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7(1): 123-50.
Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster and Michael Kremer (2008) “Using randomization in
development economics: A toolkit” In: Paul Schultz, T., John, Strauss (Eds.), Handbook of
Development Economics, Vol. 4. North Holland, Amsterdam, NH, pp. 3895–3962.
Fernandes, Daniel, John G. Lynch, Jr., and Richard G. Netemeyer (2014) “Financial Literacy,
Financial Education, and Downstream Financial Behaviors”, Management Science, 60(8): 1861-
1883
Grodzicki, Daniel (2015) “Competition and Customer Acquisition in the U.S. Credit Card
Market”, https://editorialexpress.com/cgi-
bin/conference/download.cgi?db_name=IIOC2015&paper_id=308
Karlan, Dean, Jonathan Morduch and Sendhil Mullainathan (2010) “Take-up: Why microfinance
take-up rates are low & why it matters”, Financial Access Initiative Framing Note,
http://www.arabic.microfinancegateway.org/sites/default/files/mfg-en-paper-take-up-why-
microfinance-take-up-rates-are-low-why-it-matters-jun-2010.pdf
Klapper, Leora, Annamaria Lusardi and Peter van Oudheusden (2015) Financial Literacy
Around the World: Insights from the Standard & Poor’s Rating Services Global Financial

                                              18
Literacy Survey. http://gflec.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/3313-Finlit_Report_FINAL-
5.11.16.pdf?x28148
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell (2014) “The economic importance of financial literacy:
theory and evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature 52(1): 5-44.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Peter Tufano (2015) “Debt literacy, financial experiences, and
overindebtedness”, Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 14(4): 332-68.
McKenzie, David (2012) “Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments”,
Journal of Development Economics 99: 210-221.
Miller, Margaret, Julia Reichelstein, Christian Salas, and Bilal Zia (2015) “Can You Help
Someone Become Financially Capable? A Meta-Analysis of the Literature”, World Bank
Research Observer, 30(2):
Mottola, Gary (2013) “In Our Best Interest: Women, Financial Literacy, and Credit Card
Behavior.” Numeracy 6 (2), Article 4.
Ponce, Alejandro, Enrique Seira and Guillermo Zamarripa (2017) “Borrowing on the Wrong
Credit Card? Evidence from Mexico” American Economic Review, 107:
Willis, Lauren (2011) “The financial education fallacy” American Economic Review Papers &
Proceedings 101 (3), 429–434.




                                               19
Figure 1. Take up rates


                                                   Panel A: Workshop group                                          Panel B: Coaching group



                                        .01




                                                                                                          .12
                                        .008




                                                                                                          .1
                Proportion of take-up




                                                                                  Proportion of take-up
                                        .006




                                                                                                          .08
                                        .004




                                                                                                          .06
                                        .002




                                                                                                          .04
                                                                                                          .02
                                        0




                                               0         2        4          6                                  0         2        4          6




                                                                                 20
Figure 2: Evolution over time of fraction of clients paying above the required minimum and fraction of clients with delay in
their payment by treatment status


                                                                   Workshop intervention
                                  Paying More than Minimum Payment                                                    Delay in Payment
                                                           Intervention                                                               Intervention
     .78 .8 .82 .84 .86 .88




                                                                                    .04 .06 .08 .1 .12
                              2015m3   2015m8    2016m1     2016m6        2016m11                        2015m3   2015m8    2016m1     2016m6        2016m11
                                                    time                                                                       time

                                           Control               Workshop                                             Control               Workshop




                                                                    Coaching intervention
                                  Paying More than Minimum Payment                                                    Delay in Payment
                                                           Intervention                                                               Intervention
                                                                                    .2
     .52 .54 .56 .58 .6




                                                                                    .15
                                                                                    .1
                                                                                    .05




                              2015m3   2015m8    2016m1     2016m6        2016m11                        2015m3   2015m8    2016m1     2016m6        2016m11
                                                    time                                                                       time

                                           Control               Coaching                                             Control               Coaching




                                                                                                            21
Figure 3: Illustration of the Five Different Approaches to Forming a Counterfactual, for the Workshop Treatment and
Outcome of Paying More than the Minimum Payment


                                                  Full Sample                                                 In common support                                   Nearest Neighbor all Vars
                                                            Intervention                                                      Intervention                                            Intervention



                               .95




                                                                                                .95




                                                                                                                                                           .95
                                   .9




                                                                                                .9
                        Proportion




                                                                                   Proportion




                                                                                                                                                     Proportion
                           .85




                                                                                                                                                         .9
                                                                                                .85
                               .8
                               .75




                                                                                                                                                           .85
                                                                                                .8
                                        2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9                                2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9                      2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9

                                                 Control            In workshops                                   Control            In workshops                         Control            In workshops



                                         Nearest Neighbor Lasso                                      Nearest Neighbor Min Payment
                                                            Intervention                                                      Intervention
                               .95




                                                                                                .95  .9
                                   .9




                                                                                          Proportion
                          Proportion




                                                                                             .85
                         .85




                                                                                                .8
                                                                                                .75
                               .8




                                        2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9                                2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9

                                                 Control            In workshops                                   Control            In workshops




Notes: Full Sample compares means for all individuals receiving coaching to the full control group; in common support shows means for the sample within the
common support of a propensity score estimated using the full history of all five outcomes plus a control for gender; Nearest neighbor all vars then shows means
after single nearest neighbor matching without replacement within this common support using the propensity score estimated with all variables; Nearest neighbor
lasso using lasso regression to pick the variables used to form the propensity score, then matches to the nearest neighbor with this propensity score; Nearest neighbor
min payment forms a propensity score only on the history of paying more than the minimum payment, and forms the nearest neighbor from this score.

                                                                                                                        22
Figure 4: Trajectories of financial outcomes of those receiving workshops compared to nearest neighbor matched control group


                                    Minimum Payment                                     Delay in Payment                                 Monthly Spending
                                                   Intervention                                       Intervention                                      Intervention




                                                                    .02 .04 .06 .08




                                                                                                                                7.5
                          .95
                     .8 .85 .9
                      Proportion




                                                                      Proportion




                                                                                                                           Proportion
                                                                                                                           6.5     7
                          .75




                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                6
                                   2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9                        2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9                       2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9

                                         Control         In workshops                       Control         In workshops                      Control         In workshops



                                      Deposit Account                                    Profitable Client
                                                   Intervention                                       Intervention
                          .8




                                                                            .8
                                                                        Proportion
                      Proportion
                      .76 .78




                                                                        .7    .75
                          .74




                                                                            .65




                                   2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9                        2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9

                                         Control         In workshops                       Control         In workshops




Notes: Propensity score matching used to construct a nearest neighbor matched control sample using outcome-specific pre-intervention variables. Fewer months
pre- and post-intervention are available for the outcome of being a profitable client for the bank.




                                                                                                23
Figure 5: Illustration of the Five Different Approaches to Forming a Counterfactual, for the Coaching Treatment and
Outcome of Paying More than the Minimum Payment


                                                   Full Sample                                           In common support                                      Nearest Neighbor all Vars
                                                             Intervention                                                Intervention                                               Intervention




                                                                                                                                                          .85
                                                                                              .8
                               .8




                                                                                              .75




                                                                                                                                                          .8
                         Proportion




                                                                                 Proportion




                                                                                                                                             Proportion
                                 .7




                                                                                                                                                          .75
                                                                                              .7
                                                                                              .65




                                                                                                                                                          .7
                        .6




                                                                                                                                                          .65
                                                                                              .6
                                                                                              .55
                               .5




                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                         2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9                          2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9                         2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9

                                                  Control              Coached                                Control              Coached                               Control              Coached



                                          Nearest Neighbor Lasso                                Nearest Neighbor Min Payment
                                                             Intervention                                                Intervention
                               .85




                                                                                              .8
                                    .8




                                                                                               .75
                                                                                        Proportion
                         Proportion
                             .75




                                                                                        .7
                        .7     .65




                                                                                              .65




                                         2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9                          2015m3   2015m9    2016m3   2016m9

                                                  Control              Coached                                Control              Coached




Notes: Full Sample compares means for all individuals receiving coaching to the full control group; in common support shows means for the sample within the
common support of a propensity score estimated using the full history of all five outcomes plus a control for gender; Nearest neighbor all vars then shows means
after single nearest neighbor matching without replacement within this common support using the propensity score estimated with all variables; Nearest neighbor
lasso using lasso regression to pick the variables used to form the propensity score, then matches to the nearest neighbor with this propensity score; Nearest neighbor
min payment forms a propensity score only on the history of paying more than the minimum payment, and forms the nearest neighbor from this score.

                                                                                                                  24
Figure 6: Trajectories of financial outcomes of those receiving coaching compared to nearest neighbor matched control group


                                     Minimum Payment                                    Delay in Payment                             Monthly Spending
                                                  Intervention                                       Intervention                                 Intervention




                                                                                                                            6
                                                                    .02 .04 .06 .08
                            .8
                       Proportion




                                                                      Proportion




                                                                                                                       Proportion
                                                                                                                             5.5
                        .7 .75




                                                                                                                        5
                            .65




                                                                                                                            4.5
                                                                             0
                                    2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9                       2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9                   2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9

                                           Control        Coached                            Control         Coached                       Control        Coached



                                      Deposit Account                                    Profitable Client
                                                  Intervention                                       Intervention


                                                                             .95
                            .88




                                                                       .8 .85 .9
                                                                        Proportion
                       Proportion
                       .84 .86
                            .82




                                                                             .75




                                    2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9                       2015m3 2015m9 2016m3 2016m9

                                           Control        Coached                            Control         Coached




Notes: Propensity score matching used to construct a nearest neighbor matched control sample using outcome-specific pre-intervention variables. Fewer months
pre- and post-intervention are available for the outcome of being a profitable client for the bank.




                                                                                                25
Table 1: Baseline Characteristics by Treatment Assignment
                                                      Panel A. Workshop Sample                                                   Panel B. Coaching Sample
                                         Assigned                                 Test of                                                                            Test of
                                             to     Assigned to      Attended  Differential                    Assigned to       Assigned to       Attended        Differential
                                          Control    Workshop       Workshop    Take-up                         Control          Coaching          Coaching         Take-up
Time unvarying characteristics of clients
Female                                       0.5         0.5            0.51      -0.01                             0.48             0.45             0.35            0.12***
Age                                          46          46              46          0                               46               46               46                0
From Mexico City                            0.63        0.63            0.74    -0.11***                            0.63             0.62             0.74           -0.12***
Years with our partner bank                  12          12              13        -1*                               12               11               12                0
Variables used for stratification
High-risk client                            0.19        0.19            0.16       0.03                              1                 1                1                0
Medium-risk client                          0.37        0.38            0.38       0.00                              0                 0                0                0
Low-risk client                             0.44        0.44            0.46      -0.02                              0                 0                0                0
With frequent low payments                  0.26        0.26            0.20     0.06***                             1                 1                1                0
Time varying characteristics of clients (Average over pre-intervention period)
Payment above minimum required             0.86         0.86           0.91     -0.06***                           0.56             0.57               0.74          -0.18***
Pays past due date                          0.01        0.01            0.00     0.0***                             0.02             0.03              0.01           0.02***
Monthly credit card purchases (Mx $)       6,594       6,729           9,428   -2,833***                           5,258            5,491             9,901         -4,643***
Owns deposit account                        0.69        0.69            0.75    -0.06***                            0.88             0.88              0.86             0.02
Profitability to the bank                  1,056       1,073           1,142       -86                             1,881            1,974             2,399           -518**
Notes: The table presents the summary statistics of our sample of 114,226 clients for the period of December 2014 to May 2015. Panels A and B present the characteristics
of the sample assigned to the workshops and coaching groups, respectively. The first three columns of each panel present the summary statistics of clients assigned to the
control group and to the workshops (Panel A) or coaching (Panel B), as well as clients that effectively attended the workshops (Panel A) or coaching (Panel B). The fourth
column of each panel presents the mean difference between clients assigned to the control group and clients in workshops (Panel A) or coaching (Panel B) that effectively
attended the intervention. The time varying characteristics of clients correspond to the average over 12 months prior to the interventions, except for the variable ‘profitability
to the bank’, which is only available 5 months prior to the interventions. *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                       26
Table 2: The Take-up Challenge
                                                                         Workshops             Coaching
                                                                    Number of             Number of
                                                                                Percent               Percent
                                                                     clients               clients
                Assigned to treatment                                73,654      100%       3,626      100%
                Contact attempted                                    34,818      47.3%      3,209     88.5%
                Able to be contacted                                  8,900      12.1%      1,164     32.1%
                Agreed to participate                                 2,672      3.6%        509      14.0%
                Actually received treatment                            583        0.8%       246       6.8%
Source: Own calculations from the study implementation data.




                                                               27
Table 3: Experimental Estimates of Treatment Effects
                                           Client
                                                                                                 Has basic
                            Share of    classified                               Pays more                                                        Log of           Log of
                                                      Delay in                                    deposit        Profitable      Profitable
                           debt paid     as not in                                 than                                                           monthly         monthly
                                                      payment                                     account        client (bai)   client (nibt)
                          by due date       good                                 minimum                                                          balance         spending
                                                                                                 with bank
                                         standing
Panel A: Impact of Workshops
ITT                          -0.002       -0.001        0.000                       0.001          -0.001          0.003**        0.004***         0.020**          0.012
                             (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.001)                     (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.010)         (0.015)
LATE                         -0.254        -0.069       0.053                       0.149          -0.148          0.424**        0.529***         2.494**          1.440
95% confidence interval    [-1.2, 0.7]  [-0.7, 0.6]  [-0.2, 0.3]                 [-0.2, 0.5]     [-0.5, 0.2]      [0.1, 0.8]      [0.1, 0.9]      [0.0, 5.0]     [-2.1, 5.0]
Sample Size                 799,816      248,411      865,572                     798,314         858,891          660,084         660,084         842,944        865,572
Mean                          0.526        0.110        0.054                       0.806           0.698           0.812           0.786           9.297           5.382

Panel B: Impact of Coaching
ITT                         -0.009                  0.010           0.010          -0.002          -0.002          -0.002          -0.000          -0.014           0.029
                            (0.012)                (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.045)         (0.066)
LATE                        -0.122                  0.146           0.140           -0.033          -0.025         -0.027          -0.000          -0.206           0.411
95% confidence interval   [-0.4, 0.2]            [-0.1, 0.4]     [-0.0, 0.3]     [-0.2, 0.2]     [-0.2, 0.1]     [-0.2, 0.2]     [-0.2, 0.2]     [-1.5, 1.1]     [-1.4, 2.2]
Sample Size                 43,100                 30,777          47,632          43,017          48,058          36,736          36,736          46,940          47,632
Mean                         0.271                  0.146           0.101           0.537           0.851           0.821           0.805           9.474           3.657
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the client level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels respectively. Estimation is by
Ancova, and includes mean of outcome over baseline periods, time period fixed effects, and strata fixed effects.




                                                                                     28
Table 4: Estimated Treatment Effects for those who did receive workshops
                                                    Full          In         Nearest Neighbor Matching
                                                  control      common     on all                     on
                                                  sample        support              using lasso
                                                                         variables                outcome
Panel A: Pay more that the minimum payment
Receive Workshop*Post-Intervention                               0.050***        0.051***        0.043***         0.053***        0.107***
                                                                  (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.015)
Sample Size                                                       826,664         647,267         22,161           25,773          22,225
Mean                                                               0.806           0.831           0.871            0.834           0.802
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                          0.864           0.592           0.567           0.0241           0.599
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                      0.380           0.475           0.981          7.69e-05          0.989
Panel B: Delay in payment
Receive Workshop *Post-Intervention                              -0.037***       -0.036***       -0.020***       -0.038***       -0.034***
                                                                   (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.008)
Sample Size                                                       967,442         707,101          24,121          28,389          29,998
Mean                                                               0.0539          0.0489          0.0332          0.0546          0.0464
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                           0.225           0.126           0.262           0.829           0.711
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                         0             0.450           0.811          0.0164           0.991
Panel C: Log monthly spending on card
Receive Workshop *Post-Intervention                              0.455***        0.408***        0.417***         0.454***        0.637***
                                                                  (0.089)         (0.096)         (0.139)          (0.125)         (0.126)
Sample Size                                                       967,442         707,101         24,121            28,389         29,997
Mean                                                               5.382           5.963           6.845             6.478          6.425
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                          0.224           0.636           0.973             0.621          0.680
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                      0.253           0.762           0.970           0.00904          0.998
Panel D: Has a deposit account
Receive Workshop *Post-Intervention                              0.028***        0.029***        0.044***         0.028**          0.027**
                                                                  (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.016)         (0.014)          (0.013)
Sample Size                                                      1,003,455        732,321         25,061           29,418           31,079
Mean                                                               0.698           0.687           0.747            0.673            0.761
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                          0.370           0.615           0.766            0.393            0.922
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                      0.226           0.812           0.776           0.0830            0.995
Panel E: Profitable client for the bank
Receive Workshop *Post-Intervention                               0.024**         0.023**           -0.005          0.018           0.021
                                                                  (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.016)         (0.015)         (0.016)
Sample Size                                                       449,122         326,999          11,153          13,122          13,948
Mean                                                               0.786            0.811            0.778          0.819           0.746
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                          0.083            0.368            0.871          0.840           1.000
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                      0.173           0.0687            0.978          0.327           1.000
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the client level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels
only. The five columns show estimated treatment impacts of taking part in the coaching treatment, using different control groups. Column 1
uses all clients randomly assigned to the control; column 2 uses those within the common support when matching on all pre-intervention
variables; Column 3 uses single nearest neighbor matching within this common support; Column 4 uses single nearest neighbor matching
with the common support when using lasso to select variables for propensity score, and then nearest neighbor matching within the common
support.

                                                                     29
Table 5: Estimated Treatment Effects for those who did receive coaching
                                                    Full          In                                 Nearest Neighbor Matching
                                                  control      common                             on all                     on
                                                  sample        support                                      using lasso
                                                                                                 variables                outcome
Panel A: Pay more that the minimum payment
Receive Coaching*Post-Intervention                                0.036**        0.055***         0.068**           0.040          0.059**
                                                                  (0.017)         (0.019)         (0.027)          (0.026)         (0.028)
Sample Size                                                        59,043         41,743           9,104           10,380           9,151
Mean                                                                0.537          0.582           0.687            0.661           0.689
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                           0.074          0.417           0.107            0.474           0.800
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                       0.283          0.985           0.641            0.358           0.811
Panel B: Delay in payment
Receive Coaching*Post-Intervention                               -0.058***       -0.061***       -0.064***       -0.042***         -0.026*
                                                                   (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.019)         (0.016)         (0.013)
Sample Size                                                        70,498          45,485           9,894          11,390           12,560
Mean                                                                0.537           0.582           0.687           0.661            0.689
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                           0.074           0.417           0.107           0.474            0.800
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                       0.283           0.985           0.641           0.358            0.811
Panel C: Log monthly spending on card
Receive Coaching*Post-Intervention                                0.396**          0.270          0.585**          0.448*          0.418*
                                                                  (0.178)         (0.195)         (0.267)          (0.250)         (0.247)
Sample Size                                                        70,498         45,485           9,894           11,390          12,510
Mean                                                                3.657          4.559           5.207            5.562           5.092
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                           0.006          0.306           0.895            0.701          0.0700
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                       0.031          0.853           0.961            0.798           0.907
Panel D: Has a deposit account
Receive Coaching*Post-Intervention                               0.032***         0.030**           0.033           0.019           0.028
                                                                  (0.012)         (0.014)          (0.021)         (0.019)         (0.019)
Sample Size                                                       73,805           47,261          10,270          11,835          13,179
Mean                                                               0.851            0.838           0.815           0.862           0.839
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                          0.476            0.771           0.502           0.584           0.938
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                      0.035            0.886           0.890          0.0631           0.860
Panel E: Profitable client for the bank
Receive Coaching*Post-Intervention                               0.065***        0.059***         0.061**          0.033*         0.078***
                                                                  (0.015)         (0.015)         (0.024)          (0.020)         (0.022)
Sample Size                                                       32,987          21,064           4,572            5,268           5,856
Mean                                                               0.805           0.834           0.825            0.854           0.770
p-values for test common linear pre-trend                          0.786           0.621           0.753            0.557           1.000
p-values for test common non-linear pre-trend                      0.079           0.432           0.962           0.0749           1.000
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the client level. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels
only. The five columns show estimated treatment impacts of taking part in the coaching treatment, using different control groups. Column 1
uses all clients randomly assigned to the control; column 2 uses those within the common support when matching on all pre-intervention
variables; Column 3 uses single nearest neighbor matching within this common support; Column 4 uses single nearest neighbor matching
with the common support when using lasso to select variables for propensity score, and then nearest neighbor matching within the common
support.

                                                                     30
Appendix 1: Comparison of Pre-Intervention Means for Workshop Intervention
                          Treatment     Full Control Sample      In Common Support           NN All Vars                NN Lasso               NN Outcome
                          Received     Normalized               Normalized              Normalized               Normalized                Normalized
                          Workshop     Difference    p-value    Difference    p-value   Difference     p-value   Difference     p-value    Difference    p-value
Female                       0.511        -0.016        0.705       -0.015      0.753       -0.021       0.743       -0.150        0.013
Age                         45.995        -0.040        0.345       -0.065      0.166       -0.174       0.008       -0.074        0.218
Years as Client             15.189        -0.096        0.072       -0.104      0.074       -0.260       0.000       -0.173        0.004
Mean Min Pay                 0.916        -0.286        0.000       -0.147      0.004        0.038       0.559       -0.121        0.045        0.020      0.755
Mean Delay in Paying         0.003         0.153        0.002        0.003      0.950        0.020       0.763        0.175        0.004       -0.010      0.863
Mean Log Spending            6.732        -0.441        0.000       -0.346      0.000       -0.011       0.873       -0.108        0.075       -0.007      0.910
Mean Deposit Account         0.751        -0.145        0.001       -0.147      0.002        0.035       0.592       -0.202        0.001       -0.003      0.961
Mean Profitable Client       0.770         0.181        0.000        0.200      0.000       -0.032       0.626        0.252        0.000        0.000      1.000
Sample Size                   583          36946                    26811                     465                      547                       469
Notes: The control group varies with outcome for the last approach (NN outcome), and so normalized differences and p-values are shown using the outcome specific
control group.




                                                                              31
Appendix 2: Comparison of Pre-Intervention Means for Coaching Intervention
                          Treatment      Full Control Sample     In Common Support            NN All Vars                NN Lasso               NN Outcome
                          Received      Normalized              Normalized               Normalized               Normalized                Normalized
                          Coaching      Difference    p-value   Difference     p-value   Difference    p-value    Difference     p-value    Difference    p-value
Female                       0.354          0.251        0.000        0.182     0.019       -0.076        0.461        0.320       0.001
Age                         45.618          0.030        0.661       0.039      0.618       0.155         0.131        0.066       0.492
Years as Client             14.557         -0.074        0.248       -0.028     0.709        0.035        0.733        0.039       0.682
Mean Min Pay                 0.737         -0.561        0.000      -0.346      0.000       0.032         0.753       -0.150       0.117         0.024      0.813
Mean Delay in Paying         0.011          0.280        0.001        0.018     0.811        0.045        0.661        0.094       0.325        -0.029      0.747
Mean Log Spending            5.283         -0.423        0.000       -0.316     0.000       -0.027        0.790        0.087       0.361         0.020      0.830
Mean Deposit Account         0.862          0.068        0.292        0.030     0.689       -0.047        0.645        0.041       0.665         0.002      0.981
Mean Profitable Client       0.846          0.086        0.190        0.093     0.203        0.047        0.648        0.087       0.360         0.000      1.000
Sample Size                   246           2504                      1563                    190                       219                       192
Notes: The control group varies with outcome for the last approach (NN outcome), and so normalized differences and p-values are shown using the outcome specific
control group.




                                                                               32
Appendix 3a. Contents of Credit Card Financial Literacy course
 Topic           Description
 Credit cards    This session explains that debt can be useful if you know how to use it correctly.
                 The session also covers how to apply for a loan and the different types of loans
                 there are.

                 Objectives:
                    1. Participants know what debt is
                    2. Participants know what a credit card is
                    3. Participants know good habits with their credit cards
                 Content:
                     Types of loans available
                     Advantages and disadvantages of each type of loan
                     What a credit card is
                     Credit cards’ elements
                     The Personal Identification Number (NIP)
                     The bank statement and how to read it
                     Credit cards APR (Annual Percentage Rate)
                     Healthy use of credit cards
                 Duration: 1 hour
                 Exercise:
                      Case study: identifying what kind of credit is the best for each situation
                      Interactive exercise: identifying the parts of a bank statement
 Healthy         This session focuses on understanding what a credit rating is and how to keep a
 Credit rating   good credit score.

                 Objectives:
                    1. Participants learn what a credit rating is
                    2. Participants learn how to obtain their own credit rating
                    3. Participants learn what they can do if they have credit problems
                 Content:
                     Credit ratings and the importance of having good credit rating
                     The credit bureau
                     How and where to get a credit report
                     What my credit report means
                     Self-diagnose credit health
                     Advise to maintain or improve your credit rating
                 Duration: 1 hour
                 Exercise:
                     Case study: helping someone to solve their financial problems

Source: BBVA Bancomer Financial Education department



                                               33
Appendix 3b. Golden Rules for having good credit health from BBVA Bancomer’s
Financial Literacy Course




Source: BBVA Bancomer Adelante con tu futuro ©



                                             34
Appendix 3c. Description of Coaching Sessions
   Sessions         Objectives                          Topics to be covered                                         Tools

                                                         1. Introduce the coaching sessions
                    Identify financial issues and                                                                    - Client’s information
   Session 1:                                            2. Invite the client to participate in the sessions
                    concerns based on questions and 3. Mention the 5-session program                                 - Diagnostic questionnaire
   Diagnostic                                                                                                        from the Credit Health
                    analysis of credit situation         4. Detect the client’s issues/concerns
                                                                                                                     workshop
                                                         5. Bring solutions to the issues/concerns identified
                                                         1. Analyze client’s expenditures
                    Prepare savings plan considering 2. Classify expenditures into fixed and variable
   Session 2:                                                                                                        - Coaching format for
                    variables that prevent the client to expenditures
   Budget                                                3. Self-evaluation                                          creating a budget
                    keep up with her payments
                                                         4. Request to prepare the coaching worksheet for the next
                                                         session
                                                         1. Review topics from previous session
                    Analyze key aspects of a credit 2. Explain main parts of the bank statement
                    card and credit card statement to 3. Highlight key elements to help improve expenditure and
   Session 3:       come up with an action plan that payment behavior, and overall use of the credit card            - Client’s bank statements
   Credit           helps improve her credit card                                                                    - Credit card
                                                         4. Request that coaching worksheet is ready for the next
                    payment behavior                     session

                    Suggest several alternatives that   1. Verify client’s behavior on credit card payments, starting
   Session 4:       the client can implement to pay     from analysis of last session’s bank statement                - Coaching worksheet
   Healthy credit   down her loans                      2. Evaluate client’s credit health after incorporating        - Client information
                                                        recommendations into purchasing and payment behavior
                   Measure effectiveness of BBVA
                                                   1. Evaluate debt registry after learning how to properly use - Bank statements
   Session 5: Were Bancomer coaching sessions                                                                   - Client information
   goals met?      among clients who stayed in the the credit card and the benefits of staying with a healthy
                   program                         credit history

Notes: Sessions 1-4 were scheduled approximately two weeks apart. The final session was scheduled one month after the fourth session. Source:
Adapted from BBVA Bancomer guidance tables.



                                                                        35
Appendix 4. Current credit card offerings by BBVA Bancomer Mexico
                                    Mininum          Minimum income to                                   Annual Percentage Rate
           Name of card                                                       Late fee    Annual fee
                                    payment           be demonstrated                                           (APR)*
       Platinum                      20 %                  50,000               377          2177                34.9%
       Visa infinite                 20 %                 150,000                -           5275                18.6%
       Oro                           20 %                  20,000               377           972                75.3%
       Afinidad UNAM                 20 %                  12,000               377           972                88.0%
       e                             25 %                   5,000               348           580                 ND
       Azul                          20 %                   6,000               377           631                90.2%
       IPN                           20 %                   6,000               377           631                91.6%
       Congelada                     20 %                   4,000               235           290               115.6%
       Educacion                     20 %                   6,000               377           631                68.2%
       Mi Primera Tarjeta            20 %                   6,000                -             -                 79.9%
       Rayados                       20 %                   6,000               377           631                83.0%
       Source: Comisión Nacional para la Protección y Defensa de los usuarios de Servicios Financieros (accessed October 13th
       2017)
       * APR does not include taxes




                                                                   36
