                                                   WPS8127


Policy Research Working Paper                     8127




                Farm Size and Productivity
              A “Direct-Inverse-Direct” Relationship

                             Sara Savastano
                          Pasquale L. Scandizzo




Development Economics
Global Indicators Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8127


  Abstract
 This paper proposes a new interpretation of the farm                               reverses the relationship. In both cases, the relationship
 size–productivity relationship. Using two rounds of the                            points toward a threshold value of farm size; however, the
 Ethiopian Rural Household Survey, and drawing on earlier                           threshold is a minimum for the less productive farmers
 work on five countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, the paper                            and a maximum for the more productive ones. To the left
 shows that the relationship between farm size and produc-                          of the threshold, for very small farmers, the relationship
 tivity is neither monotonic nor univocal. Most previous                            between productivity and farm size is positive; for the
 studies that tested the inverse farm size–productivity rela-                       range of middle farm size, the relationship is negative;
 tionship used ordinary least squares estimation, therefore                         and to the right of the threshold, the relationship is direct
 reporting parameter estimates at the conditional mean of                           (positive) again. From a policy perspective, these findings
 productivity. By expanding these important findings to                             imply that efficiency-enhancing and redistributive land
 consider the entire distribution of agricultural productiv-                        reform should consider farm size in the proper context of
 ity, the analysis finds sign switches across the distribution,                     the present and potential levels of agricultural productiv-
 pointing to a “direct-inverse-direct” relationship. Less                           ity. The results and their policy implications underline the
 productive farmers exhibit an inverted U-shape relation-                           relevance of the most recent efforts of the international
 ship between land productivity and farm size, while more                           development community to collect more reliable georef-
 productive farmers show a U-shape relationship that                                erenced data on farm size and agricultural productivity.




  This paper is a product of the Global Indicators Group, Development Economics. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at ssavastano@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                   Farm Size and Productivity:
                        A “Direct-Inverse-Direct” Relationship


                                   Sara Savastano1,2 and Pasquale L. Scandizzo2
                              1
                                  World Bank, 2University of Rome Tor Vergata -DEF




JEL codes: O12, Q12, Q15
Keywords: Agricultural Policies, Agriculture Productivity, Agriculture and Food Security, Ethiopia


Sara Savastano is Senior Economist at the Global Indicators Group, Development Economics and Assistant Professor of
Economics at the University of Rome Tor Vergata (currently on leave). Pasquale L. Scandizzo is professor at the
University of Rome Tor Vergata. For their comments the authors thank participants of the conference on “Farm Size
and Productivity: A Global Look “organized by USDA – ERS & Farm Foundation on February 2-3, 2017, and participants
of the 21th ICABR Conference on “Bioeconomy in Transition: New Players and New Tools”, Berkeley May 30 – June 2,
2017. The authors acknowledge the FAO & CEIS-Tor Vergata Letter of Agreement on “Smallholder agriculture in
transition: Behavior, constraints and policies in Ethiopia” for the use of the data.
Introduction
         The existence of an inverse farm size–productivity relationship (IR), defined as a smooth tendency
of productivity to decline with farm size, has been considered as a well-established finding of agricultural
economics, and a stylized fact to guide rural development strategies and land reform to promote efficiency
and overall equity. First observed in Russia (Chayanov, 1926), then in the dualistic agriculture labor market
in India (Bardhan 1973, Sen 1975, Srinivasan 1972), IR was initially explained by labor market imperfections
and supervision constraints, with small-scale farmers having lower opportunity and supervision costs of
their labor than operators of larger farms.
        From the economic perspective, IR implies that diseconomies of scale characterize agriculture
systems for several possible reasons, including the failure of land and labor markets to equalize production
efficiency across farm size distribution. From the policy perspective, reforms to redistribute land from large
towards small farms appear justified not only on equity but also on efficiency grounds.
        In most empirical studies, IR appears to be a smooth tendency of land productivity to decline with
farm size and thus is not limited to a different pattern of resource uses between large and small farms.
While different reservation wages could account for family versus non-family farms, this would not explain
why land productivity appears to decline within small family farms as well.
        The IR hypothesis has been tested in a variety of studies using households and plot level data, in
cross sectional or country frameworks, over time using panel data to account for farmers’ and plots’
unobserved heterogeneity, and controlling for land quality. The availability of a more accurate measure of
land area by means of GPS has seemed to add further proof for the existence of IR, even after eliminating
farmers’ self-reported land bias. More recently, the use of geo-referenced measures of soil quality and
infrastructure has helped in rejecting the hypothesis that IR might be the fruit of statistical artefacts.
         In this paper, we analyze the land productivity–farm size relationship using a quantile regression
approach to test whether farm size affects differently farmers with low productivity as compared with
farmers of average or higher levels of productivity. In this framework, we aim to understand how farm size
affects farmers’ productivity achievements across the whole distribution of land productivity.
         The large majority of the IR studies have modeled farm productivity as a function of land area and
other covariates using an OLS approach. The use of georeferenced variables that correct for measurement
errors, objective measures of soil quality, and use of panel data to account for farmer and plot
heterogeneity do not change this core framework, which is essentially based on the study of the effect of
farm size on the conditional mean of land productivity. However, this approach clearly provides only a
partial view of the relationship, as we might be interested in describing the relationship at different points
in the conditional distribution of agriculture productivity. By supplementing the estimation of conditional
mean functions with techniques for estimating an entire family of conditional quantile functions, we aim to
provide a more complete statistical analysis of the stochastic relationships among random variables.
         Quantile regression is not a novel approach. The econometric specification was introduced in 1968
by Koenker and Basset. More recent empirical applications concerned education (Koenker and Bilias, 2001)
and peer effects (Levin, 2001), analysis of duration of employment spell (Horowitz and Neumann, 1987;
Fitzenberger,1997), ecology (Cade and Noon, 2003; Chamaillé- Jammes and Blumstein, 2012; and Lemke K.,
2012), health economics (Johar and Katayama, 2012), and in the context of political economy aspects of
trade policy (Billger, 2009; Imai et al., 2012). To our knowledge, application to agriculture policies are found
only in Evenson and Mwabu (E-M, 2001) and Scandizzo and Savastano (S-S, 2017). E-M studied the impact
of Kenya’s extension service, and found that productivity response to acreage, measured through quantile
regression, was not significantly different across quantiles, but displayed a concave shape, first rising and
then falling with the size of the cultivated area. Testing the IR on national representative surveys from five
Sub-Saharan African countries, S-S pointed out that IR may be an artifact of the central tendency indicators

                                                                                                               2
captured by the OLS technique, and depending on conditional expectations. Using quantile regression, S-S
found a U-shape and an inverted U-shape relation with sign switches at different points of the distribution
of farms’ productivity in all the countries.
        In this paper, we corroborate the above S-S results, using two rounds of the Ethiopian Rural
Household Survey (ERHS),1 a unique multi-purpose longitudinal household data set representative of the
rural population of the country. The contribution of our paper is twofold. First, we test the productivity–
farm size relationship, taking into account farmers’ heterogeneity; second, we consider the possible
interaction between productivity and management quality and efficiency.
         By considering the entire distribution of agriculture productivity, we found sign switches across the
distribution pointing to the existence of a “Direct-Inverse-Direct” (DID) relationship. Less productive
farmers exhibit an inverted U-shape relationship between land productivity and farm size, while the more
productive farmers show a U-shape relationship that reverses the relationship. In both cases the
relationship points towards the existence of a threshold value of farm size, which is, however a minimum
for the less productive farmers and a maximum for the more productive ones. The results show that the
inverse relationship holds for middle size farms. To the left of the threshold, for very small farmers, the
relationship between productivity and farm size is positive, and farmers can invest in the extensive margins
through land expansion as a safety-first strategy to achieve a minimum level of production to guarantee
subsistence. For the range of middle farm size, the relationship is negative. Middle farmers tend to invest in
new agriculture technologies and income diversification to increase their productivity. They may improve
their position by increasing their intensive margins, namely getting more productivity from land already
under cultivation. To the right of the threshold the relationship is direct (positive) again.
          Our findings indicate that, while IR may be important for certain ranges of farm efficiency and size,
it is by no means a ubiquitous characteristic of agriculture. Whether the relationship between productivity
and size is positive or negative in fact appears to depend crucially on other factors, including agro-
ecological conditions and non-farm opportunities.
        The plan of the rest of the paper is as follows. First, we provide some background and motivation
through a brief survey and discussion of the literature. Second, we describe the conceptual framework and
the estimation strategy. We turn next to a discussion of the model used, the data employed, the estimation
techniques and the discussion of the results. The paper concludes with policy recommendations.

    1. Background and Motivation
        The fact that land productivity is negatively related to the size of the land operated (both owned
and rented) appears historically established by a variety of studies starting in the late 1970s (e.g. Berry and
Cline, 1979, Kutcher and Scandizzo, 1981, Binswanger et al., 1995).
         The literature has emphasized different explanations for this “empirical regularity”. The early
studies focused on factor market imperfections in land and other markets such as credit and modern inputs
(Scandizzo and Kutcher, 1981; Eswaran and Kotwal, 1985; 1986; Barrett, 1996; Benjamin and Brandt 2002;
Berry and Cline 1979; Feder 1985; Binswanger et al. 1995, Ali and Deininger, 2014). More recently the
literature has focused on statistical issues and measurement errors in land and agriculture output, omission
of soil quality measurements that are inversely correlated with farm or plot size but positively associated
with yields (Lamb, 2003; Barrett et al., 2010; Goldstein and Udry, 1999, De Groote and Traorè, 2005). The
availability of sophisticated remote sensing and georeferenced data has increased the statistical debate of
the IR. Carletto et al. (2013 and 2015) show that the IR persists even after controlling for more objective
GPS-based land area measures. Deininger et al. (2012) and Kilic et al. (2017) showed that the inverse
relationship could be driven by errors in self-reported survey data on crop production. Desiere and Jolliffe

1
 The project was conducted by the Department of Economics at Addis Ababa University, the Centre for the Study of
African Economies (CSAE), the University of Oxford and the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
                                                                                                                   3
(2017) compared self-reported production and crop-cuts estimates, and found that the IR is stronger when
based on self-reported production, but disappears when based on crop-cut estimates. Finally, Bevis and
Barrett (2017) identified the “edge of the plot” effect, namely that productivity may be greater along
the edge of small plots where labor is concentrated. The standard explanation of the IR is the presence
of omitted variables and unobserved heterogeneity: omission of soil quality measurements that are
inversely correlated with farm or plot size but positively associated with yields (Carter 1984; Bhalla and Roy
1988; Walker and Ryan, 1990; Benjamin 1995; Lamb 2003; Assunção and Braido, 2007; Assunção and
Ghatak, 2007; Benjamin, 1995).
         The IR finding, however robust across many studies, seems at the same time puzzling, for several
reasons. First, it is not limited to small versus large farms, but in most studies, there is a smooth tendency
for land productivity to decline with farm size. This result seems to be in contrast to the equalization of
factor prices predicted by market equilibrium theory and not simply explained by lower reservation wages
for family farms, because land productivity appears to decline within all ranges of family as well as non-
family farms. In this respect, Feder’s (1985) alternative explanation appeals to a more general transaction
effect, reminiscent of Coase’s theory of the firm. According to this explanation, smaller farms are based on
more intense use of family labor, because of its higher efficiency and motivation than hired labor, and the
fact that supply of working capital is directly related to farm size. Srinivasan (1972) explains the inverse
relationship by yield risk, by defining utility over income, and imposing restrictions on the coefficients of
risk aversion and on how risk enters production, under constant returns. Hazell and Scandizzo (1974)
provide a rationale for producers to reduce planned production in response to the negative correlation
between supply and prices, and Barrett (1996) shows that IR can emerge from price risk if farmers are net
buyers of the crop produced, since in this case, risk aversion implies labor overemployment to protect
consumption.
         As Savastano and Scandizzo (2009) have shown, a relationship between productivity and operated
area may arise, because of the risk associated to the investment decision such as, for example, to increase
one’s farmland. Under dynamic uncertainty, in fact, the amount of land operated by a farmer will depend
on the timing of the exercise of the option to invest in land development. With decreasing returns to scale,
this will imply a non-monotonic relationship between revenue per ha and operated land. If land is available
on the market in fixed quantities (i.e. supply of plots for rents or sale, or entire farms of discrete size),
and/or investment is lumpy, small farms will exhibit lower revenue thresholds for investment, and thus
lower revenues per unit of land than larger farms. This implies, in particular, that the relationship between
productivity and size may exhibit turning points, as farmers switch from one type of investment to another
(e.g. from land improvements to irrigation) as their operating land increases as a result of previous
investment decisions.
        Most recently, using data from five Sub-Saharan African countries, Scandizzo and Savastano (2017)
found a nonlinear relationship between farm size and land productivity, and signs switches across farm size
groups. The analysis overcomes the statistical and measurement biases by testing the IR with the LSMS-ISA,
nationally representative geo-referenced surveys of Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. The
estimation approach used also controls for many exogenous common and comparative geo-spatial
measures of land quality, infrastructure and access to markets, climate conditions, soil conditions and
topography.
          Using quantile regression on a cross sectional framework, the results showed that average land
productivity (ALP) exhibits an inverted U-shaped relation for less productive farmers, with ALP first rising
and then falling after a threshold farm size. ALP shows the opposite pattern of a U-shaped relationship in
the upper tail of the productivity distribution, first decreasing and then increasing after reaching a lower
threshold. Farms in the lower tail of the ALP distribution thus experienced IR only once they have reached a
critical size after which only by moving to a higher ALP class can they avoid the IR relationship from
diseconomies of scale. Vice versa, more productive farmers experience IR only if they are below a critical
size, which, in general, tends to be larger (and sometime much larger) than the critical size of the lower end
                                                                                                                 4
farms. Thus, small and large farm behavior tends to diverge, since farms in the lower deciles of the land
productivity distribution experience IR for a smaller range of farm sizes than farmers of the higher deciles.
The results are consistent across countries, and in the pooled analysis.


The main conclusions of this analysis, which are corroborated by the results in the present paper, can be
summarized as follows:
               (1)      ALP will display respectively a negative (the IR) or a positive correlation with farm
       operating size, depending on whether the threshold effect (the higher incentive for larger farms to
       hold undeveloped land as an option) prevails or is overwhelmed by the management effect (the
       tendency of ALP to increase with farm size since larger farms attract better managers).
               (2)      Depending on the functional form of their relationship, the two tendencies may
       equal each other, once a threshold of farm size is reached, after which the net effect on ALP will be
       reversed.
               (3)      Both tendencies and the level of the threshold will depend on the management
       quality and thus can be expected to vary across farmers, depending on the distribution of
       management quality and the extent to which the market for managers succeeds in allocating them
       to larger farms.

         These conclusions support the idea that the IR relationship may indeed be present in many farming
systems, but we should expect it to be neither ubiquitous nor monotonic. In particular, if farmers face
dynamic uncertainty by holding a waiting option for land development and unobservable management
quality is positively correlated with farm size, both a reverse and a direct effect of operating size on average
productivity may be present at any one time. This in turn implies that the net impact of increasing
operating size on land productivity will depend on whether a threshold is crossed where the two effects
exactly balance each other.
         On the technical estimation side, we further argue that OLS will generally provide an estimate of
the relationship based on mean response if factor productivity is distributed normally, with a constant
variance. In other words, OLS will allow us to estimate a response coefficient that will quantify the average
response of the dependent variable (e.g. land productivity) to farm size increases. If the distribution of the
response around the mean, estimated according with OLS, is not satisfactorily described by a single
variance, however, quantile regression (Koenker and Basset, 1978) promises a more robust and appropriate
estimate, especially if variance is systematically related to the increase in the response variable
(heteroscedasticity). We also conjecture that the relationship between productivity and alternative
measures of size (land available, land under cultivation etc.) may be considerably different for farmers who,
for various reasons that cannot be captured by the econometric model, have to operate at lower
productivity levels, with respect to farmers that operate at higher productivity levels.

    2. Conceptual Framework

        Consider the relationship between land productivity and farm size in the stylized form. For
simplicity, we omit the time period:


          =β +β         +γ     +ϵ                                                                          (1)

where y is some measure of production for the ith farm, is a correspondent measure of farm size (e.g.
operated area), 	 a set of exogenous variables, and ϵ a random disturbance. It is important to underline
the fact that equation (1) is not a production function, but the result of farmers’ choices, on the basis, inter

                                                                                                                 5
alia, of an underlying technology. If we assume that farmers have adjusted production (either through
optimization or through any other behavioral rule) to the circumstances outside their control, including
exogenous variables, states of nature etc., the coefficient β in (1) should be zero. In other words, all
systematic differences in production per acre between farms should be accounted for by differences in the
   variables or in the random term ϵ . A β different of zero, on the other hand, would imply the existence
of systematic differences across farmers that are not accounted for in the rest of the equation: these
differences could be due to different behavioral rules, different abilities in following the same rules or
different levels of information or other omitted variables that are correlated with farm size.
        It is also important to notice that a non-zero β may be caused by discontinuities in the behavioral
function that underlies farmers’ adjustment to the exogenous variables. These discontinuities are implied
by most of the explanations of the inverse productivity relationship based on anthropological differences
between “family” and “non-family” farms or systematic divergence in behavior between “small” and
“large” farms (e.g. Feder, 1989; Cornia, 1985). However, if IR is the result of these discontinuities, it should
only concern the differences across the two extreme groups of farmers, and not the differences within the
groups themselves.
        In order to test for the existence of a relationship between land productivity and farm size, we use
both OLS regression models and quantile regressions (Koenker and Bassett, 1978). While OLS focuses on
modeling the conditional mean of the response variable without accounting for its distribution, the quantile
regression model accounts for the full conditional distributional properties of the response variable (or is
residual after accounting for the exogenous variables) thereby differing on the assumptions about the error
terms of the regression model.
       In the case of equation (1), the OLS model is based on the assumption that the error term is
normally distributed with zero mean and constant variance: ϵ ~i. i. d. N(0, σ ).
         The mean zero assumption on the error term implies that the model fits the conditional mean,
namely E[y − γZ|x] = β + β x which can be interpreted as the average value of productivity, after
accounting for the effect of the exogenous variables Z, corresponding to a given value of the covariate x
(i.e. farm size). The linear regression model describes how the conditional distribution behaves by utilizing
the mean of a distribution to represent its central tendency, a choice that appears appropriate under the
assumption of homoscedasticity, namely of constant variance for all values of the covariate x.
         The quantile-regression model (QRM) estimates the potential differential effect of a covariate (farm
size) on various quantiles in the conditional distribution. A conditional quantile is a statistic corresponding
to the probability level of a given distribution, according to a function (the quantile function) defined as
  (p) = {y: Pr(Y ≤ y) = p} . By considering the different quantiles, the QRM estimates how the effect of a
covariate varies with the distribution of the response variable and accommodates heteroscedasticity. The
QRM corresponding to the LRM in Equation (1) can be expressed as:

               ( )        ( )         ( )          ( )
        y =β         +β         x +           +ϵ                                                              (2)

                                            ( ) ( )
                                           ( )
        The parameter vector, [β β             ] is obtained by minimizing the sum of absolute deviations from
an arbitrarily chosen quantile of a farm yield across farmers. In the case of Equation (2) this sum can be
expressed as:
                                                ( )        ( )
                 Minimize ∑             − [β          +β         x +∑                                (3)

where       = average productivity for farmer i at quantile q, (i =1, ....n); x = farm size   = covariate j for
farmer i (j = 1,....K).



                                                                                                                    6
         The solution to Equation (3) is found by rewriting the expression as a linear programming problem
over the entire sample (see Chamberlain, 1994) and solving for the values of the parameters. Both the
squared-error and absolute-error loss functions are symmetric, as the sign of the prediction error is not
relevant. While OLS can be inefficient if the errors are highly non-normal, quantile regression is more
robust to non-normal errors and outliers. QR also provides a richer characterization of the data, gives
information on heterogeneity in the effect of land on the productivity, and allows to consider the impact of
a covariate on the entire distribution of y, not merely its conditional mean. In particular, for each quantile,
it can be shown whether the effect of farm size on productivity is positive or negative, and how large this
effect is compared to other quantiles.
    3. Data Source and Descriptive Statistics
         We use the last two rounds of the Ethiopian Rural Household Survey (ERHS),2 a unique multi-
purpose longitudinal survey conducted since 1989, which covers four of the nine administrative regions in
Ethiopia, where the largest proportion of the country’s farmers are located, and includes 15 woredas
(districts) stratified over the three major agricultural systems found in five agro-ecological zones. Although
not nationally representative, the sample is broadly representative for the main farming systems in the
country.
        Table 1 shows the main characteristics of farmers in both rounds. With 1.4 ha of land per
household and 6 family members, small, resource-poor, subsistence farmers dominate the rural sector in
Ethiopia. Given the large number of plots cultivated by a farmer (4.7 and 5.1 plots in 2004 and 2009
respectively), fragmentation and the lack of improved technologies are a major challenge for spurring
agriculture productivity and to allowing farmers to meet their subsistence needs. While farm size is on
average low and has changed very little between the two rounds (1.4 to 1.5 ha), since its distribution is
highly skewed, we complement our descriptive analysis with the concept of midpoint farm size introduced
by Hoppe et al. (2013). The statistic is defined as the size at which half of all cropland is on farms with more
cropland than the midpoint, and half is on farms with less. It is a more informative measure of land
consolidation than either a simple median (in which half of all farms are either larger or smaller) or the
simple mean (which is average land per farm). We found that the midpoint farm size in Ethiopia is 1.6 ha in
2004, and 2.15 ha in 2009, 1/2 ha more than the value of average farm size, thereby indicating little
variation given the presence of a very large number of very small farms and the high degree of
fragmentation.
       Only one-third of the farmers employ hired labor, and with an average of 6 members per
household, they use family members to farm land. Though young (50 years on average), household heads
have received little education, 1.6 years of school on average, and so did family members who obtained a
maximum of 4.7 years of education.
       Farmers rely heavily on agriculture, which accounts for 78% of total income. It is worth noting,
however, that the share of income from agriculture has decreased of 9% from 2004 to 2009, while the
opposite has occurred for wage and other income sources thereby suggesting a shift from owner-operated
farming to wage labor, perhaps also as a consequence of the high food prices of 2008.
        Agriculture productivity has increase over time from 446 to 549 US$/ha with an average of both
periods of 497 US$/ha. We recognize the importance of mean effect, but one of the assumption of the OLS
regression is that the error term – and the dependent variable – is normally distributed. To investigate
whether this assumption is satisfied, we display in Figure 1 the kernel density estimates for gross
agriculture income per hectare, separately by agriculture productivity below and above the median and
along the whole distribution.


2The ERHS represents a collaborative effort of the Department of Economics at Addis Ababa University, the Centre for the Study of
African Economies (CSAE), the University of Oxford and the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
                                                                                                                               7
        Source: Authors’ calculation based on ERHS



        None of the conditional distributions appears to be Gaussian, suggesting correlation across farms.3
For low productivity performance, the distribution appears as an inverted U-shape, while for high
performance it is skewed to the right. For the median productivity farm the distribution appears bimodal.
This seems to justify the choice of quantile regression (QR), since, unlike OLS estimation, QR does not
require a normally distributed error term.
          We use information on households’ land ownership and income to compute the Gini coefficient of
the farmers in both survey years of the panel. With a Gini total income coefficient of 0.48 in the first and
0.46 in the second period, income inequalities appear to have decreased very little between the two
periods. With a land Gini coefficient of 0.43 and 0.44 in each year respectively, inequality in assets is
slightly lower than income inequality, a result that differs from most asset and income distributions in the
rest of the world and is probably due to a combination of extreme poverty and small size farming. The
higher level of the Gini coefficient for income also suggests that inequality may depend on different levels
of ability rather than on asset holdings.
        Farming conditions are relatively favorable with, on average, less than one plot per household with
steep slope, 54 percent of land area with good soil quality, but with one-third of farmers being affected by
climate change and reporting to have little rain on fields during the rainy season.
         Under these conditions there are few agriculture investment options that farmers can exercise over
time. For the sake of simplicity and based on the survey questions available in both rounds, we have
identified three main options: land expansion, investment in soil conservation practices, and raising
livestock.
        Land expansion is the main option for farmers, with 52 percent of farmers having exercised the
option to invest in new land, mostly through some kind of rental agreement. We only focus on those who
increased their holdings, and we observe that, with an average size of land expanded of 0.75 ha, farmers
doubled their land operation in five years. In line with the literature, a well-functioning land market allows
land to be transferred to more productive producers and to those who want to stay in agriculture.
       For Ethiopia, which faced a severe drought in 1973, investments in soil erosion, also promoted by
the government, are an important way to increase agriculture productivity and income. As a second option,

3
  The central limit theorem posits random variables independently drawn from independent distributions converge in
distribution to the normal with zero mean and constant variance.
                                                                                                                     8
we have computed the share of households who decided to invest in soil conservation practices in the
second round of the panel. We observe that in 2009, 18 percent of farmers decided to combat land
degradation and invest in one or more soil conservation practices such as physical structures (cross-slope
barriers, terraces, and biological practices – mainly agro-forestry). In general, farmers invest in a set of soil
conservation practices rather than in a single one; therefore, we use a combined option, instead of focusing
on individual options such as agro-forestry, which is exercised only by 5% of the farmers in the sample.
          4.    Empirical Strategy
    4.1. Estimation of the IR with panel data
     Our estimates at the household level are based on the functional form originally proposed by
Binswanger, Deininger and Feder (1995), in line with more recent approaches (Barrett et al. 2010) but in
the context of panel data:
    (4)

                                     =     +        +        +      +     +

In (4)    represent the unit value of gross revenue from agriculture production of household at time =
1, 2.    is farmers’ land endowment in each year, and         .is the square term to test for non-linearities in
the purported relationship.        is a matrix of household and farm characteristics such as head’s age,
education of the head, and gender of the head. To account for time-variant differences in land quality, we
add some soil quality variables, as well as variables related to topography. We also control for the impact of
non-farm activities by introducing the value of non-farm income. We draw on Reardon (1997) who found
that in 23 field studies in Africa, the share (on average) of non-farm income in total income was twice as
great in upper income tercile househoIds as in lower tercile households.
       We use a linear approximation strategy over log-linear and log-log approaches for two main
reasons. First, neither of those were found to provide a better fit with the data, and second, because the
presence of outliers is not our major concern since the QR approach inherits its robustness property from
median regression, and can produce good and reliable estimates even in the presence of extreme outliers.
        We investigate the existence of an average land productivity (ALP)- farm size relationship by using
different models. First, we run a pooled OLS regression and compare the results with a fixed-effect
regression over the two periods of time (Table 2). We complement our analysis with a panel quantile
regression model following Powel (2016) to test the robustness of the results, and to extend them to the
entire distribution of farm productivity (Table 3).
        The fixed-effects (FE) model allows us to control for time-invariant, unobserved idiosyncratic
factors which may affect farmers’ ALP, such as know-how, ability and expertise in farming activities, and
which are included in the α term, whereas       represents the time-varying error term that is uncorrelated
with the ALP outcome variable.
         The time-invariant component may encompass any form of latent individual effects, or farmers’
non-ignorable heterogeneity and even unobserved farmers’ personality traits or cognitive and non-
cognitive abilities (Almlund et al., 2011; Heckman, 2011; Ravallion 2012). Considering that the unobserved
characteristics do not change over time, any change in the dependent variable can be attributed to
influences other than these fixed characteristics. Farmers’ intrinsic characteristics or risky attitude will
determine their willingness to exercise different options, and embark on productivity enhancing activities.
The whole of these idiosyncratic characteristics that we define as farmers’ abilities does not vary over time,
once we control for a full set of predictors. According to this definition, the farmer is able to maximize the
level of his ALP over time, given a set of initial endowments in terms of factors of production or household
characteristics.


                                                                                                               9
         For what concerns the sign of the IR, the introduction of the square terms allows to capture
different possible relationships, such as a U shape or inverted-U shape relationship between farm size and
productivity. Based on the sign and significance of the coefficients and we can compute a threshold
level (maximum for inverted U-shape, and minimum for U-Shape) for farm size that implies a sign-switch in
the relationship. If a nonlinear relationship exists, the pattern of thresholds will be even more interesting to
analyze in the context of a quantile regressions for panel data (Powell, 2016), as we can analyze non-
linearities and sign switches along the whole distribution of productivity.
    4.2. Robustness checks and testing for changes in agriculture productivity
        We complement our analysis with some robustness checks to test the validity of the panel quantile
on the one hand, and for analyzing how the sign of the ALP impacts changes with agriculture productivity.
         We use first the panel structure of our data to corroborate our results by using a quantile
regression on the second year of the survey with lagged independent variables to avoid endonogeneity.
While the empirical application of cross-sectional conditional quantile regression models has been widely
developed and tested, corresponding methods for panel data have been developed only recently. The large
majority of the panel quantile studies has thus dealt with macroeconomic applications, longer time spans
and fewer numbers of observations (Koenker, 2004; Lamarche, 2010; Kato and Galvao, 2010; Kato, Galvao
and Montes-Rojas, 2012). The main problems associated with fixed effect quantile regression models is
that, as it is the case with nonlinear panel data models, the method of differencing out the fixed effects
used for the conditional linear-mean model does not carry over to the conditional quantiles. Panel quantile
methods also suffer from the standard incidental parameter problem (Neyman and Scott, 1948). This
results in an inconsistent estimate of the coefficient of interest (e.g., the land area) in an individual fixed
effects quantile regression model when the number of individuals grows large (tends to infinity) and the
number of time periods is fixed (small) (Kato and Galvao, 2011, Flores et al., 2014).
        Given this background, we use the same functional form and estimate the relationship of interest
with a quantile regression model for 2009, the second year of the survey (Table 4). Agriculture ALP is thus
regressed on its lagged value, on farm size and its square, on lagged non-farm income and on a set of
exogenous controls. As farm size (and not land operated) and past off-farm incomes are the results of past
decisions of farmers, no endogeneity arises. As an additional test, we also run the cross-section quantile
regression on ALP changes between 2004 and 2009 (Table 5).
    5. Estimation Results
        Table 2 presents results for a simple OLS pooled regression with year dummy (Column 1), and for
fixed-effect regressions (column 2) with gross agriculture income per hectare (our ALP) as the dependent
variable, using the two rounds of data, 2004 and 2009.
        By measuring ALP as gross revenue per ha, we interpret the functions that we estimate as a
normalized revenue function, in the spirit of McFadden, i.e. as a gauge function that characterizes farm
production along a, possibly bounded, optimization path. This implies that the revenue per ha observed
already incorporates the same period farm choices relative to input levels and is a function only of
exogenous variables, including prices and farm size.
        We find a nonlinear significant U-shape relationship between farm size and productivity. This
suggests the presence non-constant returns to scale in agriculture, first decreasing up to the threshold
(3.44 ha) and then increasing.
         However, the analysis of panel quantile regression suggests a different picture. Even though not
significant, the relationship between ALP and farm size for low performers (low agriculture productivity) is
an inverted U-shaped form, and after median productivity is reached, switches to a U-shaped form. This in
turn suggests that returns to scale switch across the distribution of both productivity and farm size.


                                                                                                             10
        Given the short time spam, we choose to corroborate our results using the panel structure of our
data on the second year cross-section sample. Tables 3 and 4 present results of quantile regression analysis
on the second round of the survey where the dependent variables are, respectively, ALP (Table 3) and ALP
growth (table 4).
         Our major finding suggests that land productivity and farm size are systematically related, but the
sign and the intensity of this relationship depend on one or more latent variables, directly related to total
factor productivity. For farmers in the lowest deciles of the ALP distribution, where this variable has lower
values, revenue per ha tends first to increase with farm size, and once reached a maximum (3 ha in
average), to decrease. These farms, therefore, may be using land expansion (or expansive margins),
perhaps as a safety-first strategy, to increase their welfare by ensuring subsistence. They would benefit first
from an increase in farm size, but their deficit of management capacity would then become a priority, so
that they would lose from further expanding their land size without achieving independent and substantial
gains in ALP or, more effectively, in total factor productivity (TFP). For farmers in the highest deciles of the
land productivity distribution, on the other hand, where management ability and related TFP are more
developed, the situation would be reversed. These farmers would benefit from expanding their farm size
beyond the minimum threshold, while they would be constrained and show negative results by expanding
within the threshold itself.
        We also find that productivity growth is driven by similar factors, with a pattern of behavior that
reinforces our conclusions beyond the cross-section results. Not only the farms that are in the lowest
productivity deciles, in fact, but also the farms that are less dynamic in terms of productivity growth,
display a lack of management ability that translates into diseconomies of scale. Farms in the highest deciles
of average productivity growth, on the other hand, display the opposite pattern of response to farm size
increase, with increases in productivity first negatively and then positively correlated with the scale of
operations.
         Figure 2 summarizes the results of our analysis and analyzes the farm-size productivity relationship
among less and more performant farmers. Put it in a general perspective, beyond the value of the
threshold, it appears that the relationship between farm size and productivity follows two distinct patterns
for less and more productive farmers, with latent variables pushing farm size to converge to a certain
threshold. Given a level of productivity, the relationship is direct for very small farms, and for large ones
(below and above the threshold respectively), and it is inversely related to agriculture productivity for a
whole range of median (or middle farms). This pattern suggests that the ALP farm size relationship can be
characterized as DID (Direct-Inverse-Direct). This result goes beyond the overall farm size. Figure 3 shows
the distribution of land among low and high performance (below and above the median land productivity
respectively). With a maximum farm size in the sample of about 6 ha, Figure 3 points towards the existence
of a variety of farms size within the two classes of productivity.
         One interesting result is the significance and sign of the variable non-farm income, a proxy for non-
farm employment and agriculture diversification. The coefficient is positive and significant in the pooled
OLS regression, and the panel fixed effect (Table 2). This points towards the fact that the income generated
by off-farm activities is likely to be used as a safety net activity to increase rural income and to reduce
income inequalities. Farmers that invest in off-farm activities or work off-farm can use the income
generated to invest in more productive on-farm activities. However, when looking at the entire distribution
(Table 4), the coefficient is positive only for the less productive farms but not significant for the more
productive, though still positive. This suggests, as Figure 2 shows, that agriculture diversification and rural
non-farm activities represent a valuable option for the “middle farm” farmers lying on the negative side of
the farm-size productivity relationship. This is counterintuitive compared to the conventional wisdom of
the negative relationship between non-farm and total income or landholdings. Our interpretation adds to
the existing literature that revisits this hypothesis (Reardon et al., 2000; Reardon 1997; Lanjouw and
Lanjouw, 1995; Reardon and Taylor, 1996; and Ellis, 1998).

                                                                                                             11
Figure 2: IR and Threshold value of Land




Figure 3: Distribution of farm size by bottom and top performance.

                                Farm Distribution by Productivity
                                Bottom                           Top
           .6
           .4
 Density
           .2
           0




                0           2            4      6   0       2          4   6
                                             Farm Size


                    Source: Authors’ calculation based on ERHS



        These results, which seem reasonable and are confirmed along a vast set of countries, suggest that
the ubiquitous IR relationship reported by the literature may have been an artifact of the presumption that
                                                                                                         12
the relationships observed were linear or, at least, a linear approximation to a monotonic relationship. It
appears not only that the relationship is pronouncedly non-monotonic, but also that it is drastically
different across farms, depending on their position in the distribution of productivity. The policy
implications of these findings are also significant. For farms in the lowest TFP ranks, this result in fact
implies that some land expansion may be beneficial, but lack of management ability soon creates
diseconomies of scale so that better management and technology are needed more than land increases.
Moreover, this implication holds also for farms that are less dynamic in terms of their productivity growth.
On the contrary, for farms that already have a patrimony of technological know-how and good
management, and thus are in the highest deciles of the distribution of productivity or productivity increase,
land expansion, and the associated economies of scale, may be the only policy that can make their
productivity grow.


Conclusions
The inverse relationship (IR) between average land productivity (ALP) and land size has been the object of a
voluminous literature, raising both objections and explanations. In this study, after a brief review of some
of the main arguments, we have presented evidence from two rounds of data from Ethiopia that offers a
new and more comprehensive explanation for the relationship. The survey data used are from detailed
household interviews and contain accurate georeferenced information on farmers’ location, distance from
the markets, distance from the main road, and land quality. In order to estimate the ALP–farm size
relationship and to test the IR hypothesis, we have used a specification entirely relying on exogenous
variables and estimation procedures according to the quantile regression model.
         Our results suggest that farm size displays a robust impact on ALP, but this impact is nonlinear and
switches shape across farms according with their performance. For low performers the impact is first
positive and then negative, while the opposite is true for high performers As already noted, although in a
different context by Evenson and Mwabu (2001), this may be due to individual management factors, so
that in the two areas of the ALP distribution, different complementary and substitute relations exist
between land sizes and unobserved human capital variables, such as farmers’ abilities, skills and
experience. In turn, these results are consistent with a revised version of Savastano and Scandizzo’s (2009)
option model, where management quality is supposed to be positively correlated with farm size.
         Interpreted across the range of farm sizes, our results also point to the possible existence of an S-
shaped relationship between ALP and acreage at least for a range of performances, with ALP first increasing
then decreasing, then increasing again. This DID relationship implies a turning point for the lower quantiles
of the ALP residual distribution at which a positive (DR) relationship becomes negative (IR) and one for the
upper quantiles where IR becomes positive again (DR). Both turning points are for small to medium farm
sizes, but the ones of the lower quantiles tend to be smaller than those for the upper quantiles. Thus, while
there is some significant negative relationship between productivity and operating size for low performers
over a relevant range of farm sizes, higher performers tend to display IR only over a range from small to
medium farm sizes. The interpretation of these results is thus that low productivity farms may exploit to
some extent economies of scale for a limited range of farm size increases, but need to become more
productive by exercising the right options to invest and not to incur into diseconomies once a maximum
farm size is reached. Farmers in the higher quantiles of the productivity distribution, on the other hand, can
exploit the economies of scale related to farm size only after they cross a minimum threshold of farm size.
Furthermore, a similar relationship holds for productivity growth, in the sense that more productive and
more dynamic farms are those that can exploit more fully farm expansion as a source of scale economies
and that the IR relationship holds only if they are below a minimum economic level of farm size.
         One could question whether the DID relationship could hold in a new external context
characterized by new trends such as emergent or mega farm operators, and large-scale land acquisitions
(Collier, 2009; Collier and Dercon, 2014; Sitko and Jayne, 2014). We argue that even though our nationally
                                                                                                            13
representative surveys focus on small and medium size farms, the results of our land productivity
distribution analysis could be tested also on a larger sample of farms, and identify different levels of middle
farms based on the countries’ own agro-ecological and farming characteristics. With some exceptions (Ali
et al., 2016; Muyanga and Jayne, 2016), the current format and survey design do not allow to make any
type of quantitative productivity analysis.
         These results have clear policy implications, since they indicate that land reform and redistribution
policies may be very effective for less efficient producers only if they are below a critical farm size, after
which management and technology are better instruments to improve their lot. Vice versa, for producers
that are already at a reasonable level of efficiency and dynamism, the opposite is true: land policies, be
they in the form of redistribution or more secure tenure, would be more effective than extension and
technological innovation.
         In sum, our results confirm that IR may be a ubiquitous relationship, as found in much of the
literature, but indicate that its form, shape and importance may significantly differ across the spectrum of
farm productivity performance. At the low end of the ALP distribution, IR appears to prevail, once a
minimum threshold of farm size is reached, while at the higher hand, IR only appears to be mainly a
characteristic of farmers with operating sizes not exceeding medium size thresholds. The literature on
transaction costs and the role of the firm suggests that these differences will require a deeper analysis of
some of the critical factors determining the performance of the farm as a “productivity agent” and of the
role played by management and capabilities in shaping farmers’ choices.




                                                                                                             14
References


Ali, D. A and K. Deininger. 2014. Is there a farm-size productivity relationship in African agriculture? Evidence from
Rwanda. World Bank Policy Research Paper 6770.
Ali, Daniel Ayalew & Deininger, Klaus W. & Harris, Charles Anthony Philip, 2016. "Large farm establishment,
smallholder productivity, labor market participation, and resilience : evidence from Ethiopia, "Policy Research Working
Paper Series 7576, The World Bank.
Almlund, Mathilde & Duckworth, Angela Lee & Heckman, James & Kautz, Tim, 2011. "Personality Psychology and
Economics,"Handbook of the Economics of Education, Elsevier.
Assunção, J. J. and L. H. B. Braido. 2007. Testing Household-Specific Explanations for the Inverse Productivity
Relationship. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 89 (4): 980-90.
Assunção, J., Ghatak, M., 2003. On the Inverse Relationship between Farm Size and Productivity. Economics Letters,
Volume 80, No. 2, pp.189-194, August 2003

Bardhan, P. 1973. Size, productivity and returns to scale: an analysis of farm-level data in Indian agriculture. Journal of
Political Economy, 81 (6): 1370-86.
Barrett, C. B. 1996. On Price Risk and the Inverse Farm Size-Productivity Relationship. Journal of Development
Economics, 51 (2): 193-215.
Barrett, C. B., M. F. Bellemare and J. Y. Hou. 2010. Reconsidering Conventional Explanations of the Inverse
Productivity-Size Relationship. World Development, 38 (1): 88-97.
Benjamin, D. 1995. Can Unobserved Land Quality Explain the Inverse Productivity Relationship? Journal of
Development Economics, 46 (1): 51-84.
Benjamin, D., Brandt, L., 2002. Property Rights, Labor Markets, and Efficiency in a Transition Economy: The Case Of
Rural China. Canadian Journal of Economics, 35(4), 689–716.
Berry, R.A., Cline, W.R., 1979. Agrarian Structure and Productivity in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press,
Baltimore, MD.
Bevis Leah EM and Christopher B Barrett,2016, "Close to the Edge: Do Behavioral Explanations Account for the Inverse
Productivity Relationship?"; November 2016 working paper.
Bhalla, S. S. and P. Roy. 1988. Misspecification in Farm Productivity Analysis: The Role of Land Quality. Oxford
Economic Papers, 40 55-73.
Billger, Sherrilyn M. & Goel, Rajeev K., 2009. "Do existing corruption levels matter in controlling corruption?: Cross-
country quantile regression estimates," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 90(2), pages 299-305,
November.

Binswanger, H.P., K. Deininger, and G. Feder. 1995. Power distortions revolt and reform in agricultural land relations.
In: Behrman, J. and Srinivasan, T.N. (eds). Handbook of development economics, Volume III. Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V.
Cade, B. and B. Noon, 2003.“A Gentle Introduction to Quantile Regression for Ecologists.” Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment, 1, 412-420.
Carletto G., Savastano S., and A. Zezza, 2013, “Fact or Artefact: The Impact of Measurement Errors on the Farm-
Productivity Relationship”, Journal of Development Economics, Volume 103, July 2013, Pages 254–261, and World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5908, December 2011
Carletto, C.; Gourlay, S., and P. Winters, 2015. "Editor's choice From Guesstimates to GPStimates: Land Area
Measurement and Implications for Agricultural Analysis", Journal of African Economies, Centre for the Study of African
Economies (CSAE), vol. 24(5), pages 593-628.



                                                                                                                          15
Carlos A. Flores, C. A., Flores-Lagunes, A., and D. Kapetanakis, 2014. "Lessons From Quantile Panel Estimation of the
Environmental Kuznets Curve,"Econometric Reviews, Taylor & Francis Journals, vol. 33(8), pages 815-853, November.
Carter, M. R. and K. Wiebe. 1990. Access to Capital and its Impact on Agrarian Structure and Productivity in Kenya.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 72: 1146-1150.
Carter, M., 1984. Identification of the Inverse Relationship between Farm Size and Productivity: An Empirical Analysis
of Peasant Agricultural Production. Oxford Economic Papers, New Series, 36, 1, pp. 131-145.
Chamaillé-Jammes, S. and Blumstein, D. 2012. “A case for quantile regression in behavioral ecology: getting more out
of flight initiation distance data.” Blumstein Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 66 – 6: 985-992
Chamberlain, G. , 1994, “Quantile Regression, Censoring, and the Structure of Wages,” in C. A. Sims (ed.), Advances in
Econometrics, Sixth World Congress, Volume 1. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge
Chayanov, A.V. 1926. The Theory of Peasant Economy, In D. Thorner, B. Kerblay, and R.E.F. Smith, eds. Irwin:
Homewood.
Collier, P. and S. Dercon. 2014. African Agriculture in 50 Years: Smallholders in a Rapidly Changing World? World
Development, 63: 92-101.
Collier, Paul. 2009. Africa’s Organic Peasantry: Beyond Romanticism. Harvard International Review Summer: 62-65.
Cornia, G. A., 1985. Farm Size, Land Yields and the Agricultural Production Function: An Analysis for Fifteen Developing
Countries. World Development, 13 (4): 513–34.
De Groote, H., Traoré O., 2005. The Cost of Accuracy in Crop Area Estimation. Agricultural Systems 84:21-38
Deininger, K., and G. Carletto, Savastano S., Muwongue, J., (2012), “Can diaries help in improving agricultural
production statistics? Evidence from Uganda” Journal of Development Economics, Volume 98, Issue 1, Pages 42-50
(May 2012)
Desiere S. and D. Jolliffe, 2017 (forthcoming),” Land productivity and plot size: Is measurement error driving the
inverse relationship?”, Manuscript submitted for publication in Policy Research Working Paper. Washington DC: World
Bank Group
Ellis, F. (1998). The Determinants of Rural Livelihood Diversification in Developing Countries, AgriculturalEconomics
Society Annual Conference, University of Reading
Eswaran, M., Kotwal, A., 1985. A Theory of Contractual Structure in Agriculture, American Economic Review 75: 352-
67.
Eswaran, M., Kotwal, A., 1986. Access to Capital and Agrarian Production Organization, Economic Journal 96: 482-98.
Evenson,R.E. and Mwabu, G., 2001, “The Effects of Agricultural Extension on Farm Yields in Kenya”, African Economic
Review Volume 13, Issue 1.
Feder, G. 1985. The Relation between Farm Size and Farm Productivity: The Role of Family Labor, Supervision and
Credit Constraints. Journal of Development Economics, 18 (2-3): 297-313.
Fitzenberger, B. (1997). A Guide to Censored Quantile Regressions. In: Handbook of Statistics, Volume 15: Robust
Inference (Eds. G.S. Maddala & C.R. Rao), 405-437. Amsterdam: North–Holland.
Goldstein, M., Udry C., 1999. Agricultural Innovation and Risk Management in Ghana. Unpublished, Final report to
IFPRI.
Hazell, P. e Scandizzo, P.L., 1974 “Market Intervention Policies when Production is Risky”, American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 57 (4), pp. 641-649, 1975 Johns Hopkins University Press.
Heckman, J., and Kautz, T.D., 2011, “Hard Evidence on Soft Skills” paper presented at the World Bank, December 15,
2011, Washington DC.
Horowitz, J.L. & G.R. Neumann, 1987. “Semiparametric estimation of employment duration models”, Econometric
Reviews 6, 5—40
Imai, S., Katayama, H. and K. Kala, 2013. "A quantile-based test of protection for sale model", Journal of International
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 91(1), pages 40-52.
                                                                                                                        16
Johar, M. And H. Katayama, 2012. “Quantile regression analysis of body mass and wages”. Health Economics, Volume
21, Issue 5, May , 597–611
Kato, K., and A. Galvao (2011): “Smoothed Quantile Regression for Panel Data,” Working Paper. [811,815] KATO, Kato,
K., Galvao K., A. and G. Montes-Rojas (2012): “Asymptotics for Panel Quantile Regression Models With Individual
Effects,” Journal of Econometrics, 170, 76–91. [811,815, 817]
Kilic, T., Gourlay, S. and D. Lobell, 2017, Could the Debate Be Over? Errors in Farmer-Reported Production and Their
Implications for Inverse Scale - Productivity Relationship in Uganda, unpuplished working paper
Koenker, R. & Y. Bilias, 2001. “Quantile regression for duration data: A reappraisal of the Pennsylvania reemployment
bonus experiments”, Empirical Economics 26, 199—220.
Koenker, R. (2004): “Quantile Regression for Longitudinal Data,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 91, 74–89.
[811,815,820]
Koenker, R., and J. Bassett (1978): “Regression Quantiles,” Econometrica, 46, 33–50. [810, 815-817]
Kutcher, G. P., and P. L. Scandizzo, 1981. The Agricultural Economy of Northeast Brazil. Baltimore, John Hopkins
University Press for the World Bank
Lamarche, C. (2010): “Robust Penalized Quantile Regression Estimation for Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 157,
396–408. [811,820]
Lamb, R. L. 2003. Inverse Productivity: Land Quality, Labor Markets, and Measurement Error. Journal of Development
Economics, 71 (1): 71-95.
Lanjouw J.O. and Lanjouw P. 1995. Rural Nonfarm Employment: Survey. Yale University and the World Bank. World
Development Report. Washington D.C.
Lemke K. 2010 “Modeling Healthcare Expenditures Using PROC QUANTREG”, NESUG 2010, 1-7
Levin, J.,2001. “For whom the reductions count: A quantile regression analysis of class size and peer effects on
scholastic achievement”, Empirical Economics 26, 221—246
MacDonald, James M.; Korb, Penni and Robert A. Hoppe, 2013, Farm Size and the Organization of U.S. Crop Farming,
A report summary from the Economic Research Service, August
Muyanga, M., and T.S. Jayne; 2016, Is small still beautiful? The farm size-productivity relationship revisited in Kenya,
Paper presented at the World Bank Land and Poverty Conference, March 15, 2016, Washington, DC.

Neyman, J., and E. L. Scott (1948): “Consistent Estimates Based on Partially Consistent Observations,” Econometrica,
16, 1–32.
Ravallion, M., 2012, Poor, or Just Feeling Poor? On Using Subjective Data in Measuring Poverty, Policy Research
Working Paper 5968, The World Bank Washington DC.
Reardon, T. (1997). Using Evidence of Household Income Diversification to Inform Study of thc Rural Nonfarm Labor
Market in Africa, World Development, 25(5)
Reardon, T., J.E. Taylor, K. Stamoulis, P. Lanjouw, and A. Balisacan, 2000. “Effects of Nonfarm Employment on Rural
Income Inequality in Developing Countries: An Investment Perspective,” Journal of Agricultural Economics, Volumc 51,
Number 2 - May 2000 - Pages 266-288
Reardon. T. and Taylor, J. E. (1996). Agroclimatic Shock, Income Inequality, and Poverty: Evidence from Burkina F&o,
World Deuelqpment, 24(4), 901-914.
Savastano S., and P.L. Scandizzo, 2009, “Optimal Farm Size in an Uncertain Land Market: the Case of Kyrgyz Republic”,
Agricultural Economics, 2009, vol. 40, issue s1, pages 745-758
Scandizzo, P.L., Savastano, S., 2017. Forthcoming, “Revisiting the farm size productivity relationship: New evidence
from sub-Sahara African countries”, In Agriculture and Rural Development in a Globalizing World, edited by Prabhu
Pingali and Gershon Feder, Chapter 3 Earthscan Food and Agriculture Series. London: Routledge
Sen, K. Amartya, 1975. Employment, technology and development. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.


                                                                                                                           17
Sitko, Nicholas J. & Jayne, T.S., 2014. "Structural transformation or elite land capture? The growth of “emergent”
farmers in Zambia,"Food Policy, Elsevier, vol. 48(C), pages 194-202.
Srinivasan, T. N. 1972. Farm size and productivity: Implications of choice under uncertainty. Sankhya - The Indian
Journal of Statistics, 34 (2): 409-20.
Walker, T.S., Ryan, J.G., 1990. Village and Household Economies in India's Semi-arid Tropics. , Johns Hopkins Univ.
Press, Baltimore.




                                                                                                                      18
Table 1: Household characteristics

                                                         2004        2009      Total
Farmers’ characteristics
Head’s age                                             50.49***    52.53***    51.51
Dummy for female HH head                                 0.26*       0.29*      0.27
Head’s education (years)                                1.4***      1.8***      1.6
Max years of education of HH members                     3.8**       5.7**      4.7
HH size                                                  5.93        5.91       5.92
Income, poverty and Inequality
Income per capita (Const. 2009 US$)                      105.3       152        129
Consumption per capita (Const. 2009 US$)                 93.5        173.5      134
Gini coefficient of land                                 0.43        0.44       0.44
Gini coefficient of income                               0.48        0.46       0.48
Gini agriculture income pc                               0.51        0.52       0.53
Gross agriculture income/ha                            446.81***   549.92***   497.8
Share of income from:
agriculture (crop+liv)                                  0.82***     0.73***     0.78
from crop                                               0.61***     0.55***     0.58
from livestock                                          0.21***     0.18***     0.2
from non-farm income                                    0.18**      0.27**      0.22
Agriculture and Farming conditions
Farm size                                               1.40**      1.52**      1.46
Midpoint farm size                                       1.6**      2.15**      2.0
Number of plots                                           4.7         5.1       4.9
Value of inputs /ha                                    501.82***   991.93***   746.43
Nb. of plots with steep slope                            0.16        0.14       0.15
Dummy too little rain on HH fields
during rainy season                                     0.27***     0.32***     0.29
Share of land with good soil quality                     53*         56*        54
Agriculture options in round 2
Dummy Option land expansion                                         52***       76
Amount of land increased (ha)                                        0.75       0.75
Dummy option soil conservation                                        18        18
Source: Authors’ computation based on ERHS 2004-2009
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                        19
Table 2: Panel Analysis ERHS 2004-2009: Dependent Variable: Gross Agriculture Income per ha (US$/ha


 Gross Ag. Income/ha in 2009 (US$/ha)             Pooled OLS   aster   HH Fixed Effect   aster

 Farm size                                          -260.89    ***        -271.30        ***
 Farm size sq.                                        37.90    ***          38.95        ***
 Age of HH head                                       0.99                  0.81
 Dummy for female HH head                            -56.32     **         -55.67         **
 Years of education of HH members                     39.97    ***          37.06        ***
 Nb. of plots with steep slope                       -51.53    ***         -44.21        ***
 Share of land with good soil quality                88.19     ***         76.50         ***
 Producer price Index for Cereals                     32.98    ***           0.93        ***
 Non-farm income                                       0.05    ***           0.05        ***
 Dummy year 2009                                   -2,650.48   ***
 Constant                                          -2,980.06   ***         460.32        ***
 Threshold Land                                        3.44                 3.48
 Observations                                         2,126                 2,126
 R-squared                                            0.129
 Number of HHs                                                             1,063
Source: Authors’ computation based on ERHS 2004-2009
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                      20
   Table 3: Panel Quantile Analysis ERHS 2004-2009: Dependent Variable: Gross Agriculture Income per ha (US$/ha


                                                                   Low Performers                             Median                                    High Performers
Gross Ag. Income/ha in 2009
(US$/ha)                                 Q 0.1     aster   Q 0.2    aster   Q 0.3   aster   Q 0.4   aster   Q 0.5    aster   Q 0.6    aster    Q 0.7     aster    Q 0.8    aster    Q 0.9        aster

Farm size                                 3.57              0.18             3.57           -6.38           -12.05           -45.24           -171.20    ***     -269.49   ***     -570.86       ***
Farm size sq.                            -2.21             -0.07            -1.10           -0.86             0.88             4.09            20.34      **      33.86     *       84.74         **
Age of HH head                           1.30              0.01             -0.06           -0.04            -0.03            -0.26             1.11               0.31              2.27
                                                                               -              -
Dummy for female HH head                  2.29             -1.33            22.56           21.15           -4.50            -23.15           -60.90             -51.87            -81.42
Years of education of HH
members                                   3.12             0.66             22.66    **     18.73    **     8.24             18.42     **     38.89      ***     50.64      **     72.38          *
                                                                              -
Nb. of plots with steep slope            -0.32             8.20             15.10           -2.11           -2.97            -16.65    *      -34.62             -48.80            -67.99        ***
Share of land with good soil
quality                                   5.61              1.49            27.40           27.62           20.43            53.86            111.16      **     112.80            142.06
Producer price Index for Cereals          1.10              0.01            0.19            0.33            0.23             0.58              1.42               1.84              2.11
Non-farm income                          -2.97             -0.01            0.02            0.03            0.01             0.07              0.04               0.05              0.06
Constant

Threshold Land                                                                                                                                4.21               3.98              3.37
Observations                             2,126             2,126            2,126           2,126           2,126            2,126            2,126              2,126             2,126
R-squared
Number of HHs                            1,063             1,063            1,063           1,063           1,063            1,063            1,063              1,063             1,063
   Source: Authors’ computation based on ERHS 2004-2009
   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                            21
  Table 4: Cross Section Quantile Regression in 2009: Dependent Variable Gross Agriculture Income/ha (US$/ha)


                                                               Low Performers                                       Median                                          High Performers
Gross Agriculture
Income/ha in 2009              Q 0.1      aster      Q 0.2      aster    Q 0.3      aster    Q 0.4      aster    Q 0.5      aster    Q 0.6      aster    Q 0.7       aster    Q 0.8      aster    Q 0.9        aster

                                 .
Gross Ag. Income/ha
lagged                          0.04                  0.08       ***       0.08     ***        0.08      *         0.13      **        0.22      **        0.24      ***        0.28     ***       0.24         **
Land (ha)                      58.04       **        58.72        **      47.97      *       15.17               -30.09              -76.20             -165.12      ***     -268.70     ***     -566.20       ***
Land sq                        -9.08       **        -8.13                -9.11      *        -4.68                0.92               6.91                20.96       *        36.12      **      88.16        ***
Head's Age                     -0.92                 -1.59       ***      -1.38               -1.69      *        -1.47               -1.07               -1.20                -1.87               1.27
Dummy Female Head             -46.73       ***      -62.69       ***     -81.17     ***      -87.34     ***      -62.32       *      -54.82      *       -69.03       **      -94.14      *      -125.79        *
Head's Education               10.25        **       17.06       ***     23.40      ***      26.74      ***      30.81       ***      36.36     ***       34.90      ***       48.21     ***      60.88        ***
Nb. of Plots with Steep
Slope                          -6.23                -18.88       ***     -31.92     ***      -40.70     ***      -40.16      **      -39.20     ***      -46.03      ***      -52.78     ***      -87.60       ***
Share of land with good
soil quality                  26.38                  23.71               31.10               31.51               32.78               65.74       *       60.29                69.56               24.06
Producer Price Index for
Cereals                       30.45        ***       25.77       ***     24.59      ***      25.85      ***      29.62       ***     32.61      ***      36.72       ***      35.27      ***      50.27        ***
Non-Farm Income
Lagged                         0.03         **        0.03        **       0.03      *         0.02                0.03                0.03                0.03                 0.04                0.03
Constant                    -5,683.58      ***     -4,717.56     ***    -4,427.78   ***     -4,548.81   ***     -5,181.53    ***    -5,689.44   ***     -6,276.02    ***     -5,761.33   ***     -8,179.54     ***

Threshold Land                 3.20                                      2.63                                                                            3.94                 3.72                3.21
Observations                  1,063                  1,063               1,063               1,063               1,063               1,063               1,063                1,063               1,063
  Source: Authors’ computation based on ERHS 2004-2009
  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                          22
Table 5: Cross Section Quantile Regression in 2009: Dependent Variable Difference Gross Agriculture Income/ha (US$/ha) (2009-2004)


                                                                  Low Performers                               Median                                     High Performers
 Difference Gross
 Agriculture Income/ha
 (2009-2004)                       q10        q10        q20        q20      q30     q30     q40      q40     q50       q50     q60      q60     q70        q70      q80     q80     q90        q90

                                    .
 Land (ha)                       152.73         *      123.17       ***     90.85    ***    62.19     **      22.00            -18.35          -104.73       *     -233.09   ***   -520.58      ***
 Land sq                         -21.96                -17.83        **    -15.19     **    -10.73     *      -4.93             1.62            14.59               36.54    ***    81.40       ***
 Head's Age                       -2.22                 -1.88               -2.28    ***     -1.97    ***     -1.78     **      -2.73    **      -1.48               -0.12          -0.05
 Dummy Female Head               -56.68                -72.53              -44.65           -58.48    **     -47.63            -36.89           -61.26              -91.40         -120.65
 Head's Education                 0.16                  -7.03               -3.22            0.76             7.31             10.15            18.36       **      13.19           39.81       **
 Nb. of Plots with Steep
 Slope                            12.75                 22.67               4.86            2.46             -0.72             1.42             -11.27              -28.19          -59.08
 Share of land with
 good soil quality               -153.41                -87.92       *     -53.20    *      -20.52           11.21             -1.04            -19.27             -40.82           -20.88
 Producer Price Index
 for Cereals                      53.63       ***       40.52       ***     41.87    ***    35.58     ***    32.33      ***    25.82     ***    28.67       ***     36.58    ***    49.05       ***
 Non-Farm Income
 Lagged                          -0.05                   0.03               0.02             0.03             0.04      **      0.02             0.05               0.06             0.08        *
                                   -                       -                  -                -                -                 -                -                  -                -
 Constant                      10,454.05      ***      7,769.19     ***   7,903.02   ***   6,649.06   ***   5,978.87    ***   4,568.63   ***   4,987.71     ***   6,258.85   ***   8,122.64     ***

 Threshold Land                                         3.45                2.99            2.90                                                                    3.19            3.20
 Observations                     1,063                 1,063               1,063           1,063            1,063             1,063            1,063               1,063           1,063
Source: Authors’ computation based on ERHS 2004-2009
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                           23
