                                                  WPS8213


Policy Research Working Paper                    8213




Demand and Supply Curves in Political Markets
         Understanding the Problem of Public Goods
             and Why Governments Fail Them

                                 Stuti Khemani




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8213


  Abstract
 This paper brings the economic tools of demand and supply                          the selection of a point on the political demand curve by
 curves to better understand how political markets shape                            oligopolistic political competition. Further, it shows how
 the selection of government policies. It does so to tackle a                       elite capture is only one of many possible outcomes, and is
 problem at the intersection of political science and econom-                       endogenous to preferences and beliefs in society. Preferences
 ics: government failure to pursue policies on the basis of                         in society for public goods (or the lack thereof ), and beliefs
 sound technical evidence. Too often, the leaders who wield                         about how others are behaving in the public sector, are the
 policy-making power within governments deliberately and                            primitive or fundamental elements driving the shapes of
 knowingly ignore sound technical advice, or are unable to                          political demand and supply curves and thence the selection
 pursue it despite the best of intentions, because of political                     of public policies and institutions. This framework highlights
 constraints. The paper shows how the prevailing dominant                           the need for future research to understand where political
 explanation for suboptimal policies and weak institutions,                         preferences and beliefs come from, which is essential to the
 of special interest and elite capture, can be understood as                        design of institutions that address problems of public goods.




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at skhemani@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                         Demand and Supply Curves in Political Markets:
    Understanding the Problem of Public Goods and Why Governments Fail Them


                                                    Stuti Khemani1
                                                     World Bank




JEL classification codes: H1, H41, H7, E1,
Keywords: public goods; political economy; institutions; norms; preferences




1
 This paper has been invited by Ben Ross Schneider and Melani Cammett, Editors of the Cambridge Elements Series on the
Politics of Development. I thank Melani Cammett and Luis Serven for really helpful comments on the first drafts, and Maya
Eden and Rafael Martinez for discussion that helped to clarify the ideas in this paper. I thank Swati Raychaudhuri for
assistance with the figures and tables. The opinions expressed here are those of the author and need not coincide with
those of the World Bank or its Executive Directors.
“The reader may wonder why we [economists] do not just pack up and become sociologists. The
answer, we think, is that the distinctive strengths of economics—explaining prices and quantities, as
well as exploring the complex and often unexpected ways that countless uncoordinated actions generate
sometimes unanticipated aggregate outcomes and dynamics—is no less relevant today than when it was
pioneered by the classical economists two centuries ago.” (Bowles and Gintis, 2000, pp 1433).


This paper brings the economic tools of demand and supply curves to better understand how political
markets shape the selection of government policies. It does so to tackle a problem at the intersection of
political science and economics: government failure to pursue policies on the basis of sound technical
evidence. Too often, the leaders who wield policy-making power within governments deliberately and
knowingly ignore sound technical advice, or are unable to pursue it despite the best of intentions,
because of political constraints (World Bank, 2016). Simply put, government failure can be described
as: “bad policies can be good politics” and vice versa, that “good policies can be bad politics” (Vicente
and Wantchekon, 2009; Bueno de Mesquita et al, 2003).
“Good” and “bad” policies are examined in this paper on the basis of economic models of the role of
governments, or the public sector, in addressing market failures, promoting prosperity, eradicating
poverty, and providing the public goods that contribute to society’s wellbeing. The central question
regarding policy choices, which is common to both economics and political science, is whether politics
yields policies in the broad public interest rather than being captured to serve narrow special interests.
The paper develops a new analytical framework which synthesizes a complex body of multidisciplinary
research on this question, and distills a few fundamental features that matter for whether governments
pursue policies more, or less, in the public interest. The consolidated approach to political markets
offered in this paper is one which hones in on how politics matters for the selection of economic policies
by governments.
The political market examined in this paper is one in which actors on the demand-side are separated
from the supply-side on the basis of the degree of direct power they exercise over public policy. Demand
side actors are the countless “ordinary” citizens, who are not well organized, who hold no powerful
positions, nor command significant economic resources, and exert little direct influence over policy-
making. Supply-side actors consist of that sub-set of citizens who select into government bureaucracy
and political contestation for power—for leadership positions in government or as organized groups that
exert direct influence over leaders and policy-making. The analogy to economic markets is the selection
of individuals into being consumers, or “takers” of public policy, versus producers, who “make” public
policy, exercising direct power over what government agencies and authorities do.2 The actors on the
supply-side are also citizens, but distinguished from citizens on the demand-side by having the power to
make policy.

2
  One concern raised upfront by a reviewer is whether there is a problem with limiting the framework to a two-actor
world—on the demand and supply sides. The paper will show how this is not the case. The shape of the demand and supply
curves in political markets that are proposed in this paper reflect complex variation among individuals in their preferences,
and the different types of political actions individuals can take on the supply-side. However, the framework abstracts from
the details of these different types of political actions to hone in on how they are aggregated by political markets and
translated into policy outcomes.

                                                              2
The development of this framework is timed to coincide with global forces that are making political
markets look much more like “countless uncoordinated actions” (Bowles and Gintis, ibid) than ever
before, necessitating more tools to understand how these actions aggregate into outcomes, and the
dynamics of these outcomes. More and more ordinary citizens are participating in political processes
around the world (World Bank, 2016). These citizens are not only queuing at voting booths or taking to
the streets, but they are also contesting on the supply-side for local leadership positions, with the spread
of local elections and decentralization of public policy delivery within countries across the political
spectrum. In more and more places around the world, the power to make public policy, including
through how policy is de-facto implemented, is less and less restricted to a small group of organized
elites, but rather dispersed across a larger number of actors in leadership positions. The framework
offered here takes-on the analysis of how individual political actions, and the threat thereof, of large
numbers of citizens, on both the demand and supply sides, aggregate into outcomes of public policy.
Political markets determine the allocation of resources to public goods. In contrast to the availability of a
well developed framework in economics to think about how economic markets allocate resources to
private goods, there is no general framework available in the social sciences to think about the market
for public goods. Questions about the nature of public goods that matter for human wellbeing and
economic development, how society allocates resources towards these goods, and how to think about
whether these allocations are “sufficient” or “optimal” are falling through the cracks between
disciplines in the social sciences. While important advances have been made to answer these questions, I
posit that a more general framework is needed that can encompass or bring together dispersed pieces of
individual research. This paper is a first attempt to provide such a general framework by extending the
methodology of demand and supply curves in economics to examine how political markets allocate
resources to public goods.
At the same time as offering something of value from economics, namely, the application of demand
and supply curves, the paper confronts perhaps its biggest shortcoming: of assuming exogenous
preferences. It focuses on this shortcoming particularly in the context of preferences for public goods,
and attitudes towards the role of government in an economy, and shows how these are the crucial
ingredients shaping the political market. It seeks to learn from political science and other disciplines
about how collective or social preferences are formed for public goods, and the role of endogenizing
preferences to understand equilibrium outcomes of political markets. Economists have grown recent
interest in questions of culture—values and beliefs—which are closely linked to preferences; how
culture interacts with formal institutions, and how these shape economic outcomes (Alesina and
Giuliano, 2015, provide a review). However, this is a nascent body of work which has yet to clarify
concepts, and to distinguish between channels through which values and beliefs impact outcomes. A key
distinction is whether culture matters through interaction among people in private markets or through
political markets that shape public policies. In this paper, I focus on the latter channel—how values and
beliefs shape political markets—and summarize what we may know and what are large, open questions
for future research.
In the framework of demand and supply curves in political markets in this paper, the fundamental
element driving public policy outcomes, and government failures to pursue public goods, is: preferences
across citizens over public goods. Preferences over public goods can be understood as values and beliefs


                                                      3
about the role of government in the economy and society—what types of problems governments should
be addressing through public policy, or what types of goods and services governments should be
providing. These preferences shape citizen participation on both sides of the market—as “takers” of
public policy on the demand side, and as “makers” of public policy on the supply side. Preferences over
public goods determine which citizens enter the supply-side, contending for positions of political and
bureaucratic leadership, and organizing into groups to actively exert pressure on policies. Preferences
therefore shape policy outcomes through both the demand-side mechanisms of how popular support (or
opposition) determine incentives of policy-making leaders, as well as through the supply-side
mechanisms of who selects to become contenders for policy-making powers, and on what basis they
compete with each other. The paper shows how policy outcomes across a variety of formal and informal
political institutions that determine who has power over policy-making can be understood as the
intersection of different shapes of demand and supply curves. Using this general framework thus allows
for focusing on the characteristics of public policies—summarized into an index of private versus public
interest outcomes—that come out of a diversity of political institutions for gaining and remaining in
power.
In the last section of the paper, after defining the framework of demand and supply curves in political
markets, I argue that we know very little about which types of formal institutions of power configuration
(such as democracy, autocracy, federalism, etc.) are more or less conducive to getting more public (less
private) goods from the public sector. I discuss how the existing evidence supports my argument that
preferences for public goods, and beliefs about how others are participating in politics, are of first order
importance within any institutional context, shaping both the demand-side—what citizens are willing to
support before becoming more politically active, that is, moving to the supply-side—entering the market
of contenders for policy-making powers. For example, some autocracies can outperform democracies,
while others are disastrous. This variation between good policy outcomes in some autocracies and bad
policies in some democracies can be explained not by differences in formal institutions of elections, but
rather, by differences in behavior within institutions that are ultimately attributable to different
preferences and beliefs among citizens.
Fundamental questions about political markets loom large for all types of countries, rich and poor, going
well beyond things like voting behavior, or outcomes of elections, to how citizens form preferences over
public goods, and the critical role of how they access information and use it to form beliefs about what
the state or government should be doing. How do citizens find common ground to demand broad public
goods that benefit society as a whole? What role do formal institutions play in shaping citizens’ values
and beliefs with regard to the role of governments in providing public goods? What are the
characteristics of informal institutions that shape these values and beliefs? This paper provides a new
framework, drawing upon vast areas of literature, to tackle these broad questions, and shows how central
these questions are to research and policy efforts to understand and solve problems of public goods.
I further argue that this new framework is useful to understand how transitions happen from one type of
“low level” equilibrium, such as of clientelist or patronage politics where public policies are more likely
to be geared to provide private benefits rather than broad public goods, to a better equilibrium, such as
where public goods are provided by depoliticized and professional bureaucracies. Transition from an old
to a new equilibrium can come about through changes in either the citizen demand-side of political


                                                     4
markets or on the supply-side, through policies selected by political leaders, or both, but without a
structured framework or tools to examine these forces separately, we have limited ability to analyze the
dynamics of a transition. Most scholars acknowledge that little is known about how societies with
initially weak institutions, of bureaucracy and the rule of law, move towards strengthening them so they
cannot be easily bent to the will or discretion of powerful political elites. What little research is available
relies on historical accounts of institutional transition in the United Kingdom and the United States. The
insights from competing papers on what explains these transitions can be reconciled and consistently
interpreted within the framework offered in this paper. For example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2000)
argue that the transition to democratic institutions in England in the 1800s was the result of underlying
threat of revolution by citizens on the demand-side. However, Lizzeri and Persico (2004) argue that
demand-side explanations are insufficient to expain the political reforms, and should be complemented
by another of increasing preferences among some elites for urban public health goods following the
industrial revolution. Preferences for public goods among citizens—both as voters on the demand-side
and as elites who actively influence or become contenders on the supply-side—have also been credited
as underlying the so-called Progressive Era in the 20th century United States during which
professionalism in bureaucracies became established (Glaeser and Goldin, 2006). I discuss how these
different accounts of institutional transition can be interpreted as changes in the shape (or slope and
elasticity) of demand and supply curves in political markets.
The paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a discussion of the problem that is the objective of
this analysis: the problem of public goods and government failure to address it. Section II presents the
framework for the demand and supply sides of political markets, and discusses how to interpret policy
selection in equilibrium. Section III applies this framework to explaining government failures to pursue
public goods. Given the importance of preferences and beliefs in shaping the demand and supply curves
in political markets, Section IV forges connections between key pieces of available evidence to examine
what we know about the formation of these preferences and beliefs. The experience of citizen
engagement through local political markets, the messages communicated through local media, and the
learning of concepts and ideas in schools appear to play fundamental roles in shaping political
preferences and beliefs, but with many open questions on which future research is needed. Section V
concludes.


   I.      The Problem of Public Goods and Government Failure
Markets are the domain of economic transactions among large numbers of people. Governments attempt
to control the freedom of private individuals and groups to engage in market transactions by exercising
the powers of authority and coercion of the state. Modern economics analyzes how markets function and
aims to identify regularities or patterns in what outcomes are obtained through the interaction among
large numbers of dispersed agents. A durable result from this analysis is that when markets are
competitive, property rights are well defined, contracts can be enforced, and transactions between agents
are not too costly, good economic outcomes of rising incomes and prosperity are likely to be obtained.
Furthermore, a related result in economics is that the outcomes produced by competitive markets would
be difficult for a central planner in government to replicate through instruments of state policy and



                                                      5
suppression of markets. The domain of “good” economic policy making by governments is derived as
supporting competitive conditions in markets, and providing the public goods that markets do not.3
Economics is most confident about its results about markets when it comes to the allocation of resources
to the consumption and production of private goods—goods from which individuals derive utility and
that have little direct implications for the utility of others. Economics recognizes the limits of markets to
achieve good outcomes when there are problems of externalities and public goods—when the
consumption of a good by one individual has direct implications for the ultility of others. Elementary
economics textbooks present the notion of market failures, externalities and public goods which are
problems that require some form of public policy intervention by governments. The “optimal” policy is
typically derived by assuming the position of a benevolent social planner to analyze the characteristics
of the problem and the potential impact of different policy instruments.
For example, take the case of the negative externality (for environmental quality) of pollution generated
during the production process of firms, such as oil refineries. Policy makers in government can choose
between “command and control” regulation which specifies the quantity of pollution that each firm is
allowed to produce; price regulation through the imposition of Pigouvian taxes on the production of
pollution; or, allocate “pollution permits” (the cap and trade policy) to firms and thence allow market
forces to determine who produces how much pollution. The third solution follows the insights of Coase
(1960) on how to secure property rights and well-functioning markets in which different agents can
costlessly negotiate with each other, calls for light policy interventions by governments to facilitate
market-led solutions. Yet, even the so-called Coase Theorem, which minimizes the role of government,
does not get rid of it—government institutions are needed to protect property rights, reduce transactions
costs, support free markets and gently nudge these markets when they fail (as in the case of the pollution
externality).
Governments are not only uniquely positioned to provide the institutional infrastructure for well-
functioning markets, but also to pursue public goods that society values and that are likely to be under-
provided by markets. For example, for those who seek to eradicate poverty and reduce inequality,
governments also have unique powers of redistribution to complement other market-based solutions to
raise living standards for all. Supporting market institutions can also be regarded as a public good, and
some forms of redistribution, such as providing social safety nets, can be viewed as part of this public
good. For example, by cushioning people from shocks, public insurance programs may help prevent
populist backlash against markets. Redistribution may also help maintain competitive conditions in
markets by reducing the likelihood that unequal endowments of wealth lead to the creation of
monopolies by the wealthy.4
The notion of “public goods” that governments can uniquely provide (or nudge markets to provide) is
broader than the textbook definition of those goods that have the physical properties of being “non-
excludable” and “non-rival” (clean air and national defense are typical textbook examples of public
goods, although one could think of ways in which even these can be excludable and rival). Many types
of public spending may be regarded as providing public goods even though at first glance they would
3
 Rajan and Zingales (2003) provide a most spirited account of the economists’ view of the importance of markets.
4
 The concept of redistribution as a public good needs greater attention in the literature. The paper will discuss the
challenge of analyzing what are technically sound redistribution policies further below.

                                                              6
appear as both “excludable” and “rival”. For example, spending on public education in a neighborhood
school excludes residents living in other neighborhoods, and increasing public resource allocation to
some schools is likely to rival resources for others. But society and its citizens may have preferences
defined over the public good of “equal opportunities for all children, regardless of the accident of their
birth”. Providing this good may require an array of unequal public spending policies such as progressive
targeting of resources to schools in poor neighborhoods, or providing scholarships and social support to
children from disadvantaged families.
Solutions to problems of market failures and public goods need not necessarily involve public policies
of direct production or provision of services by government departments. Just like in the example of cap
and trade regulation of pollution, public policies that aim to accomplish goals of redistribution or equal
access to health and education services may provide incentives for markets to provide these services
(Pinheiro and Schneider, 2017). This paper will be agnostic about what specific policy design works
better than others to accomplish a policy goal. It will pursue the more abstract or meta question of
whether society and government seek to address problems of public goods using the best available
technical evidence about what policies work for the purpose.
Governments fail when its leaders deliberately and knowingly ignore sound technical advice about what
public policies work better than others in pursuing public goods. Defining and measuring government
failure is difficult because it requires first specifying what are appropriate policies, and what are the
public goods that governments should deliver, to then be able to assess whether leaders are failing to
pursue those policies and deliver those goods. This paper will follow World Bank (2016) and
characterize appropriate public policies in the abstract: as those policies that aim to fulfill the unique role
of government to provide the public goods that create value for society but are not adequately provided
by markets, debating the best available technical evidence for this purpose. Governments fail when
leaders adopt and implement policies that they know are costly for the greater public good, despite the
availability of alternative policies that are likely to yield improved outcomes. Governments can make
inadvertent mistakes, when they do not have the right evidence, when there is uncertainty and
disagreement among experts about the appropriate policies, or when the state of the world changes and
they need to find out what to do to tackle new problems as they emerge. Such mistakes and uncertainties
about appropriate public policies are not part of the problem of government failure that is tackled in this
paper. Government failure is defined on the basis of purpose, intent, and incentives of leaders to pursue
public policies in the public interest.
One example of government failure on which there appears to be a consensus is that of malfeasance and
mismanagement within public bureaucracies and by political leaders: limited control of corruption; weak
management practices that condone frequent absenteeism among public sector workers; the role of
connections or nepotism in the recruitment and career concerns of public sector workers, which can
contribute to lack of motivation to perform on the job; crony capitalism, whereby politically connected
firms receive privileged treatment by public regulators and financial markets. The reason there appears
to be consensus that corruption is socially costly is because the evidence suggests that where there is
greater corruption, public policies confer concentrated private benefits on a few, at the expense of
economic efficiency and more widely shared public benefits (World Bank, 2016 and 2017).



                                                      7
Another example of government failure on which there appears to be consensus has similar properties of
conferring private benefits at the expense of the greater public good: price subsidies for energy. For
example, there is technical evidence and wide agreement among experts that energy subsidy policies
pursued by many governments around the world are inefficient and entail fiscal and environmental costs
with little justification on equity grounds (Clement et al. 2013). Energy subsidies in the developing
world are highly regressive (Arze del et al. 2012). In India, a country that exemplifies the political and
economic problems around energy pricing policies, estimates suggest that the richest 10 percent of
households receive seven times more in benefits from subsidies than the poorest 10 percent (Anand et al.
2013). Furthermore, India is also a country where citizens are actively engaged in outright theft of
energy. Depuru et al (2011) estimate that utility companies worldwide lose more than $25 billion every
year due to electricity theft, of which utility companies in India lose about $4.5 billion every year. Such
theft, and the resultant transmission and distribution losses, combined with pricing policies of
subsidizing electricity results in bankrupt utilities that are unable to provide reliable electricity to
anyone. Electricity produced by public utilities in India in effect becomes a scarce commodity over
which intense distributive conflict is waged through the political process (Golden and Min, 2013).
How does the notion of government failure defined here apply to other broad areas of policy-making
that have been the subject of voluminous scholarship—market-oriented policies of economic
liberalization, on the one hand, and social welfare and redistribution on the other? In the literature on the
political economy of macroeconomic reforms, policies such as trade liberalization, privatization,
deregulation, and fiscal discipline, are argued by economists to be technically sound policies that would
enable economic growth for the benefit of all; failure to pursue these policies, economists warn, would
have dire consequences.5 The animating puzzle in that literature is why governments do not adopt these
superior economic policies, and why reforms for macroeconomic stabilization are delayed despite all
policy actors realizing that adjustments will eventually become necessary (for example, because budget
constraints will eventually bind). The notion of government failure defined here is consistent with the
dominant theme in that literature: that failure to adopt reforms is the result of conflict of private interests
among policy makers and the constituents they serve. That is, policy makers pursue private interests,
either their own or of the interest groups to whom they are beholden, even when they understand
technical evidence about the costs of delaying reforms.6
When it comes to policies for social welfare and redistribution, there is far less consensus among
economists not only about what are technically sound policies, but more fundamentally about how to
think about “technical merit”.7 Most analysis by World Bank poverty economists, for example, assumes
redistribution as a policy objective and then proceeds with technical analysis of how best to achieve the

5
  Krueger (1993), Rodrik (1996) and Sturzenegger and Tommasi (1998) are classic references that review the literature on
the political economy of reforms.
6
  The leading authors reviewing the literature (cited above) recognize a role for genuine differences in technical opinion
about what are appropriate policies, and that some part of lack of reforms is the result of “limited information and the
dynamics of learning” (Sturzenegger and Tommasi, 1998, page 8-9). However, they conclude that this limited knowledge
factor cannot explain the persistence of bad economic policies without appealing to some role for powerful interest groups
who block reforms to maintain their private rents, without regard for the generalized social costs.
7
  Consensus on basic macroeconomic stabilization policies is ultimately rooted in binding budget or resource constraints—
sustaining fiscal excesses is infeasible. In contrast, redistribution policies are determined by the objectives that are being
pursued, and these objectives, rooted in preferences, can vary across citizens and policy-makers.

                                                              8
amounts and targets of the specified objective function, such as the World Bank’s own goal of
eradicating extreme poverty (World Bank, 2014). A significant literature has examined how differences
in preferences for redistribution, such as, based on differing beliefs and philosophies about the role of
luck verus effort and individual responsibility in shaping income inequality, is an important factor
explaining variation in the size of government, progressive taxation and spending on welfare of poorer
households (Alesina and Glaeser, 2004). How relevant, then, is the notion of government failure—
leaders pursuing policies that they know are costly for the greater public good, despite the availability of
alternative policies that are likely to yield improved outcomes—for the area of redistributive policies, if
there is much less evidence or expert consensus on those “alternative policies” or “improved outcomes”?
The World Development Report 2006, Equity and Development (World Bank, 2006), marshals evidence
to argue that public policies for equitable access to health, education, and economic opportunity are
needed for sustained economic growth for all. Put another way, World Bank (2006) provides evidence
consistent with equity of opportunity, and avoidance of extreme deprivation by any sub-group of the
population, being public goods, in a similar way as protection of property rights, and institutions to
support competitive markets. If any policy maker does not agree with the conclusions about the
technical value (for sustained economic growth for all) of redistributive policies, and therefore does not
pursue those policies, would that be regarded as government failure in the framework of this paper? If
the basis for policy disagreement is sustained by credibly non-partisan technical analysis of economic
data, it would not. However, if policy making in contentious areas is influenced by incentives of leaders
to extract private rents, for themselves or for the interest groups to whom they are beholden, and these
leaders deliberately ignore technical evidence on social costs in order to preserve private rents, that
constitutes government failure.8
This paper builds on the analysis in World Bank (2016) and characterizes “good” versus “bad” policies
as the extent to which policies confer private benefits at the expense of the greater public good. I define
a policy index—p—to capture the degree of inequality in the incidence of benefits from public policies,
akin to the Gini coefficient for income equality. Like the Gini coefficient, the value of p lies between 0
and 1, with 0 representing perfect equality, when the incidence of benefits from public policies is spread
universally, and 1 representing perfect inequality—when the benefits are captured by a small segment of
the population.
Unlike the Gini coefficient, which reflects inequality in the distribution of a fixed amount of resources,
the policy index proposed here reflects a trade-off between allocating public resources to provide private
consumption versus investment in a public good that yields greater social returns whose benefits are
universally shared. Values of p0 reflect equality in distribution of benefits; but importantly, the
origins of these universally shared benefits come from investments in public goods that generate social
value. Values of p>0, reflect the opposite, of public spending on private goods, even if they are
distributed equally (such as, to continue the earlier example, if subsidized electricity were distributed

8
 Outcomes in other areas of contentious policy-making that go beyond economics—such as gun control, or environmental
policies to combat climate change—may also be partly explained by knowledge limitations and disagreement based on
technical analysis of data. But I would argue that the notion of government failure defined in this paper would nevertheless
be relevant. Government failure in these cases would look like the following: despite government leaders having access to
expert evidence that points to the benefits of some policy reforms that they can all agree upon, those reforms are not
undertaken because the political process becomes gridlocked by partisan considerations.

                                                             9
equally across constituents), if these policies come at the expense of public investments that would
create greater social value (such as, well functioning, and solvent electric utilities that support economic
growth).
The social costs of under-investments in public goods (for example, to combat climate change) may be
disproportionately borne by poorer sections of the population who have fewer means to insure or protect
themselves, bringing this proposed policy index back in line with a measure of inequality. In short, the
policy index p captures the cost of distributive conflict over the allocation of public resources, resulting
in allocations to serve private interests at the expense of investments in the greater public good, with p=1
representing the highest cost, and p=0, no cost:
        0  p 1       (1)

This policy index p is the fundamental building block of the analytical framework in this paper. It
represents the problem of government failure that is the objective of this analysis—governments fail
when their leaders knowingly and deliberately adopt a policy index p for which there is evidence that it
confers private benefits at the expense of the greater public good. This is an abstract way of denoting
public policies and should not be confused with policies that are in practice designed to confer unequal
benefits in the pursuance of a larger public good—such as, in the example raised earlier of unequal
spending across public schools, to give equal opportunity to all children regardless of the accident of
their birth in poor families, and build human capital for long-term, sustained growth. The approach is
one of summarizing policy choices into a single index of “privateness” versus “publicness”, which links
to normative concepts in other disciplines, such as in political science, about special interest versus
public interest politics.
Government failure in this approach is analytically identical to market failure—the failure of trade or
negotiation between agents to yield a public sector which provides public goods. Any policy index p>0
is an example of a government failure—there exist public goods that would enhance social welfare but
public policies are allocating resources to private rather than public goods because it serves the interests
of some citizens. There is no political Coase theorem here because of conflict of interest among citizens
who are pursuing their private good through public policies (Acemoglu, 2003).
The concept of summarizing policy choices into a single index representing the degree to which policies
deviate from the optimal policy of providing public goods can be supported by a general model of an
economy which exhibits market failures and requires public goods, such as, property rights and
institutions that support competitive markets. The model would need to specify the costs of producing
that public good, in terms of foregone private consumption of citizens in that economy, and in terms of
the technology of taxation (distortionary and transaction costs associated with taxation). It would yield
an “optimal” solution, in the tradition of modern economics, characterized by equating the marginal
benefits from the public good with the marginal costs of producing it. This is the so-called Samuelsonian
condition, named after the economist who first wrote down such a general model (Samuelson, 1954).
The difference in this paper from the Samuelsonian approach consists of how the public good is
modeled. Modern economics analysis takes as its starting point a defined welfare or utility function with
exogenously given preferences for private consumption, c, and a public good, g. An individual or group
j’s utility function can be written (for simplicity’s sake) as the sum of utility from private consumption

                                                     10
and the public good (which enters the utility of all other individuals in society since the good, g, is
assumed to be non-excludable and non-rival):

U j (c, g )  c j  H j ( g )      (2)

The marginal benefit of g would then be derived from a social welfare function that sums up the welfare
or utilities of all individuals in the society. If C(c, g) denotes the social cost function of producing the
public good, the optimal solution would be represented as:

∑       =         (3)

The problem with this approach is that it does not pay attention to where preferences for public goods
come from, how they are endogenously formed by political and economic institutions, and how this
matters for economic and human development outcomes (Bowles, 1998; Gintis et al, 2005). The
Samuelsonian approach of relying on individual utility functions requires that preferences for public
goods have to satisfy particular properties in order to be amenable to analysis through utility functions.
Social choice theorists, beginning with Arrow (1965), have cast doubt on the existence of well-behaved
preferences over the multiple dimensions of public policy making. The political economy approach of
assuming a “median voter”, who has well defined preferences, suffers from the same problem.
I further contend that the problem of defining exogenous and stable preferences is particularly severe for
public goods, g, than it is for private consumption.9 Public goods, by definition, involve a shared
understanding in society about which goods or public policies provide benefits for all, and thereby have
the properties of being non-excludable and non-rival. Beliefs about what should be regarded as a public
good are not only shaped by the societal institutions that sociology studies, but can also be shaped
through game-theoretic interactions between multiple agents (that is studied in political science and
political economics). Far from being stable, preferences based on beliefs about how others are thinking
and acting may change rapidly. For example, Grossman and Helpman (2001) describe how elites can
distort public policy to cater to their own self-interest by persuading ordinary citizens that those policies
are in the public interest. Elites’ preferences over public policy in these models of special interest
capture may be indistinguishable from their preferences over private consumption, leaving open the
question of how to think about preferences for public goods.
What the framework here does is separate the origins of differences in opinion over the optimal public
policy p between that which is derived on the basis of technical evidence, and that which is shaped by
beliefs, ideology, history, norms, and self-interest. The intuition in the examples discussed earlier in this
section, that there exists some available “technical” basis about the types of policies governments should
be pursuing to create social value, is not consonant with summing-up individual lay citizens’ valuation
of policies, nor with the preferences of a “median voter”. Indeed, there are several examples of
institutions adopted by society precisely to shield public policy from popular incursions, and place some
forms of policy making within the domain of technical experts. For example, monetary policy making
by an independent central bank. A large literature on economic reforms has described what technically

9
 I cannot think of a formal reference where this distinction has been made, that preferences over public goods, g, is harder
to define than preferences over private consumption. I would be grateful for suggestions during the review process.

                                                             11
sound public policies should look like, relying on “expert” assessment of whether these policies would
contribute to growth (Rodrik, 1996, and 2006 provides reviews). Theoretically, Lizzeri and Persico
(2002) provide a model where the public good, G, is given by exogenous assumptions about the
technical value of G, and the efficient or optimal policy choice is to allocate all public resources to
producing this public good as long as it is more valuable than the cost of foregone private consumption.
The approach of assuming a domain of policy solutions that carry some technical merit for the good of
society as a whole is a particular way of avoiding the ultimately philosophical question of what is “the
public good”. An abstract policy index, p, which denotes deviation from technically sound policies does
not obscure the fact that there may be a great deal of uncertainty around what specific policies are
contained in the benchmark indicator, p=0. To continue the prior example, Rodrik (2006) discusses
significant limitations to expert understanding of good economic reforms. Experts rarely have irrefutable
evidence about whether reforms would indeed improve outcomes. But this uncertainty over knowledge
of reforms is not the interesting political economy question. At some philosophical level, society will
never “know” what options are better than others. The interesting question is whether governments
pursue policies on the basis of constructively debating the best available technical evidence and
continuously promote the generation of better evidence and more debates to inform policy making.
The analysis here will regard citizens’ preferences over p to be endogenously formed by political and
economic markets, and shaped by history and social norms. In what follows below, individuals and
groups in society will have different preferences over p, and disagreements over the normative,
“technical” value of setting p=0. This allows for examining society’s beliefs with regard to an abstract
benchmark, p=0, that has some useful properties. This benchmark is consistent with several strands of
literature across disciplines that regard public goods as those that confer universal benefits. This
characterization is also useful to serve the role of “prices” in political markets—the price of providing
more equal benefits from public policies is foregone private consumption, especially among economic
elites who hold greater private wealth endowments and incomes that need to be taxed to finance the
public good. The next section will develop the demand curve for the policy index p, using this “price”
characteristic of foregone private consumption that is unequally distributed across citizens with different
endowments/income.


   II.     Demand and Supply Curves in Political Markets
The political market examined in this paper is one in which actors on the demand-side are separated
from the supply-side on the basis of the degree of direct power they exercise over the setting of public
policy, p. Demand side actors are the countless ordinary citizens who hold no public office and exert
little direct influence over policy making. Supply-side actors consist of that sub-set of citizens who
select into political contestation for power—for leadership positions in government or as organized
groups that exert influence over leaders and policy making. The analogy to economic markets is the
selection of individuals into being consumers versus producers (Table 1).




                                                    12
Table 1: Analogy between Economics and Politics on Roles and Actions of Individuals
                                  Demand-side                         Supply-side            Actions
 Economics                    Consumers                  Producers                           Buy/sell
 Politics                     Citizens/users/voters      Politicians/bureaucrats/influential Elect or support/run
                                                         organized groups                    or apply, organize


This section will focus on drawing the demand curve for the public policy index p: D(p).
Consider a society with different individuals or groups indexed by j. The welfare of group j’s members
is given by:

W j (c, b)  c j  b j ( p)           (3)

where c represents private consumption over which an individual exercises direct decision-making
power, while b(p) represents net benefits from public policies after paying any taxes owed to the
government under those policies. I propose separating the analysis of the demand and supply sides of
political markets on the basis of little versus greater power to manipulate p. To gain power to manipulate
p, citizens have to enter the bureaucracy or become political actors and contest as candidates (or
organize into parties) or participate as voters and political interest groups on the supply-side of the
market. The decision to vote, or how to vote, and protest (or rise in revolt) receive special treatment in
this framework, lying at the cusp of the demand and supply sides—these are actions ordinary citizens
can threaten to take to indirectly influence policy selection, regardless of whether they in fact vote or
revolt. The act of voting or of mobilizing in protest are actions on the supply-side of the political market.
The demand curve is proposed as the number of citizens, D(p), who would choose to remain “takers” of
a given policy (p), rather than becoming political or bureaucratic actors on the supply side to directly
influence or select the policy.10 The demand side thus reflects citizen support provided to a policy
without resorting to political action to change the policy. It captures one aspect of voting behavior—the
weight that voters place on public policy offers or past performance—but does not pin down actual
voting decisions that are made on the supply side of the market. Actual voting decisions depend upon
the supply side of this market—what different options are in fact being offered by candidates competing
for power to make policy.11
The supply-side in this framework consists of that sub-set of citizens who enter the market as contenders
for power over policy making—for leadership positions in government, both as politicians and
bureaucrats, or as organized interest groups that exert influence over leaders and policy making. The
analogy to economic markets is the selection of individuals into being consumers on the demand-side
versus producers on the supply-side (Table 1). For politicians, actions on the supply-side consist of the



10
   This approach to the demand-side is similar to the concept of latent threat of revolution in institutional contexts where
citizens have no formal political powers. Citizen behavior on the demand side plays a similar role in democratic contexts
where people can vote to remove leaders from office.
11
   This point—about voting decisions on the supply-side—is elaborated further below.

                                                              13
political strategies that are adopted by different candidates/parties, given electoral rules and political
institutions that determine how to win office or gain access to policy-making powers.
However, the supply-side not only consists of citizens who run for political office, but also citizens who
seek a career in the government bureaucracy. Bureaucratic leaders manage myriad working-level
agencies of government and wield power over the implementation of public policies, de facto making
policy through how it is implemented. For example, the behavior of frontline service providers, such as
public sector teachers, matters directly for whether public spending on their salaries leads to widely
shared public benefits (such as, an educated and healthy population). If teachers are absent from the
classroom, or not motivated to teach effectively even when present, spending on teachers translates into
a high p—providing rents to teachers in the form of a secure government job, but at the expense of the
public good of an educated population. We will return to this point, about the supply-side including both
political and appointed technocratic leaders who wield power over public policy, further below in this
section.
Consistent with the view of citizen behavior on the demand side as “takers” of policy, the supply side
consists of citizens who have strong preferences for (i) holding office and/or (ii) for specific policies, p,
that they would like to have implemented. The first factor shaping who enters the supply-side,
preferences for holding office, is consistent with the Downsian tradition of assuming that candidates
competing for power select political strategies opportunistically, to maximize the probability of winning
(Downs, 1957). The second factor shaping the entry of citizens into the supply-side, preferences for
specific policies, is consistent with the “citizen-candidate” tradition in economics (Besley and Coate,
1997; Osborne and Slivinski, 1996). Citizens’ values and beliefs with regard to public goods thus shape
their behavior on both the demand and supply sides—what policies to support, and when to enter as
actors and contenders on the supply-side.
Switching bgetween the demand and supply sides: The decision to “switch” from the demand to the
supply side of political markets is a special feauture of political markets that is not familiar to economic
markets. The switching decision for citizens to compete for leadership positions, and to participate as
voters (or protestors, outside of elections) on the supply-side is determined by the following factors:

(1)   Preferences over public policies: b j ( p)
(2)   Preferences over non-economic policies, and directly from the act of participating in politics
(3)   Beliefs about the behavior of other contenders for leadership
(4)   Beliefs about the behavior of other voters/protestors
The supply-side of political markets is thus intricately linked to the demand-side through preferences
over public goods, represented in b ( p) in equation (3). In addition to preferences over the benefits
                                    j


from public economic policies, preferences over non-economic policies and for particular parties,
candidates or ideological positions, regardless of economic policies, shape the decision to switch from
the demand to the supply side. These preferences which determine the entry decision also determine
subsequent behavior on the supply side. Furthermore, separate from preferences, entry and behavior on
the supply side are determined by beliefs about how others are behaving.



                                                      14
A large literature on expressive voting suggests that a component of voting decisions, separate from how
voters weigh economic policy offers, is whether citizens derive direct utility or value from the act of
voting, V(x), where x denotes turning out to vote. Further, citizens may derive utility from aligning with
parties who represent their social or ideological beliefs, a, independent of actual policy choices, and
from voting to support these parties, z: V(x, a, z).12 That is, voters may derive utility from seeing their
“team” (the party which represents their ideological positions) win, regardless of whether their party
actually implements policies consistent with their purported ideology. Candidates can, potentially, seek
to implement a costly policy index ph, that is disliked by a majority of citizens because it would give
them few benefits, but nevertheless win office and the power to implement it by targeting political
strategies at manipulating x, a, and z. By separating out demand, as latent voting over public policy from
actual voting behavior, which is exercised on the supply-side of the market because it responds to non-
policy variables x, a, z, that candidates on the supply-side can manipulate, this framework
accommodates a vast literature on expressive voting while retaining a focus on implications of political
behavior for economic policy choices.
It is therefore possible for a citizen to prefer optimal economic policies at p=0, but nevertheless vote for
a candidate who offers p>0 because there are no candidates offering p=0; and/or because the citizen
derives utility from voting and therefore does not want to abstain. What the demand curve will then
reflect for each point of p—representing social costs due to foregone public goods—is the number of
citizens who provide support to that policy by not coming out to act against it on the supply side.
For the switch to the supply-side as contenders for leadership, entry decisions are determined by very
similar factors as in the citizen-candidates models: what policies are likely to result in equilibrium given
how others are voting, and given who else is entering as contenders; how far those expected policies are
from their own preferred positions; and, what are the costs of running for office. Prevalent models that
emphasize the role of political institutions in determining policy outcomes emphasize the role of the
costs entailed in running for and winning office. The framework here includes consideration of policy
preferences in shaping entry, in addition to maintaining that political institutions that determine the costs
of entry also matter. However, entry costs are subsumed into beliefs about the behavior of other
contenders for leadership. For example, in contexts where entry costs are high, such as when powerful
incumbents use the coercive power of the state to prevent contenders from emerging, the decision to
enter would be shaped by beliefs about how this incumbent would respond. In contexts where entry
costs are high because organized political parties control nomination, the decision to enter would be
shaped by beliefs about the behavior of these political parties—how they choose candidates and how
they mobilize voters around policy platforms.
The spread of electoral institutions across and within countries has significantly lowered entry costs for
citizens because elections allow individuals to participate on the supply side as voters, compared to
contexts where there are no elections. Incumbent leaders or organized parties on the supply side can still
manipulate those entry-costs, such as by using violence and intimidation in weak institutional contexts,
or passing new laws, such as literacy tests and poll taxes, to regulate voting in strong institutional costs



12
     This summary is obtained from a review of the literature by Romer (1996).

                                                              15
(Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). The decision to enter the supply-side as voters would be influenced by
beliefs about how incumbent powerful leaders might respond to voters.
Policy selection in equilibrium, p*, has to be a point on the demand curve—at least some citizens have to
support it by remaining as “takers” on the demand-side of the market rather than choosing to enter to
contest power or sanction incumbents as voters. Leaders, or the contenders who enter the supply-side of
political markets, will, in effect, choose a point on the demand curve as the selected policy as they
compete with one another to win more “decisive” citizen support than others. Political institutions
determine what proportion of citizen support is “decisive” in that leaders cannot deviate to another
policy choice and still be able to defeat their opponents by wooing other citizens. The formal and
informal rules of the game for gaining and remaining in power determine who enters the supply side,
and with what motivation—to opportunistically seek public office or to pursue particular policies; and,
what political strategies to deploy upon entering the market. Political institutions thus influence which
point on the demand curve is selected as policy, as leaders compete for power under those institutions.
Since the public policy index, p*, that is selected in equilibrium has to lie along the demand curve, the
shape of the demand curve—its slope and elacticity for different regions of p—matters for policy
selection. Preferences on the demand-side thus influence the selection of public policies by determining
the shape of the demand curve. This is how the framework represents the outcomes of Downsian
political competition in which voters play a crucial role in the selection of policy, such as, for example,
in the median-voter theorem. I show further below how this framework goes beyond the Downsian
tradition and allows for the preferences of citizens to influence policy as potential contenders for power
on the supply side.
Shape of the demand-curve. Assuming that citizens are, on average, self-regarding and materialist,
deriving greater wellbeing from both greater private consumption and greater public policy benefits, we
                                                          D  0
can draw a downward sloping demand curve, reflecting         p     (Figure 1).13 To see this intuitively,
consider regions of p1, in which public policy allows an elite to control all economic resources and no
public goods and benefits are provided to the non-elite population. Low demand in this region of p1
would mean a high proportion of citizens are unwilling to “take” this policy as given and would rather
become active on the supply side to oppose it, such as through voting or even violent revolution. At
intermediate values of p, the elites in the population who control a larger share of economic resources
would pay a higher price in terms of foregone private consumption to finance the provision of public
goods whose benefits are universally shared. A higher proportion of citizens would thus receive net
benefits from these intermediate values of p and thereby be willing to support these policies.


13
  The assumption of selfishness makes it harder to draw demand curves that are downward sloping for all regions of p. It
would be easy to draw a downward sloping demand curve in this framework if we assumed that people are altruistic or
other-regarding, as critics of homo economicus contend. The critical issue that arises in this framework is whether citizens
demand altruistic policies from government, even if they choose to behave altruistically in their private lives (such as, by
making voluntary charitable contributions). The literature on crowding-out versus crowding-in of voluntary contributions
does not show that private markets can solve problems of redistribution and public goods (Bowles and Polania-Reyes,
2012); rather, similar to the role of government in the Coase theorem, it shows that optimal public policy should take
individual responses into account.

                                                             16
    Figure 1: Demand curve for public policies


                  P
                   1
P: Policy Index,
reflecting the cost            D(p
of distributive
conflict in terms
of foregone public
goods




                      0                                                            Q      Number of citizens



                                 D(P): Number of citizens who are willing
                                 to support P



    The only assumption needed to draw a downward sloping demand curve is that a higher number of
    citizens are likely to support a more equal policy index, or one that creates more social value, compared
    to the proportion of those who would tolerate a more unequal or more socially costly policy index.14
    This assumption does not preclude the possibility that some citizens, including the elite, may have
    altruistic or other regarding preferences which may mean that no-one in society would tolerate a policy
    index of perfect inequality (p=1). It also does not preclude the possibility that poorer citizens may have
    “populist” preferences for private consumption at the expense of investments in public goods. Populism
    is to be understood here as the widespread provision of private benefits from public spending policies
    which have high fiscal and macroeconomic costs (Sturzenegger and Tommasi, 1998; Krueger, 1993).
    Populist demand would result in citizens supporting certain policies that provide them with immediate
    private benefits, such as free electricity, but that entail large social costs from which the poor may
    eventually suffer disproportionately.
    The crucial feature of the demand curve is not whether it is downward sloping, but rather, its elasticity
    over different regions of p. Figure 2 provides examples of different demand curve elasticities. Panel A
    depicts a demand curve that is elastic around a high value ph , while panel B depicts elasticity around a

    14
      We can also get rid of this assumption and draw demand curves with varying slopes for different regions of p. That does
    not change the main insight coming out of this framework that the shape of the demand curve for different regions of p
    matters for what policies are selected in equilibrium. The puzzles we want to address pertain to how even when a large
    number of people would benefit from public goods, government and its institutions fail to invest adequately in those goods.

                                                                17
low value pl . What each shows is the region of the policy index p for which there are large increases in
the proportion of citizens who would support those policies.
The reason the elasticity of the demand curve is important is because equilibrium policies—those that
are selected and implemented by leaders who win policy-making powers—have to lie along the demand-
curve; and, leaders are more likely to choose points on the elastic portion of demand curve because there
is greater flexibility (compared to inelastic regions of the demand curve) to choose political strategies to
win support from a decisive proportion of citizens. Supply-side actors can exploit the elastic portion of
the demand curve to implement the corersponding policies by forging together the required support from
different groups of citizens, choosing from a variety of political strategies, tailored to prevailing political
institutions, or the rules for gaining power.
Panel A, for example, represents the demand-side explanation for persistent elite capture of public
policies in countries with free participation of citizens in political contestation (Gilens and Page, 2014;
Grossman and Helpman, 2001). When citizens are unwilling to act on the supply-side to sanction highly
unequal policy indices, elites can get away with selecting a point on that portion of the demand curve
corresponding to those unequal policy indices. Panel B, on the other hand, provides an example of a
more progressive or enlightened society where citizens would be more likely to take action to overturn
highly unequal or socially costly policy choices. This latent threat of citizen action plays a similar role
across authoritarian and democratic political systems, incentivizing leaders in both types of regimes to
select a policy that enjoys large citizen support (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000).


Figure 2: Elasticity of the demand curve
Panel A: Demand is elastic at high values of p (Conditions for elite capture in many political systems,
including democracies)


             P
              1



             ph




              0                                                        Q

                                                      18
Panel B: Demand is elastic at low values of p (Conditions for enlightened public policy in many political
systems, including autocracies)


            P
             1




             Pl
                                                                      Q
Shape of the supply-curve. In all of the literature, political candidates or parties (political firms) select
policies given their “production function”—the rules of the game for gaining and remaining in power—
and the shape of the demand curve. Political candidates and parties are, in effect, “price setters”,
analogous to monopolistic, duopolistic and oligopolistic competition among firms in economic markets.
Prevalent models that emphasize the role of political institituions in determining public policy are, in
effect, saying the following: elites who have the capacity to incur the entry costs of contending for
power will exploit political institutions to gain and remain in office while pursuing their preferred policy
positions. Even in models in the Downsian tradition in which policy makers are exogenously given and
assumed to be purely opportunistic, political institutions such as electoral rules create conditions for
duopolistic or oligopolistic competition. Electoral rules that promote two-party systems are
characterized by duopolistic competition, and rules, such as in proportional systems, that promote
multiple parties are characterized by oligopolistic competition.
Authoritarian institutions in which political power is monopolized in a single party or even in a single
leader or group of elites, would not yield supply curves—the monopolist political firm would choose its
preferred policy point on the demand curve subject to its technology for remaining in power (the
production function), including violence and coercion through state institutions to enforce the
acquiescence of citizens. In Downsian political competition between opportunistic office-seekers,
alternate electoral rules shape the production function of oligopolists, and thereby which point is
selected on the demand-curve. For example, Lizzeri and Persico (2001) examine how proportional
versus winner-takes-all electoral rules would result in very different implications for whether public

                                                     19
goods are produced in equilibrium; when public goods are very valuable (from a technical perspective),
winner-take-all systems would under-provide them compared to systems where politicians gain power
proportional to their vote share. Investigating the effect of electoral rules and forms of government on
fiscal policy outcomes in a large sample of democracies, Persson and Tabellini (2004), find that
majoritarian elections lead to smaller governments and smaller welfare programs than proportional
elections.
More complex models of political bargaining among different groups who pursue their group-specific
policy preferences, rather than being only opportunistic (as in the Downsian setting), can be translated
into our framework as a search for equilibria among those points that are preferred by the political elite.
Highly captured political institutions can be represented as akin to an economic monopolist who sets the
price (policy index) to maximize his own preferences and can win office and implement this policy even
if it is detrimental to the larger public interest. For example, political institutions that allow violence and
coercion may enable leaders to gain and remain in office even while implementing highly unequal
public policies. But, political capture need not require violence and coercion. A point on the demand
curve corresponding to more captured policies can be supported as an equilibrium even under
competitive elections, and even if a non-trivial proportion of citizens would prefer more public goods.
For example, citizens who would prefer a different policy outcome than what a political party or
leadership has been known to pursue, may abstain (not turn out), vote for a losing candidate, or even
vote for a candidate who does not offer their preferred policy because other non-policy considerations
persuade them. Candidates on the supply side can use political strategies that are separate from
economic policy choices, of appealing to social or ideological preferences, or deploying charisma, to
win office and implement their preferred economic policies even when they are different from what their
supporters prefer.
Preferences play a fundamental role in pinning-down which particular point on the demand curve is
selected by leaders when we relax the assumptions about exogenously-given oligopolistic political
institutions on the supply-side, and allow for endogenous entry which yields greater comptetion among
contenders for power. Further below, I propose a supply-curve for political markets which is shaped by
the preferences of citizens who choose to enter the market as contenders of power. Preferences thus
determine policy outcomes in this framework through the shapes of both the demand and supply curves.
 Most prevalent models of the supply-side of political markets assume fixed political institutions, formal
and informal, and are preoccupied with examining who are the elites who have lower costs or greater
ability to be contenders for office; and, who are the organized interest groups who defray the costs of
running, or enhance the ability of contenders to succeed. As discussed above, these models emphasizing
political institutions do not yield supply curves at all—elites contend for power as oligopolists and are
price setters, selecting a point on the demand curve as the equilibrium policy. One of the innovations in
this framework is to propose a supply curve which reflects the other factors that influence citizen entry
to become contenders for policy-making power—the distance of status-quo policies from citizens’
prefrred positions and their beliefs about whether others are similarly (dis)satisfied and would be willing
to support a challenger. Acknowledging these other factors allows us to draw a supply curve reflecting
greater competition for leadership and policy-making powers in political markets. Greater competition
arises from the potential threat and actual entry of citizens into the supply-side of the market when


                                                      20
public policies are far from their preferences, and they know that they are not alone—others too are
dissatisfied and may shift their support away from incumbents to new challengers. As we will show
further below, greater competition does NOT ensure more public goods. Outcomes depend upon the
preferences of citizens who enter as contenders.
To be consistent with the demand-side, the supply curve, S(p), in this framework should tell us how
many citizens, from among those who select into the supply side, would pursue policy, p. I propose the
following as a model for S(p) in these political markets: citizens who put larger weight on utility derived
from public policies, b(p), and who hold certain beliefs about their capacity to be able to shape public
policy, are more likely to select-into seeking office to try to shape p in accordance with their
preferences.
Similar to the intuition for downward sloping demand curves in the previous section, assuming that
citizens who enter the supply-side, are, on average, self-regarding and materialist, deriving greater
wellbeing from both greater private consumption and greater private benefits from public policy, we can
                                                     S    0
draw an upward sloping supply curve, reflecting p            (Figure 3). Consider regions of p1, in which
public policy allows an elite to control all economic resources and no public goods and benefits are
provided to the non-elite population. Higher supply in this region of p1, compared to regions of p 0
would mean a higher proportion of contenders for leadership would pursue this policy because once in
office it would allow them to extract large personal benefits from public policies. Economic elites would
be likely to enter as contenders for leadership (or as king-makers) at a higher rate than non-elites
because they would have more to lose from intermediate values of p, where they would be taxed to
finance the provision of public goods whose benefits are broadly shared. A smaller proportion of
contenders would have the resources to combat economic elites. Entry costs, determined by prevailing
political institutions, are thus incorportated into this supply curve.
Consistent with the demand curve, the important feature of the supply curve is not whether it is
generally upward sloping for all regions of p, but rather its elasticity for different regions of p, and
additionally, its position, with reference to the size of p on the y-axis. Figure 3 provides examples of two
different supply curves— SL(p) represents the case where political leaders, and bureacrats, who we will
now bring back into the picture, compete on lower regions of p—or for more public goods—than SH(p).
This approach to a supply curve in political markets can encompass and highlight the links between two
very different strands of literature—one on political accountability of political leaders who select
policies, and another on bureaucratic accountability of appointed government agents who are supposed
to implement the selected policies. A contribution of this framework is how to think about the supply-
side as a set of complex interactions among a large number of citizens who wield different powers over
public policy as bureaucrats and politicians. This framework can be used to analyze problems of weak
public service delivery in developing countries as arising from inseparable links between bureaucrats
and politicians, which makes it difficult for any one type of agent—either a bureaucrat or a politician—
to improve outcomes without support from the other.
For example, SH(p) can represent a politicized bureaucracy where appointments and career concerns are
shaped by patronage, and where bureaucrats and politicians together capture public policy. A public-
spirited contender who might consider entering the market to try to reform the bureaucracy may not

                                                    21
have the capacity to do so, being constrained by other citizens who have selected into the public sector
to extract private rents. In this context, where the supply side consists primarily of citizens who have
entered to extract private rents, political contenders who pursue more public goods are not only unlikely
to emerge, but even if they do, they are likely to be defeated at the polls or frustrated in their attempts to
reform the prevailing public institutions. For example, suppose a reformer is able to win an election,
exploiting demand among ordinary citizens for improved public services, and tries to implement proven
reforms that incentivize public sector teachers and doctors to show up and do their job. In this context of
a supply curve positioned at SH(p), teachers and doctors who are absent from the job would not have the
incentives to follow the lead of this new politician who wants to make them perform, because the
reformers are minorities in the market of contenders with little chance of staying in office (unless the
demand side compels all politicians to shift to public goods, thereby shifting this supply curve). That is,
outcomes are driven by how citizens think others are behaving.
On the other hand, the supply curve can be positioned at lower regions of p, or more public goods, SL(p),
representing the case of an effective and professional bureaucracy which implements policies for the
public good. In countries which have inherited strong institutions or have evolved effective
bureaucracies that are free from undue political interference, citizens are likely to enter into the public
sector driven by professionalism and a sense of public service.
The point of intersection of a supply curve with the demand curve is the policy selected in equilibrium.
For example, the policy pH, at the intersection of SH(p) with D(p), is implemented because it has equal
support from citizens on the demand side and contenders for leadership on the supply side. Contenders
who pursue p>pH are thwarted from winning office by others who offer more public goods to win the
support of citizens who are unwilling to support pH. However, public policies cannot be improved
beyond the point of intersection of the demand and supply curves. A public-spirited contender who
might want to offer p<pH would be defeated by other contenders who seek to capture public policies,
and are able to select corresponding points on the demand curve, finding political strategies to win
decisive citizen support for those policies.
Supply curves may be positioned differently for different types of public policies depending on how
powers over policy making are instituted. For example, in countries with professional bureaucracies,
some areas of public policy may be relatively removed from the political process and delegated to
agencies and departments led by appointed technocrats who recruit professional service provdiers. This
would be represented in the SL(p) curve, as discussed above. But political capture of public policies for
the private interest is still possible even in these countries with strong bureaucratic institutions. Public
good policies such as regulation of markets to promote competitiveness, or the size of progressive
taxation to deliver the public good of equal opportunity (World Bank, 2006), can be thwarted when
political supply curves are located at SH(p). That is, when entry by citizens into contestation for political
leadership is driven by preferences for more private goods.




                                                      22
Figure 3: Supply curve for public policies


                P
                                                                    SH(p)




                                                                    SL(p)

             PH

              PL
                                                                      D(p)
                                                                                 Q         Number of citizens
                0
                            S(p): Number of citizens who enter to seek
                            government position to pursue p




     III.    Applying the Demand-Supply Framework to Explain Government Failure
This section will show how applying the demand-supply framework is consistent with the conlusions of
vast areas of established literature that seek to explain government failure, or the capture of policies to
serve private interests, disregarding evidence on social costs. The value of re-interpreting those
established conclusions within the new framework here is that the framework can then serve as a
schematic for analyzing when policy distortions, or deviations from technically sound directions, are the
result of elite capture; entrenched political institutions; or, beliefs and preferences widespread in society.
The other value of the framework is that its derivation employs some primitive elements that ultimately
drive others in shaping outcomes, and thereby it identifies those elements as fundamentally driving
change between outcomes of special and public interest politics. Those primitive elements underpinning
the framework are preferences over public goods, of elite and non-elite citizens acting on the supply and
demand sides of the political market, respectively.15 In this section I show how political institutions are

15
   In this sense, the paper is not much of an advance over Besley and Coate (1997) who write on the first page of their
paper: “The primitives of the approach are the citizens of a polity, their policy alternatives, and a constitution that specifies
the rules of the political process. Political outcomes are thus derived directly from the underlying tastes and policy
technology.” Policy technology in the framework here is represented in the policy index p, and tastes drive the shape of the
supply and demand curves. The contribution here is to hone in on these “underlying tastes” and explore the different ways
in which they shape policy outcomes.

                                                               23
ultimately endogenous to preferences, and how changes in policy outcomes and institutions of
government are ultimately driven by changes in preferences.
The entire literature on the political economy of reforms, and the persistence of under-development, can
arguably be summarized quite succinctly as: policy distortions or sub-optimal outcomes are the result of
bargaining among elites for greater private rents from public resources (World Bank, 2017; Rajan, 2009;
Sturzenegger and Tommasi, 1998). The World Development Report 2017, Governance and the Law
(World Bank, 2017), reviews the literature, emphasizing explanations rooted in unequal distribution of
economic ednowments as the source of unequal political power. Elites are thus defined as those who are
endowed with power, while non-elites are not. It is therefore a useful starting point to show how elite
capture and manipulation is represented within this paper’s framework. But to preview where we go
from here, I show further below how the framework allows us to endogenize who are the elites, rather
than assume this as an exogenous or fixed endowment, and how preferences in society-- among
incumbent elites, challengers or potential future elites, and non-elite citizens—are what ultimately drive
who contests power, on what policy bases, and to achieve what policy outcomes. The same framework
accommodates both an outcome of elite capture of private rents, as well as its polar opposite--of a good
policy outcome being the result of well-intentioned elites pursuing public goods, while the demands of
non-elite citizens at large in society can be the source of policy distortions.
In the framework here, elite capture is represented as monopolistic or oligopolitistic selection of elite-
preferred policy points on the demand curve. Preferences—those of elites—are thus fundamental drivers
of policy outcomes. However, explaining outcomes as arising from the preferences of predatory elites to
extract private rents from public policies, is not satisfying; one would want to know how the elites are
able to get away with low provision of public goods if there are widespread preferences among non-elite
citizens for more public goods. One would also want to endogenize elite status, rather than assume that
elites are exogenously given, such as through some intial distribution of economic endowments. Much
of the literature focusing on political institutions, and not preferences, describes a specific equilibrium in
which an initial distribution of economic and political power endowments is taken as fixed and the
selection of public policy is then derived from those fixed institutions. The framework here is
sufficiently general to accommodate those outcomes—as price setting through oligopolistic
competition—but goes further to show how the equlibium can change. Outcomes can change towards
more public goods both through greater pressure on oligopolists from non-elite citizens—the demand
side—but also through new challengers who can potentially emerge to contest for elite status, or policy-
making powers—the supply side. The extent to which these pressures are applied (or not, leading to
persistence of unequal policies) depend upon whether preferences among citizens are sufficiently far
from status-quo policies.
Let’s consider three scenarios: (1) highly distortionary policies and captured state institutions through
which the benefits from public policies are concentrated in a small proportion of citizens; (2) middling-
levels of policy distortion and concentration of benefits among a larger group of citizens, an expanded
elite, but with systematic deprivation of the large majority of non-elite citizens; and (3) relatively lower
levels of policy distortion and wider sharing of benefits from public policies with non-elite citizens, but
nevertheless, persistence of government failures to address public good problems. Figure 4 depicts these



                                                     24
scenarios as policy outcomes in three different regions of a fixed demand curve: P1, corresponding to the
first case of highly captured policies and institutions; P2 corresponding to the second case of more
expanded sharing of benefits from public policies among larger numbers of elites, but still excluding the
majority of non-elite citizens; P3 corresponding to the third case, where the majority of non-elite citizens
receive benefits from public policies, but public goods are nevertheless neglected (       0) such that
these benefits are still lower than what they could be under alternate, technically better policies.
Figure 4: Different regions of policy selection on the demand curve

P= Policy Index
                   1

           P1

            P2


            P3                                                  D(P)
              0                                                            Q= Number of Citizens
                                D(P): Number of citizens
                                      supporting P


If P1 is observed, the framework would explain it as price-setting by a political monopolist, or very
small group of well coordinated oligopolists, who hold power over policies and institutions to be able to
select P1 by thwarting the political challenge posed by citizens further down the demand curve.
Outcomes in this region of the demand curve corresponds to negligible b(p) for a large proportion of
citizens, and therefore require that political action by citizens to influence p, to achieve higher levels of
b(p), is effectively suppressed by incumbent political elites. The outcome P1, concentration of benefits
of public policies among a few, could be trivially explained as a result of preferences of those few elites,
and thereby maintain the argument of preferences as the underlying driver, but that is not satisfactory.
Even the elites may prefer more public goods, but choose sub-optimal policies, and repressive political
institutions, because this serves the purpose of maintaining their future rents and grip on power. Hence,
there may be some cases that are explained within the framework as arising out of repressive political
institutions that prohibit political action by citizens who demand higher levels of public goods. For this
range of outcomes, the sheer technology of political power remains the most important explanation of
outcomes; change may come only if citizens can sufficiently organize or equip themselves to overthrow
the regime.

                                                     25
However, for a larger range of outcomes, in the regions of P2 and P3, the selected technology of political
power needs to be explained. The framework shows how political strategies within existing formal
institutions, such as those delineated in constitutions, and those constitutional choices themselves, are
endogenous to preferences. For the range of outcomes depicted as P2, when benefits from public policies
are concentrated among an expanded group of elites, applying the framework (oligopolistic selection of
a point on the demand curve) is consistent with the following explanation in the literature: elites contest
to extract private benefits from public policies, and establish institutions that allow them to extract
greater private benefits from public policies. Elites’ valuation of public goods is not sufficiently large to
persuade them to give-up the extraction of private rents from public policies. Elites cannot escape sub-
optimal outcomes because bargaining is not costless—in order to preserve their rents, elites have to
settle for some costs (Acemoglu, 2003). The interesting question is how transitions come about from P2
to P3—if the large majority of citizens would prefer more widely shared benefits from public spending,
why is elite extraction of private rents not reduced?
Transitions out of this equilibrium of costly bargaining among elites, towards better outcomes in
developed countries have been explained as the result of rise in valuation among some elites of public
goods. Lizzeri and Persico (2004) explain transitions out of clientelist politics, and political institutional
change of the extension of the franchise in post-industrial revolution UK as the result of a rise in elites’
valuation of urban public health goods. Accounts of the Progressive Era in the United States, during
which the country experienced shifts away from machine politics, the dismantling of patronage and the
establishment of professional bureaucracies, have also been explained as arising out of a rise in demand
among business elites for urban infrastructure (Glaeser and Goldin, 2006).
In contrast to Lizzeri’s and Persico’s (2004) account of suffrage extension in post-industrial revolution
UK as being driven by elite preferences for public goods, the spread of competitive electoral institutions
in poor developing countries, such as in Africa, has been explained as a way of solving commitment
problems among elites to facilitate their rent extraction and accommodate different elite interests
(Bidner et al, 2015). Similarly, the research on clientelism in present day developing countries has
yielded much more pessimistic conclusions than research on transitions out of clientelism in the
presently developed world. For example, Fukuyama (Forthcoming) describes how clientelism in the
United States was overcome through widespread political participation by non-elite citizens who
demanded more benefits from public policies. In contrast, Anderson et al (2014) explain the persistence
of clientelism in India, despite decades of competitive elections, as the result of non-elite citizens
accepting the authority of long-standing, historical elites who control economic institutions. But there is
tremendous variation within India, to continue this example, as within Anderson et al’s (2014) study
sample, in the extent to which there exist these historical elites who continue to control the mind-sets
and economic opportunities of non-elite citizens. The flip-side, or the glass-half-full part of the empirical
results in that study is that villages where a historical elite does not dominate land ownership receive a
slew of public spending programs targeted at eradicating poverty. Competitive elections in India, as in
the rest of the world, have been associated with public spending policies that distribute benefits widely
(Banerjee et al, 2005; Brown and Mobarak, 2009; Burgess et al, 2015; Lieberman, 2015).
But public spending policies that distribute some benefits widely can co-exist with other policies that
allow rents-extraction by elites and overall lower spending on public goods needed for more equitable


                                                      26
growth and development. The literature on the relationship between democracy and growth, for
example, is far more inconclusive than the above cited results on the association between democracy and
some redistributive spending policies (World Bank, 2016, provides a review). That is, how do we
explain policy outcomes in the region of P3, where benefits are relatively more widely shared compared
to P2, but nevertheless far from optimal public good policies? Before focusing on this question, let’s
summarize thus far how preferences account for the difference between P2 and P3: in some cases, the
difference between P2 and P3 is explained as a result of shift in elite preferences for public goods; in
other cases, the difference between P2 and P3 is explained as arising from more democratic institutions
under which leaders contesting for political power have to appeal to the preferences of a larger number
of citizens. In some cases, elites reform political institutions towards greater democracy so that political
incentives are credibly and sustainably strengthened to distribute benefits more widely. In others, the
threat of revolution is sufficient to shift policies from P2 to P3 without any changes in formal political
institutions. This is how, for example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2000) explain socialist welfare policies
adopted by the German state in the nineteenth century without franchise extension. Mares and Carnes
(2009) similarly discuss how authoritarian governments have adopted social policies in many
developing countries, driven in some cases by their ideology (or preferences), and by pressure from
constituents in other cases.
Turning now to the question of why there are policy outcomes in the region of P3, where benefits are
relatively more widely shared compared to P2, but nevertheless far from optimal public good policies.
Outcomes in the region of P3 cannot be explained by appealing to differences in formal political
institutions of democracy versus autocracy. There are examples of elite capture of public policies in
advanced industrial democracies which have solved some problems of minimum public goods provided
by professional bureaucracies (Gilens and Page, 2014). There are examples of better economic
performance by some autocracies compared to many democracies (Besley and Kudamatsu, 2008). The
framework presented in this paper is consistent with the model in Besley and Kudamatsu (2008) in
which performance of both democracies and autocracies depends upon the basis on which leaders are
selected and sanctioned. The question that matters regardless of formal institutional division between
democracy versus autocracy is whether the public policies that are “salient” in political contestation are
“general interest” (Besley and Kudamatsu, 2008, page 23).
In the framework proposed here, “salience of general interest policies” is to be understood as
preferences in society for public goods. Preferences of three types of citizens in the society matter in
different ways—(i) the ordinary, no-office-bearing, non-elite citizen on the demand side; (ii) the
potential contender for power on the cusp of the demand and supply sides; and (iii) the politicians,
bureaucrats, and informal elites on the supply side who wield direct power over policy making and
implementation.
Most of the literature examining the persistence of clientelist politics in many developing countries,
despite reductions in the concentration of economic power among elites, and despite the competitiveness
of elections which could have created more pressure for public goods to reach a widening middle class,
has emphasized (iii), the preferences of entrenched elites (as in Anderson et al, 2014). Entrenched elites
are able to purchase political support through clientelist strategies while contenders are unable to launch
a challenge on the basis of promising more public goods (Keefer and Vlaicu, 2007). Another argument,


                                                     27
such as provided by Weitz-Shapiro (2012), is that variation in preferences in (i), among citizens on the
demand side, is exploited by politicians—in places where poverty is high, politicians use clientelist
stratengies to win the support of poor voters, while in other places with lower poverty, where middle-
class voters have a distaste for clientelism, politicians provide more public goods. The open questions
which have received far less attention in the literature, than the attention to elite capture, are on
preferences in (i) and (ii): why are the poor satisfied with clientelist benefits, and not more demanding of
public goods; and, why do contenders not emerge to mobilize demand for more public goods if there
indeed exist alternate policies that would deliver larger social benefits?
One set of answers is provided in the work of Cammett (2014) on how the contenders that emerge to
challenge incumbent elites seek to pursue social or ideological goals, such as sectarianism, and are less
concerned with economic policy. Put in the terminology of the framework here, contenders have
particular preferences over policies and the nature of state institutions. Cammet (2014) examines how
sectarian groups and political parties can win support from citizens by targeting social services, at a cost
for general institutional development and state capacity to provide public goods. There may be
important links, that are unexplored, between this body of work, on how non-state provision of social
services in developing countries can come at the cost of building state institutions for public goods, and
work on the role of private charitable contributions in strong states. For example, President George Bush
in the United States renewed interest in an approach to addressing problems of social and economic
inequality through “compassionate conservatism” which seeks to reduce the role of tax-funded state
programs, delivered through government departments, in favor of voluntary contributions and services
provided by private companies, charities, and religious organizations.16 Non-state provision of social
services by private groups can contribute to maintaining social divisions and impeding the development
of a common identity among citizens that underpins preferences for social welfare spending as public
goods. Singh (2015) provides an analysis of the role of social solidarity in explaining differences in state
provision of social welfare.
A related area of work that has received little attention is how elites can use positions of power to shape
preferences and beliefs on the demand side, such as about the nature of poverty and inequality, and
whether the state should play an active role in redistribution. Grossman and Helpman (2001) identify
this as one channel for the persistence of capture by special interests in the United States—investments
by elites in mass media and communication to shape preferences and beliefs among uninformed
citizens.The recent upsurge of interest in the United States in the question of why citizens belonging to
lower income deciles apparently vote against their economic self-interest can find answers in this older
body of work on special interest politics, in which ideology and partisan attachments, which are part of
preferences, are exploited by political contenders to win office while capturing economic policies.
The explanation for the persistence of clientelism in developing countries is not that far from the
explanations for special interest capture in rich countries when it comes to how citizens vote on the
supply-side on the basis of different considerations than their preferences for public goods on the
demand-side. That is, voting can happen on the basis of ideology, identity, and receipt of private
benefits, with little regard for the consequences of such voting for policy selection in equilibrium. While
the mechanisms of enforcing clientelism in the context of weak institutions are dramatically different

16
     https://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2002/04/20020430.html

                                                         28
than the mechanisms through which special interest capture is sustained in rich countries with strong
institutions, both types of capture of public policies, despite underlying preferences among citizens for
more public goods, are sustained by manipulating voting behavior on the supply side.
The conclusion for developing countries is that citizens vote on the basis of material considerations—
whether they are provided cash, a gift, a job, or more generally, a private benefit from public resources
(Hicken, 2011). A related strand of literature has examined the role of ethnic identity in sustaining
clientelist political mobilization, with some debate over whether the mechanisms of negative impact of
identity politics on public goods provision are through diversity of preferences over public goods, or,
through ethnic nepotism (Lieberman and McClendon, 2013; Habyarimana et al, 2009; Banerjee and
Pande, 2007; Posner, 2005). The mechanisms of impact of identity could thus work through preferences
for different public policies, or at least, different heuristics over evaluating public policies (as in the
argument of Lieberman and McClendon, 2013), or through political mobilization on the basis of
targeting private benefits to ethnic groups. I interpret this last channel—political mobilization on the
basis of identity-targeted benefits—as linked to lower preferences for public goods, shared in common
across ethnic groups, compared to private benefits from public policies. This is consistent with the
model in Banerjee and Pande (2007), and with the very different implications of identity in the work of
Singh (2015), when identity is associated with greater preferences for social welfare.17
These factors, of voting behavior by non-elite citizens, on the basis of identity, and/or the receipt of
private benefits, could explain both sub-optimal policy outcomes, such as subsidized or free electricity,
as well as weak institutions, such as patronage-ridden bureaucracies, crony capitalism, and pervasive
and costly state intervention in markets. These factors can also endogenize elite capture—preferences
among non-elite citizens for private benefits from public policies allows some elites to then select
political strategies of clientelism and populism and defeat more well-intentioned contenders.
To illustrate this point of how preferences of non-elite citizens can explain sub-optimal policy outcomes,
let’s return to the earlier example of energy subsidies. Assuming that the experts are correct that policies
of energy and fuel subsidies are inefficient policies, a common view based on the regressive incidence
of energy subsidies is that subsidies are a form of elite capture in poor countries (Clements et al, 2013).
But there is no evidence to distinguish whether subsidy policies are due to capture by elites or organized
special interests; or, due to informational and cognitive constraints among citizens about the costs of
these policies; or, due to ideological beliefs about the value of such policies. The latter two channels—
cognitive constraints among lay citizens, and ideological beliefs—would both feed into shaping
preferences of citizens on the demand side for price subsidies. Citizens may support energy subsidies
because of beliefs that these are “pro-poor” policies and that governments should pursue price
controls.18 Some evidence of citizen demand for price controls comes from a question we asked in a
survey of citizens in Tanzania that was undertaken in March 2016: “How strongly do you agree/disagree

17
   I return further below to the “strategy-selection” mechanism through which ethnicity can work, as in the research of
Habyarimana et al (2009).
18
   Citizens may also come to expect these subsidies as entitlements, the rents they would not be willing to give-up because
if they do they may get nothing else in exchange from elites. This class of explanation is consistent with those of costly
bargaining among different political groups. Further below, I discuss how one general explanation for sub-optimal policies is
akin to the prisoner’s dilemma in game theory—all actors would prefer another outcome but are stuck in a suboptimal one
because of beliefs about how others are behaving.

                                                             29
with the statement ‘Governments should play an active role in controlling and managing prices’?”19
Table 2 reports the percentage of respondents who agreed/disagreed with this statement, showing that
the overwhelming majority (93 percent) agreed that governments should control prices.


                Table 2: Citizen responses to “How strongly do you
                agree/disagree with the statement ‘Governments should play
                an active role in controlling and managing prices’?
                                                                       Percent of total
                                              Frequency
                                                                       (3000 responses)
                Don’t know                    16                       0.53
                Strongly Disagree             50                       1.67
                Disagree                      62                       2.07
                Neither agree nor
                                              68                       2.27
                disagree
                Agree                         1232                     41.07
                Strongly Agree                1572                     52.40
Some evidence from the United States on citizen attitudes to combat climate change with energy
policies suggests that cognitive constraints and ideological beliefs, that resist evidence, are likely to be
significant even among educated citizens in an advanced economy. Using laboratory experiments,
Kahan et al. (2012, 2013) show that those who score highest on cognitive abilities are also the most
likely to adopt ideological beliefs in defiance of technical evidence. The authors explain this as
“motivated reasoning” adopted by people in order to conform to the values of the cultural groups to
which they belong. Their findings suggest that public divisions over climate change are not a reflection
of the public's lack of knowledge or misunderstanding of science. Rather divisions stem from
conflicting interests – between an individual’s interest in adopting common beliefs held by one’s
community versus a collective interest in making decisions to promote common welfare. Holding a
viewpoint that goes against one’s surrounding cultural community can bear a cost. When such a cost is
high, it is rational for individuals to assimilate their reasoning to that prevailing in the group.
Sunstein (2007) and Dal Bo et al. (2013) provide evidence also from laboratory experiments in the
United States that citizens are cognitively constrained to demand policies that confer short-term benefits
at the expense of long-term or “equilibrium” costs. That is, citizens fail to internalize the full impact of
the demand for a particular policy. They value immediately available private benefits from policies that

19
  This survey was undertaken as part of the impact evaluation of the World Bank’s Tanzania Urban Local Government
Support Program. The principal investigators of this study, who designed the survey, are: Vincenzo Di Maro, David Evans
and Stuti Khemani. For this particular question, we drew inspiration from a pattern in Afrobarometer data of citizens
expressing especially high rates of dissatisfaction with government performance in controlling prices.

                                                            30
carry hidden and large social costs. These two sets of work – Kahan et al. (2012, 2013) and Sunstein
(2007) – both substantiate the role of beliefs and norms of behavior in shaping citizens’ demands for
public policies. They differ in their view of the extent to which citizens’ resistance to technical evidence
is because of cognitive constraints. Kahan et al. (2012, 2013) highlight the importance of cultural norms
instead of cognitive constraints arguing that citizens engage in motivated reasoning to conform an
assessment of available facts to the beliefs of the social groups to which they belong.
Going back to the Tanzania survey, here is another question which reveals widespread citizen support
for policies that would provide the private benefit of government jobs: “How strongly do you
agree/disagree with the statement ‘Governments should provide employment to people’?” Table 3
reports the percentage of respondents who agreed/disagreed with this statement, showing that the
overwhelming majority (95 percent) agreed that governments should provide employment.


              Table 3: Citizen responses to “How strongly do you agree/disagree
              with the statement ‘Governments should provide employment to
              people’?
                                                                        Percent of total
                                                    Frequency           (3000
                                                                        responses)
              Don’t know                            14                  0.47
              Strongly Disagree                     15                  0.50
              Disagree                              51                  1.70
              Neither agree nor disagree            57                  1.90
              Agree                                 1214                40.47
              Strongly Agree                        1649                54.97


Citizens in poor countries may believe that provision of jobs and subsidies is exactly what governments
should be doing because markets cannot be trusted to address the injustices of poverty and inequality.
Historical inequality in the distribution of economic endowments may explain why citizens develop
norms of supporting policies that provide immediately verifiable private benefits, with insufficient
attention to the longer run social costs associated with those policies. This interpretation is consistent
with a strand of literature arguing that countries with historical institutions of greater inequality exhibit
worse economic performance than those who history favored with more egalitarian institutions. For
example, Sokollof and Engerman (2000) argue that historically unequal economic institutions in Latin
America compared with those in the United States and Canada were responsible for the delay in
adoption of inclusive political institutions, and this delay is associated with subsequent weak institutions
and persistently worse economic outcomes. The authors provide evidence that exogenous variation in

                                                     31
the climate to produce sugar led to variation across countries within the Americas in the timing of
adoption of egalitarian political institutions (democracy with universal adult suffrage) and social policies
(education for universal literacy). Similarly, Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) argue that early experience
with inclusive or egalitarian political institutions in the history of nations is the source of variation in
subsequent paths of economic development.
However, although this body of work shows that early adoption of egalitarian institutions and social
policies is important, the mechanisms behind why early adoption matters and has persistent effects is not
clarified or made explicit. Why are countries not able to change outcomes within short time spans by
instituting elections with universal adult suffrage and spending on public education? The answer in this
paper, echoing the arguments in World Bank (2016) are that first, political preferences regarding what
policies to support on the demand side, and how to vote on the supply side, are important in shaping the
functioning of formal institutions. Historical institutions of inequality can contribute to unhealthy
political preferences such as those that sustain clientelist forms of political competition where political
support is won on the basis of providing targeted private benefits rather than broad public goods.
Brixi, Lust, and Woolcock (2015) provide a study of government failures in the Middle East and North
Africa region with a similar argument and interpretation of available evidence. They discuss how
historical experience with colonial institutions, and beliefs about the role of the state at the time of
independence in the region, led to political clientelism, elite capture of state resources, and citizen
expectations that leaders would provide a broad range of private and public benefits (such as subsidies,
health, and education). The coexistence of these three factors—that leaders organized to extract private
rents from the economy, maintaining loyalty and political support through patronage, providing
subsidies and a broad range of public services to citizens to win their acquiescence—became untenable
as economic inefficiencies mounted and citizens became dissatisfied with the social compact. Yet, as the
evolving dynamics in the region suggest, leaders may be able to use the coercive institutions of the state
to maintain elite capture despite a large number of citizens being unwilling to support it. This is another
case where the technology of political power takes precedence over the argument that political
institutions are endogenous to preferences; although elite preferences can still explain why those
coercive and suppressive technologies are adopted.
Measuring citizen demand for policies that provide private benefits rather than broad public goods is an
empirical challenge. Existing work has typically made indirect inferences on the basis of changes in vote
shares for different political parties and candidates. Casey (2015), for example, provides evidence that
information reduces vote shares of co-ethnic candidates in Sierra Leone, which may lead one to infer
that this implies a reduction in identity-based patronage and expansion of programmatic goods; but, in
fact, she cannot rule out that the information may have led to greater vote buying or targeted provision
of private benefits. Vote shares could shift because political candidates respond to availability of
information by increasing efforts at targeting those voters from whom support can be bought in
exchange for private benefits. Indeed, Cruz, Keefer and Labonne (2015) find an increase in vote buying
by political candidates in the Philippines when their constituents are exposed to more information.
Recent use of survey vignettes constitutes an important innovation in assessing citizens’ demand for
policies that confer private benefits at the expense of broad public goods. Typical surveys of respondent
policy preferences do not ask respondents to internalize tradeoffs between these two objectives. Instead,

                                                    32
they commonly ask “what is the most important thing that governments should do”; to pose
“agree/disagree” questions following statements about what governments should do;20 to frame
questions as a direct referendum on where public spending should be allocated—“if you were to allocate
$X of public spending, where would you spend it?”; or to ask respondents to express preferences from
among a menu of public goods. Another strand of literature has focused on citizens’ views of the
redistributive role of the state (Alesina and Glaeser, 2004). None of these approaches allows us to infer
changes in citizen demand along the private good-public good spectrum.
Keefer and Khemani (2014) design a survey vignette aimed at measuring citizen demand for a private
good—jobs—that prior research has identified as a salient currency of clientelist political strategies,
relative to their demand for public goods like health and education whose benefits are widely shared.
The vignette imposes an explicit trade-off in the form of a budget constraint faced by leaders such that
when they choose to allocate resources to government jobs for some members of the community, this
would come at the cost of inputs into broadly delivered health or education services that benefit the
entire community. This vignette was purposefully designed to contrast jobs as a private good, and health
as a public good, based on prior research findings on the characteristics of government jobs and public
health. With regard to health, public spending on vaccination and the distribution of subsidized anti-
mosquito bed nets has been regarded as contributing to the public good of combatting the spread of
contagious diseases (Cohen and Dupas, 2010). The vignette is thus designed to focus on health inputs of
vaccination and bed nets for all children to highlight the public good characteristics of the proposed
spending.
Public employment or government jobs, on the other hand, have been documented as a classic form of
provision of private benefits in weak institutional contexts where public bureaucracies are not
sufficiently professionalized and rules-based (Wantchekon, 2003; Robinson and Verdier, 2003;
Chandra, 2004; Kitschelt and Wilkinson, 2007; Grindle 2012; Gibson, Hoffman and Jablonski 2015).
The dismantling of political patronage in government jobs is at the heart of accounts of transition from
weak to strong institutions, such as in the history of the United States during the Progressive Era
(Glaeser and Goldin, 2006). Furthermore, there is systematic correlation between failures in delivering
broad public services and the provision of patronage jobs, and clientelist forms of vote mobilization
more generally (Callen et al, 2014; Khemani, 2015; Andersen et al, 2015). That is, when government
jobs are provided as political patronage, the job-holders have weak incentives to exert effort and perform
well in delivering public services (World Bank, 2004).




20
     Such questions are contained in the Afrobarometer surveys, for example.

                                                             33
 Over 4,000 households in 210 villages spread across northern Benin were surveyed in March 2009, and
respondents were asked whether they would support a (hypothetical) leader who chooses to allocate
spending to jobs for a few at the expense of inputs into public health and education for all (Keefer and
Khemani, 2014). Consistent with Wantchekon’s (2003) pioneering work on support for clientelist
political strategies in Benin, responses to these novel survey vignettes reflect widespread citizen support
for leaders who offer jobs. However, respondents with greater access to community radio, the most
popular local media in Benin, as in all of Africa, are significantly less likely to support leaders who offer
jobs at the expense of health and education services for all. The paper provides several pieces of
supporting evidence to show how media effects on citizen demand are the result of persuasion about the
value of public health and education because of greater exposure to radio programs about the importance
of these services.


       Box 1: Survey vignettes to measure citizen demand for private versus public goods

       The local government leaders are deciding how to use a fixed amount of local revenue to best serve
       the needs of the community. They have a limited budget so they can only afford one of the following
       two proposals. Which of these would you prefer the government do?

       1. Vignette contrasting jobs for a few with malaria prevention for all:

           (A) to spend the money to provide jobs for a few selected poor people or
           (B) to spend it on preventing malaria for the health of everyone in the community.

       2. Vignette contrasting cash transfers for a few with malaria prevention for all:

       (A) to give cash transfers to a few selected poor people who need it;
       (B) to spend it on preventing malaria for the health of everyone in the community.

       3. Vignette contrasting jobs for a few with roads for all:

       (A) to spend the money to provide jobs for a few selected poor people or
       (B) to spend it on improving roads in the community for everyone.

       4. Vignette contrasting cash transfers for a few with roads for all:
       (A) to give cash transfers to a few selected poor people who need it;
       (B) to spend it on improving roads in the community for everyone



Box 1 shows different versions of this Keefer and Khemani (2014) vignette that I included in the
aforementioned survey in Tanzania targeted at local government officials and households. While field
testing these vignettes, the local authorities were very keen to have greater specificity regarding who
would be the intended beneficiaries of the private benefits described in the vignette. We were therefore
obligated to add the words “for a few selected poor people” which compromises the degree to which we
are able to interpret responses that support benefits for a few poor people as support for private goods at
the expense of the public interest (since targeting poverty can very well be regarded as a public good).


                                                       34
Nevertheless, despite the wording of the vignettes suggesting that the private benefits would be targeted
at the poor, local government officials answered these questions by systematically choosing option
(B)—benefits for everyone in the community—across all four vignettes. Table 4 shows the percentage
of government and citizen respondents that chose the different options across the vignettes presented to
them. The pattern of responses suggests that technocrats in government think the appropriate public
policies are ones that provide broadly shared benefits rather than narrowly targeted ones. When faced
with our survey questions, the local government official is likely to give the response that they think is
the “right” answer from a technical perspective. In contrast to the responses of the government officials,
citizen responses when interviewed in their households are more skewed towards supporting option A—
which provides targeted private benefits to a few at the expense of benefits for all-- across all four
vignettes. The responses of local officials may be more subject to social desirability bias, but the
desirability likely stems from one type of policy appearing to be the technically sound one. This makes
the responses of no-office-bearing citizens more interesting, and interpretable as evidence that citizens
tend to demand sub-optimal policies that confer immediate private benefits.21
Preliminary regression analysis of the correlates of citizens’ choices over private benefits versus the
more public good suggest that those with less education, fewer assets, and greater indications of poverty
are more likely to prefer the private benefits targeted at the poor.22 Interestingly, female respondents are
robustly more likely to prefer targeted benefits. Yet, the explanatory power of these regressions (the R-
sq) is low, suggesting that there is a lot more variation in citizen demand than we can explain with
available indicators of poverty, income and education. Large proportions of citizens who have no formal
education, or, who report having gone without sufficient food to eat in the recent past, support spending
on the publicly shared goods described in these vignettes rather than on targeted benefits to the poor. For
example, 53 percent of those who report having gone without food, and 42 percent of those who have no
formal schooling, support spending on malaria prevention rather than targeted jobs.
These vignettes are one approach to what this paper proposes as a large agenda for future work on
measuring citizen demands along the dimension of “privateness” versus “publicness” of the benefits
provided by public policies. Future research can include a methodological focus to test the consistency
between survey-based measures of citizen demand against measures derived from more established lab
experiments on contribution to public goods. Another question is whether results would be different if
vignettes are designed as a referendum question on how to allocate public spending, rather than
emphasizing a choice between leaders, and leaders in turn choose different policies. By framing
vignettes as a choice between leaders, future research can examine citizen demand for different types of
leaders in representative political institutions, and contrast it against demand for public spending under
institutions of direct democracy.




21
     Consistent with the findings from laboratory experiments that were discussed earlier (Sunstein, 2007; Dal Bo et al, 2013).
22
     Not reported here, but available upon request.


                                                               35
 Table 4: Responses to Survey Vignettes contrasting Public versus Private Goods


                                        Government Official
                                                                      Citizen Responses
                                        Responses
                                                        Percent of                    Percent of
                                        Frequency       total         Frequency       total
                                                        responses                     responses

 Vignette 1:

 A: Jobs for a few selected people      38              7.92          583             37.96

 B: Prevent malaria for everyone        442             92.08         953             62.04

 Vignette 2:

 A: Cash to a few selected people       42              8.75          560             36.46

 B: Prevent malaria for everyone        438             91.25         976             63.54

 Vignette 3:

 A: Jobs for a few selected people      68              14.17         538             36.75

 B: Improve roads for everyone          412             85.83         926             63.25

 Vignette 4:

 A: Cash to few selected people         66              13.75         515             35.18

 B: Improve roads for everyone          414             86.25         949             64.82

 Notes: The survey vignettes were administered to 480 respondents among government officials.
 Vignettes 1 and 2 were administered to 1536, and vignettes 3 and 4 to 1464 household
 respondents. Households were randomly assigned to which vignettes to respond.


Citizen support for leaders who make promises of populist policies, that go against the advice of
technical experts, is a resurgent concern around the world, in both developed and developing countries.
A large literature focusing on developed countries has examined citizen demands primarily along the
single dimension of government size, and the ideological spectrum of Right versus Left. Ideological
beliefs among citizens about the role of the state, and thence government policies, can be exploited by
leaders who seek to win office on the basis of further polarizing citizens and nurturing ideological


                                                   36
constituencies (Glaeser and Sunstein, 2013). Ideological beliefs can be difficult to shift with technical
information about the costs and benefits of different policy options (Kahan et al, 2013). Such
polarization and resultant policy gridlock is the main concern in the current literature about government
failures to address public goods problems in the developed world. At the same time, concern about
persistent capture of public policies by elites has re-emerged (Gilens and Page, 2014). Why such capture
and ideological gridlock persists even in environments with free contestation for political power, and
with educated voters who have access to multiple sources of news, is an unresolved puzzle (Golden and
Min, 2013). The framework in this paper shows how the answer to this puzzle lies in the demand-side of
politics—what citizens believe about public policies and what they are willing to take from politicians
before they step-into the supply-side and organize action to bring about change. Elite capture begs
explanation beyond preferences of elites for private rents from public policies. The framework shows
how elite capture can be examined as arising endogenously from preferences prevailing among citizens
that elites can exploit. Transitions out of elite capture, such as during the so-called Progressive Era in the
United States at the beginning of the 20th century, to more public interest politics, have been explained
as a result of fundamental changes in preferences for public goods among both the elites and non-elite
citizens on the demand side.
Research in developing countries has focused largely on understanding clientelism and redistributive
politics, and voter behavior in that regard, with little work directly examining citizen attitudes to
different policy offers (Hicken, 2011; Golden and Min, 2013). Indirect inferences are made in the
literature about citizen attitudes to policy by examining voting behavior. For example, the literature can
be read as concluding that poor and uneducated citizens, in traditional societies, put little weight on
policy when determining their voting choices and are steered primarily by material considerations of the
clientelist and patronage networks to which they belong. One upshot of this conclusion—that poor
voters are unlikely to respond to information about candidate quality or performance—has been
especially subject to rigorous empirical testing, with findings showing the opposite—that citizens in
poor countries (that still have traditional institutions, and are yet to fully “modernize”) are nevertheless
highly responsive to information.23 This suggests there are other, potentially large gaps in our
understanding of citizen behavior on the demand-side, because research has concentrated on examining
equilibrium outcomes such as vote shares of candidates which are shaped by supply-side political
strategies deployed by politicians.
The framework shows how preferences link the demand and supply sides of political markets—another
area in which future empirical work might focus. For example, populist demands for subsidies and
government jobs may enable the supply of clientelist leaders who mobilize political support on the basis
of providing targeted private benefits at the expense of broad public services. Once targetable programs
are in place, and generally popular, leaders can employ them for clientelist targeting in exchange for
political support. For example, poverty alleviation programs such as the employment guarantee program
in India, the largest redistributive program in the world (Ravallion, 2016), may fuel citizen demand for
public spending on jobs, and provide politicians with the means to practice clientelism by targeting jobs


23
  Pande (2011) and The World Bank (2016) provide reviews. The research network Evidence in Governance and Politics
(EGAP) supports an ongoing research program on the impact of information on voting behavior in poor countries.
http://egap.org/metaketa/metaketa-information-and-accountabilityw.

                                                          37
to supporters, at the expense of public goods. This potentially negative political spillovers of such
workfare programs are rarely considered by policy advisers and experts.
Analogous to the role of prices in economic markets, which are signals that coordinate the actions of
large numbers of consumers and producers, the public policies that citizens experience in political
markets would coordinate their values and beliefs in political markets. For example, the experience with
rampant absenteeism among public sector teachers and doctors, can contribute to low valuation for
public spending on education and health among citizens on the demand-side, and beliefs among service
providers on the supply-side that few of their colleagues are professionally motivated to perform
because performance doesn’t matter in a government job. The political market can get settled into a trap
of low public goods because of low expectations from public service delivery and low valuation of
public goods.
These points about the fundamental role of preferences in shaping both the demand and supply sides of
political markets are weaker in contexts where the sheer technology of political power takes precedence,
such as what we see in some parts of the world where violent coercion and suppression are actively
used. However, other than these contexts where coercive technologies are overwhelmingly dominant,
the vast majority of people live in contexts where leaders accommodate citizen demands in order to win
elections or forestall a revolution. In contexts where larger numbers of citizens are actively participating
on both the demand and supply sides, the persistence of sub-optimal policies and weak institutions can
ultimately be traced to insufficient demand among citizens to support leaders who offer technically
sound policies, and/or insufficient movement of citizens into the supply side to contest power by
offering better policies.
The biggest challenge to explanations rooted in preferences, when preferences are understood only as
arguments in a utility function, is explanations cast as a prisoners’ dilemma in game theory: everyone
wants more public goods, but is stuck in a sub-optimal equilibrium based on rational beliefs about how
others are behaving. Habyarimana et al (2009), for example, argue that under-provision of public goods
in ethnically diverse societies should be understood as the result of breakdown of cooperative equilibria,
compared to greater norms for cooperation in more homogeneous societies, rather than a result of
different preferences. The framework here incorporates beliefs and norms into the supply surve (Figure
3). An additional factor shaping the supply curve, other than how public goods enter the utility function,
is beliefs about what others are doing. These are questions about norms, which were described as
political norms in World Bank (2016) to distinguish as a sub-set of social norms—beliefs or
expectations about how others are behaving in government. In the section below, I review some of the
available literature on values, beliefs, and norms.


   IV.     The Fundamental Role of Preferences and Beliefs
The previous sections have provided a framework to think about how actions by a large number of
citizens on the demand and supply side of political markets determine the extent to which public policies
are selected to address problems of public goods. This section discusses the emerging literature on the
primitive variables that shape the demand and supply curves: citizen preferences for or valuation of


                                                     38
public policies, b ( p) , as well as beliefs about how others are behaving in the public sector. These
                  j


preferences and beliefs determine citizens’ decisions to remain “takers” or supporters of public policy on
the demand-side, and whether to enter the government bureaucracy or become contenders for leadership
on the supply-side.
Examining how values and beliefs, or culture, matters for economic outcomes is a topic at the cutting
edge of the economics literature.24 After several economics papers found robust empirical evidence that
cultural traits such as trust and civic cooperation can explain variation across regions or countries in
economic outcomes, research is now focusing on better understanding the mechanisms of impact
(Alesina and Giuliano, 2015, provide a review). One of the gaps in this nascent area of work is to
distinguish the mechanisms that work through political markets, and the allocation of resources to public
goods, versus through economic markets for private transactions.
 Below I review key pieces of available work and forge connections between them to offer the following
conclusion: the intersection between political, media and education markets at the local level is the “first
mile” at which political preferences and beliefs are formed; that is, these three local markets play a
fundmental role in shaping political preferences and beliefs. Local electoral institutions are spreading
within countries across the political spectrum, including in authoritarian and closed national political
environments. Local media markets are thriving as well, both through the spread of technologies for
social networking and communication as well as through government and donor sponsorship of media
such as community radio to reach rural and remote populations (World Bank, 2016). The market for
education is also local, given the production function of education through schools. In many countries
the local education market intersects with local political markets through direct elections of school
boards, or through the management roles that locally elected governments have over public schools.25
Below I discuss the available evidence on how the experience of engagement through local political
markets, the messages communicated through local media, and the learning of concepts and ideas in
schools appear to play fundamental roles in shaping political preferences and beliefs, but with many
open questions on which future research is needed.
A substantial body of work examining local or regional differences in the quality of government and
social norms within Italy, between the center-north and the south, provides some evidence on the
mechanisms of culture’s impact through local political markets (Putnam, Leonardi, and Nanetti 1993;
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2006; Alesina and Giuliano 2015). This literature ultimately attributes
better economic performance in present times in some regions of Italy to earlier experience with
participatory democracy, dating back to the twelfth century. The inclusiveness of political institutions in
“free cities”—a formal institution in the twelfth century—triggered a set of cultural traits (civic and
cooperative behavior) whose effects persist today. Regions that were not free cities in the twelfth
century but that currently have institutions of local political engagement are argued to suffer from
“uncivic” voting, which allows corruption by political leaders to go unpunished (Nannicini et al. 2013).
This series of arguments on variation in governance outcomes within Italy thus supports the notion of

24
   This is the literature I will draw upon because this is what I know best. The hope of writing this paper is to open up more
interactions with political science and other disciplines to learn across disciplines.
25
   Naidu (2012), for example, examines how local politics in the 19th century in the U.S. South simultaneously
disenfranchised the African American population and reduced teacher-student ratios in black schools.

                                                              39
improvements in political behavior coming about through the experience of political engagement over
time. The earlier experience with democratic institutions, and greater accumulation of such experience
over time, is argued in this literature to be the underlying source of differences in economic and
government performance within Italy today.
Nannicini et al. (2013) build upon the previous work on variation in social capital across provinces
within Italy. Social capital is defined as norms for cooperative behavior in society. The authors’ main
empirical measure of social capital is average per capita blood donations in the Italian provinces
(following Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2004). They link social norms to the notion of “civic” versus
“uncivic” voting behavior, depending on whether voters assess politicians on the basis of general public
interest and punish transgressions even when they have been the recipients of private favors from the
politician. The authors use two indicators of transgression or misbehavior of incumbents in national
elections: prosecutors’ requests to proceed with a criminal investigation against a member of parliament
(Richiesta di Autorizzazione a Procedere, called RAP in most of the paper); and the absenteeism rate in
electronic votes by members of parliament over the legislative term. They find that both indicators are
more frequent in electoral districts with less social capital. More important, the electoral punishment of
the incumbent’s misbehavior is stronger in districts with more social capital.
Should we then infer from this body of work that preferences for public goods, and behavioral norms in
political markets, are slow-changing, and akin to inherited values that persist over generations (for
example, as in Akerlof and Kranton, 2000)? Some results in Nannicini et al. (2013), in fact suggest the
opposite—that political behavior can change in the short-run, and society does not have to wait for
history to run its slow course. The authors find that newspaper circulation is significantly correlated with
lower corruption. When newspaper circulation is included in the analysis, the estimated impact of
historical institutions shrinks and loses statistical significance. That is, the historically rooted differences
in institutions within Italy are not significant in explaining “civic” voting behavior to punish
transgressions once newspaper circulation is taken into account. When using measures of political
engagement (average turnout in national elections, European elections, and referenda during the 1990s)
instead of historical social capital, the negative correlation between corruption and the political
engagement measures of social capital is strongly robust to the inclusion of newspapers diffusion as an
explanatory variable.26 That is, widespread citizen engagement and transparency in political markets
together explain civic voting to punish transgressions by political leaders and thereby strengthen
incentives for lower corruption, even in an environment in which there are historical differences in
social norms.
Although there is evidence that some part of preferences for public goods or the role of government in
society is indeed slow-changing and persistent over generations (Luttmer and Singhal, 2011), there is
also significant support for arguments that preferences and attitudes to government can shift in response



26
   The results of including newspaper circulation are presented in table 5 of the working paper version. The robustness of
alternate measures of social capital, which equate it with political engagement, when newspaper circulation is included are
discussed on page 15:
http://didattica.unibocconi.it/mypage/upload/92884_20130406_031702_ACCOUNTABILITY_AEJ_FINAL_JULY2012.PD
F.

                                                            40
to political, macroeconomic (and even weather27) shocks (Alesina and Fuchs-Schundeln, 2007; Giuliano
and Spilimbergo, 2013; Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott, 2011). This latter strand of literature shows
how beliefs are shaped by experience, and are not just inherited or immutable. An important part of how
experience shapes beliefs is derived not from one’s own, individual experience, but from viewing the
experience and actions of others in society. For example, Fernandez (2013) and Fogli and Veldkamp
(2011) show that women learn about the long-run benefits from working outside the home by observing
nearby women employed in labor markets. This research shows that the speed of evolution of beliefs
depends upon the extent of information gleaned from the experience of others—when few women
participate in the labor market, information is scarce and participation rises slowly. As female labor
force participation increases, more information is revelaed about the effects of materal employment
which leads to increasing shift in beliefs and thence participation.
Political markets that are characterized by the participation of large numbers of citizens, and
accumulated experience with the performance of different public policies, thus resemble the conditions
examined in other cases, such as female labor force participation, of rapidly shifting beliefs. One study,
by Bidner and Francois (2013), models the emergence of political accountability as arising from a large
shift in beliefs about the value of punishing transgression by leaders. The very experience of political
engagement, and the outcomes it produces for quality of government and service delivery, can lead to
evolution in political behavior toward the greater public interest. Citizens can become frustrated with
corruption and increasingly intolerant of transgressions by leaders. This leads to a shift in political
norms toward punishing corruption. Establishing anticorruption norms among citizens is also the idea in
Dixit (Forthcoming) for how transitions come from a high to a low corruption regime.
Change can go in the opposite direction. Societies which have accomplished the rule of law, and
established effective bureaucracies which function according to professional norms, may nevertheless
experience political capture of public policies. Erosion of shared beliefs in common interest public
goods, and instead, an increase in polarization of ideologies about the state of the world and society, can
allow for political capture of public policies and weakening of state institutions. Systematic biases and
prejudices among citizens on the demand-side can encourage leaders on the supply-side who further
polarize people, impede the finding of common ground, and capture public policies for their private
interests. A literature on political behavior examines how voters compose a “political picture” by relying
on partisan cues and other information-economizing heuristics (Bartels, 2012). These heuristics can
sustain substantial gaps between the policy opinions of experts and average voters (Caplan, 2007).
Several voter biases have been characterized in this literature, such as antimarket and antiforeign biases.
A body of work on the history of institutional transitions suggests that the fundamental driving force for
how societies that begin with weak institutions move toward strengthening them (such as control of
corruption and bureaucratic efficacy) is citizens’ demands for broad public goods (Besley and Persson,
2009; Lizzeri and Persico, 2004; Glaeser and Goldin, 2006). A rise in demand for public goods in these
historical accounts leads to the adoption of political institutions that facilitate the emergence of leaders
on the supply-side who have the incentives to provide public goods. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson


27
  Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott (2011) find that days without rain on the Fourth of July experienced during childhood is
associated with shifts adult political views and voting in favor of the Republican party.

                                                          41
(2006) indeed define institutions as mechanisms through which social choices are determined and
implemented, thus giving primary importance to the structure of social choices.
In their review of the literature on how culture and institutions interact, Alesina and Giuliano (2015) are
hard-pressed to find definitions and measures of formal institutions that are distinct from values, beliefs
and behavioral norms, or not determined by these. They review historical accounts of how culture
shapes the design of formal institutions, such as Grief’s (1994) notable study of the adoption of legal
institutions of contract enforcement in Genoese society and lack thereof among Maghribi traders. But
when it comes to examining the impact of formal institutions on culture, the available arguments in the
literature appear to be less about differences in formal rules shaping culture, than about differences in
experience over time. The latter—differences in experience over time—may be traced to a formal
institution that existed in the past, but the operating mechanisms of persistent effects of those past
institutions are the different experiences over time which shape values, beliefs and norms. For example,
Tsai (2007) analyzes how traditional institutions can foster accountability and service delivery by
leaders even in the absence of formal mechanisms such as through elections. The distinguishing feature
of these traditional institutions is shared norms about the value of local public goods and the obligation
to contribute to them.
The difficulty in defining a role for formal rules is central to Glaeser et al’s (2004) criticism of available
measures of formal institutions. They argue in favor of measures that are specific about formal rules—
political systems (electoral rules along the spectrum of “plurality” and “proportional representation”, or
political institutions along the “democracy” and “autocracy” spectrum) and judicial constraints on
government. However, there is little evidence that these formal rules are the primary determinants of
public goods and government failures. While there is evidence that variation in electoral rules and legal
institutions across countries can explain variation in economic and public policy outcomes (Persson and
Tabellini, 2004; and La Porta et al, 2004), this body of work does not claim that certain formal
institutions are systematically associated with fewer government failures, nor that societies can change
outcomes by adopting different formal rules.
Another strand of the literature examines the role of media and communication to persuade changes in
preferences and beliefs.28 Mass media and transparency—citizen access to common information—may
affect beliefs, and thereby change how citizens’ engage with institutions in political markets. Elections
and mass media are two institutional elements through which transparency and widespread participation
by citizens in political markets can potentially interact as strategic complements. Both elections and
media have the potential to coordinate citizen action. Fearon (2011) offers a theory in which elections
coordinate voters’ beliefs about compliance by the ruler and thus also coordinate their readiness to revolt
when incumbents ignore the electoral calendar or results. A similar role is played by royal courts in the
model by Myerson (2008) wherein a common venue allows the nobles to learn how the king is treating
each of them. Yanagizawa-Drott (2014) offers a model in which media play a similar role as a
coordination device, albeit in a tragic direction, of promoting participation in the Rwandan genocide.
Additional evidence from the United States on how citizens change beliefs and political behavior
highlights the interaction between the forces of transparency and political engagement. Glaeser and

28
 See DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010) for a review of the literature.

                                                           42
Sunstein (2013) show that in the presence of preexisting beliefs that polarize citizens, media-provided
information is not only unlikely to shift beliefs but might in fact cause previous beliefs to become even
more entrenched. The same information can activate completely different memories of personal
experiences and associated convictions, thus producing polarized responses to that information.
Glaeser and Sunstein (2013) further show that leaders can play a role in credible communication that can
persuade citizens to shift their beliefs. They provide the following example from the United States in
this regard:
“When liberals and conservatives are asked for their private views about a generous welfare policy and
a more stringent one, they react in the predictable ways, with liberals favoring the former and
conservatives the latter. But things change dramatically when they are informed of the distribution of
views within the House of Representatives. More specifically, conservatives end up disapproving of the
more stringent policy, and favor the generous one, when they are told that 90 percent of House
Republicans favor the generous policy. Liberals show the same willingness to abandon their private
opinions, and thus end up favoring the stringent policy, when told that this is the position of 90 percent
of House Democrats. Notably, the effect of learning about party views is as strong among those who are
knowledgeable about welfare policy as it is among people who were not. Also notably, both
conservatives and liberals believe that their judgments are driven largely by the merits, and not by what
they learn about the views of their preferred party—but in that belief, they are wrong.” (Glaeser and
Sunstein 2013, 23)
Leaders can play a role in shifting beliefs and norms. Hermalin (1998) provides an early analysis of how
an informed leader may promote effort by others through his or her own effort, thereby signaling the
worth of a task. The behavior of leaders can also shift political norms under which citizens feel
indignant about bad performance and act to hold leaders accountable (Bidner and Francois 2013).
Acemoglu and Jackson (2015) also offer a theory in which the behavior of leaders (actors whose actions
are visible to all) affects norms (citizen beliefs about mutual behavior). In the last three papers, leaders
can take actions that subsequently lead to citizens’ adopting cooperative social or political norms.
However, whether leaders have incentives to support policies on technical merit, and the credibility to
signal that they are doing so to their constituents (as in the quote above from Glaeser and Sunstein),
rather than to reflect and even encourage polarization among the electorate, links back to the functioning
of political markets. One way to cut this Gordian knot is to explore the role of congruence between
media markets and political markets which might make it easier for leaders to select into the supply side
by reducing polarization and building common ground for public goods. Campante and Hojman (2013)
provide evidence from the US that the intersection of media and political markets influences ideological
polarization among politicians and citizens. They find that the introduction of broadcast television
decreased the ideological polarization of the U.S. Congress. Information provided by television acted as
an important force for bringing members of congress toward the political center. They also find similar
effects for the expansion of radio in the 1930s. Their framework can be extended to suggest how
different types of media play a role in the steady increase in polarization in the United States since the
1970s. This increase in polarization has coincided with significant structural changes in the American
media environment—the rise of talk radio, the expansion of cable television, and the growth of the


                                                     43
Internet, all of which are associated with content differentiation and market segmentation that may have
contributed to increased polarization.
The evidence from U.S. experience has implications for how to generate ideas about harnessing
transparency to address similar problems of ideological beliefs among citizens in developing countries,
such as the government’s role in controlling prices by subsidizing essential commodities. The insights
from the United States can explain developing countries’ experience with subsidy reforms— informing
citizens about the cost of subsidies is not sufficient to solve the problem (Clements et al. 2013).
Widespread beliefs about the corruptibility of officials make idiosyncratic policy choices—such as
subsidy reforms—seem suspect, thereby providing honest politicians with incentives to pander to
populist demands. Leaders who emerge from political markets with popular mandates for public service
delivery may be key actors who can bring about a shift in beliefs and norms for society to escape the
trap of populist policies.
In sum, the experience of engaging in political markets, the degree of overlap between media and
political markets, and audience segmentation across media outlets appear to be fundamental
determinants of how preferences and beliefs are formed with regard to public goods and the role of
government. Papers in the growing literature on media’s impact on political actions in the US, UK or
European countries have already challenged the traditional view among social scientists that media
messages cannot easily sway public opinion or voting behavior in established democracies (Ladd and
Lenz, 2009; Gerber et al, 2009). Established work has already shown that media can persuade citizens to
turn out to vote, or to support one or the other of ideologically committed political parties (Druckman
and Parkin, 2005; DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Chiang and Knight, 2011; DellaVigna and Gentzkow,
2010). Whether media can also persuade citizens about what types of policies to demand, or enable
citizens to enter the supply side as contenders for leadership on platforms of public goods, are big and
open questions.
Keefer and Khemani (2014) provide the first evidence of the importance of apolitical, public interest
media programs in shifting citizen support away from politicians who offer private benefits that would
come at the expense of public goods. General, apolitical information provided by media may influence
how citizens think about the role of public policies and what to demand from their political
representatives. For example, citizens may support politicians who offer policies of trade protectionism
because they believe these are the appropriate actions that leaders should take in the national interest of
creating domestic jobs. Would media programs that inform citizens about technical evidence on these
policies, such as, perhaps, that protectionism may come at the expense of long-term growth and jobs,
reduce citizen demand for such policy offers? The survey evidence discussed in this paper shows that in
poor countries citizens believe that provision of government jobs, and management of prices, are exactly
what governments should be doing, perhaps because free markets cannot be trusted to address the
injustices of poverty and inequality. Would media programs about technical evidence against
government intervention in well functioning markets change citizens’ minds? Would such media
specializing in the discussion of technical evidence also influence actions on the supply-side, such as
providing platforms for new types of leaders to emerge who seek to build common ground for public
goods?



                                                    44
Growing analysis of media markets in advanced economies in fact suggests that media outlets do not
have incentives to provide technical evidence but rather to slant their coverage to cater to the prior
beliefs held by their target audience (Glaeser and Sunstein, 2013; Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005).
Increasing polarization in citizen demands in the United States can be explained by citizens choosing
different types of media according to whether media programs confirm their prior ideological beliefs
about public policies and thus entrench them (Campante and Hojman, 2013). Audience segmentation
into different media outlets, that carry very different programming content, can contribute to increasing
polarization in citizen demands. But the context may be different in poor economies, such as in Africa,
with limited choice and the preponderance of small media—such as community radio—that rely on
sponsorships by government ministries and international donors. Keefer and Khemani (2014) provide
evidence from such a media market with characteristics that are the opposite of those of segmented
markets—one where uniform, public interest programming content is carried across different outlets.
They find that the opposite market characteristics also have the opposite effect on citizen
demands. Government and donor supported community radio in Africa, carrying uniform public interest
messages, increase citizen demand for commonly shared public goods.
Where media markets are persistently polarized, or where beliefs are entrenched and resistant to
persuasion via evidence, how might the experience of engaging in political markets help promote
preferences and beliefs that support public goods? The role of leaders on the supply side has been
highlighted in recent theory about how transitions come about: leaders are prominent agents who may
signal a change in norms (Bidner and Francois, 2013; Acemoglu and Jackson, 2015). Understanding
citizen behavior on the supply side—what motivates and facilitates different types of contenders to enter
the political market—is the other wide open area of research.
Political and bureaucratic institutions—such as electoral rules, and policymaking powers provided to
different jurisdictions where barriers to entry may be lower than others—are likely to matter for who
enters to contest leadership positions on the supply-side. But we understand too little about different
types of institution design in political markets, and its implications for what types of leaders emerge, and
what policy platforms they compete on. Are leaders more receptive to technical evidence, or to seeking
common ground with opposition leaders, than the average citizen? Can political institutions be designed
to yield a supply curve where leaders are more receptive to evidence of technical merit of different
policies; or, put another way, where candidates enter and compete on the basis of providing more public
goods ( SL(p) in Figure 3)? A prevailing intuition about institutions pertains to the value of deliberative
democracy in small-size jurisdictions, as in the experience of the free cities of the 12th century in Italy,
or even before, in Plato’s Agora; but whether this would hold in today’s complex world is not
sufficiently understood. Would diffusion of political power, such as through decentralization of policy-
making powers to multiple local governments, or through multiple horizontal departments, each tasked
with a different aspect of public policy, help? A large body of evidence on decentralization and local
governance has typically concluded that local elections work well for political accountability of local
leaders to citizens (Rodden and Wibbels, 2017; World Bank, 2016; Lieberman, 2015; Mansuri and Rao,
2004). But whether local leaders and local political processes also shape preferences and beliefs more
generally is the crucial question for whether the public sector works to address poblems of public goods.
Local politics could instead revolve around things like vote buying, to the detriment of public goods
(Khemani, 2015).

                                                    45
Civic education, such as to reduce vote selling among citizens, and communication for social behavior
change are widely accepted practices in international development to change preferences and beliefs.
For example, various UNICEF programs targeted at changing social behavior in developing countries
are reviewed in Mackie et al (2015). An example of civic education campaigns to change political
behavior in the developing world is provided by Gottlieb (2014). Education content and curricula have
more generally been examined as shaping preferences and beliefs of citizens in all parts of the world.
Cantoni and Yuchtman (2013) provide a review of the political economy of educational content. New
evidence is growing on how government or elite influence over school curricula can shape political
preferences, beliefs, or ideologies (Cantoni et al, 2015). While such evidence of authoritarian
interference in school curricula, or some cases of state propaganda, may be a cause for concern, other
forms of civic education and social behavior change appear to be accepted as a legitimate part of
international development policy. In that spirit of legitimate policy directions, in places where media
markets and political markets are particularly polarized, such that adult voters are impervious to
technical evidence that goes against their prior beliefs, there may be a role for public policy to target
technical evidence about public goods to the education of future voters. This brings us full circle to the
importance of how local education markets intersect with political and media markets which shape the
selection of public education policy. It is beyond the scope of this paper to further explore the political
economy of education, and its intersection with political markets, but I highlight this intersection as the
crucial area for future work to understand how political preferences and norms are formed.29
     V.      Conclusion
The problems the world is grappling with in our times are unlikely to be solved by economic markets
alone. Disease epidemics, increasing strength and frequency of natural disasters, conflict and the exodus
of refugees are just some examples of problems that require good public sector institutions to solve,
within countries and internationally, through global governance institutions that transcend national
boundaries. But governments and institutions appear to be regularly failing in addressing these
problems. While technical evidence keeps growing on how to address specific problems—be it in health
or education or energy—governments and institutions are not making sufficient use of it, with frequent
examples of deliberate policy making against the weight of evidence (World Bank, 2016 and 2017).
When it comes to building institutions that promote the broad public interest, we have little technical
evidence to draw upon. The approach of exporting lessons from the rich to the poor world does not work
(World Bank, 2016 and 2017). There is no formula or blueprint, for example, for establishing
professional bureaucracies and strengthening the rule of law. Societies, both in rich and poor countries,
continuously grapple with addressing problems of public goods as these emerge in their contexts. While
we have made serious advances in understanding how to get market institutions right to promote trade
and exchange in private markets, we have not in understanding the institutions needed for public goods,
addressing externalities and accomplishing redistribution goals. This is the frontier area of our times.
This paper is a first attempt to extend the methodology of analyzing economic markets to better
understand the functioning of political markets in addressing problems of public goods. I argue that the
29
  Such future work may well involve economists waking up to an existing and rich multidisciplinary literature on these
themes. Part of the purpose of this paper is to encourage economists to do so if we are to do better at understanding the
problem of public goods.

                                                            46
framework of demand and supply curves in political markets can encompass and consolidate inisghts
from a vast body of knowledge, honing in on the fundamental determinant of government success or
failure in addressing public good problems. That fundamental determinant is: the preferences among
citizens about public goods, about the role of the state and of government policy, and beliefs about how
others are behaving in the public sector. This points to a path for future research and policy
experimentation to understand where preferences and beliefs come from, and how citizens find common
ground to address shared problems.


References:
Acemoglu, Daron, and Matthew O. Jackson. 2015. “History, Expectations, and Leadership in the
Evolution of Social Norms.” Review of Economic Studies 82 (1): 1–34.
Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J.A., 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and
Poverty. New York: Crown Publishing Group
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and J. Robinson, 2006, “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run
Growth,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, Aghion, P. and S. Durlauf, eds., Amsterdam: North-
Holland
Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J.A., 2006. De facto political power and institutional persistence. The
American economic review, 96(2), pp.325-330.
Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J.A., 2000. Why did the West extend the franchise? Democracy,
inequality, and growth in historical perspective. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4), pp.1167-
1199.
Acemoglu, Daron, 2003. “Why not a political Coase theorem? Social conflict, commitment, and
politics.” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31: 620-652
Akerlof, G.A. and Kranton, R.E., 2000. Economics and identity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115(3), pp.715-753.
Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna and Francesco Trebbi, 2006. “Who adjusts and when? On the political
economy of reforms.” NBER Working Paper 12049, February 2006
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2015. “Culture and Institutions.” Journal of Economic Literature
53 (4):898–944.
Alesina, A. and Fuchs-Schündeln, N., 2007. Good-bye Lenin (or not?): The effect of communism on
people's preferences. The American Economic Review, 97(4), pp.1507-1528.
Alesina, A. and Glaeser, E.L., 2004. Fighting poverty in the US and Europe: A world of difference.
Oxford University Press.
Anand, Rahul, David Coady, Adil Mohommad, Vimal Thakoor, and James P. Walsh. 2013. “The Fiscal
and Welfare Impacts of Reforming Fuel Subsidies in India.” IMF Working Paper 13/128. International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
                                                   47
Anderson, Siwan, Patrick Francois, and Ashok Kotwal. 2015. “Clientelism in Indian Villages.”
American Economic Review 105 (6): 1780–816.
Arze del Granado, J., D. Coady, and R. Gillingham. 2012. “The Unequal Benefits of Fuel Subsidies: A
Review of Evidence for Developing Countries.” World Development 40 (11): 2234–48.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Lakshmi Iyer and Rohini Somanathan. 2005. “History, Social Divisions, and Public
Goods in Rural India.” Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (2–3): 639–47
Bartels, L. 1996. “Uninformed Votes: Information Effects in Presidential Elections.” American Journal
of Political Science 40 (1): 194–230.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 1997. “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1): 85–114.
Besley, Timothy, and Masayuki Kudamatsu. 2008. “Making Autocracy Work.” LSE STICERD
Research Paper DEDPS48, London School of Economics.
Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2009. “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation,
and Politics.” American Economic Review 99 (4): 1218–44.
Bidner, C., Francois, P. and Trebbi, F., 2014. A theory of minimalist democracy (No. w20552). National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Bidner, Chris, and Patrick Francois. 2013. “The Emergence of Political Accountability.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 128 (3): 1397–448Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 2001. Special
Interest Politics. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.
Bowles, S., 1998. Endogenous preferences: The cultural consequences of markets and other economic
institutions. Journal of economic literature, 36(1), pp.75-111.
Bowles, S. and Gintis, H., 2000. Walrasian economics in retrospect. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(4), pp.1411-1439.
Bowles, S. and Polania-Reyes, S., 2012. Economic Incentives and Social Preferences: Substitutes or
Complements. Journal of Economic Literature.
Brixi, Hana Polackova, Ellen Marie Lust, and Michael Woolcock. 2015. Trust, Voice, and Incentives:
Learning from Local Success Stories in Service Delivery in the Middle East and North Africa.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Brown, D.S. and Mobarak, A.M., 2009. The transforming power of democracy: regime type and the
distribution of electricity. American Political Science Review, 103(2), pp.193-213.
Bueno deMesquita, B., Smith, A., Siverson, R. M., and Morrow, J. D. (2003), The Logic of Political
Survival, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press
Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padró i Miquel. 2015. “The
Value of Democracy: Evidence from Road Building in Kenya.” American Economic Review 105 (6):
1817–51.

                                                  48
Bursztyn, L., 2016. Poverty and the political economy of public education spending: Evidence from
Brazil. Journal of the European Economic Association, 14(5), pp.1101-1128.
Callen, Michael, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, and Yasir Khan. 2014. “The Political Economy of Public
Employee Absence: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan” Unpublished, Harvard Kennedy School.
Cammett, M., 2014. Compassionate communalism: Welfare and sectarianism in Lebanon. Cornell
University Press.
Campante, Filipe, and Daniel Hojman. 2013. “Media and Polarization: Evidence from the Introduction
of Broadcast TV in the US.” Journal of Public Economics, 100: 79–92.
Cantoni, D., Chen, Y., Yang, D.Y., Yuchtman, N. and Zhang, Y.J., 2017. Curriculum and Ideology.
Journal of Political Economy, 125(2), pp.338-392.
Cantoni, D. and Yuchtman, N., 2013. The political economy of educational content and development:
Lessons from history. Journal of Development Economics, 104, pp.233-244.
Caplan, Bryan. 2007. The Myth of the Rational Voter: Why Democracies Choose Bad Policies.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Casey, Katherine. 2015. “Crossing Party Lines: The Effects of Information on Redistributive Politics.”
American Economic Review 105 (8): 2410–48.
Chiang, Chun-Fang and Brian Knight (2011). “Media Bias and Influence: Evidence from Newspaper
Endorsements.” The Review of Economic Studies 78(3): 795-820.
Clements, Benedict J., David Coady, Stefania Fabrizio, Sanjeev Gupta, Trevor Alleyne, and Carlo
Sdralevich, eds. 2013. Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington, DC:
International Monetary Fund.
Cohen, J. and Dupas, P., 2010. Free distribution or cost-sharing? Evidence from a randomized malaria
prevention experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp.1-45.
Cruz, Cesi, Philip Keefer, and Julien Labonne. 2015. “Incumbent Advantage, Voter Information and
Vote Buying.” Unpublished.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pedro Dal Bó, and Erik Eyster. 2013. “The Demand for Bad Policy When Voters
Underappreciate Equilibrium Effects.” Working Paper.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1187–234.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow, 2010. “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence.” Annual Review
of Economics, Annual Reviews, Vol 2(1): 643-669.
Depuru, Soma Shekara Sreenadh Reddy, Lingfeng Wang, and Vijay Devabhaktuni. 2011. “Electricity
Theft: Overview, Issues, Prevention and a Smart Meter Based Approach to Control Theft.” Energy
Policy 39 (2): 1007–15.


                                                  49
Dixit, Avinash, Forthcoming. “Anti-corruption Institutions: some history and theory,” In Kaushik Basu
and Tito Cordella (Eds.) Institutions, Governance and the Control of Corruption, Papers prepared for
the International Economic Association’s Roundtable, Palgrave Macmillan, London UK
Downs, A. 1957. “An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy.” Journal of Political
Economy 65 (2): 135–50.
Druckman, James N. and Michael Parkin (2005). “The Impact of Media Bias: How Editorial Slant
Affects Voters.” Journal of Politics 67: 1030-1049.
Fearon, J. D. 2011. “Self-Enforcing Democracy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4): 1661–708.
Fernandez, R., 2013, “Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Participation
Over a Century,” American Economic Review, 103(1): 472–500
Fogli, A. and L. Veldkamp, 2011, “Nature or Nurture? Learning and the Geography of Female Labor
Force Participation, Econometrica, 79(4), 1103–1138
Fujiwara, Thomas and Leonard Wantchekon (2013). “Can Informed Public Deliberation Overcome
Clientelism? Experimental evidence from Benin.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
5(4): 241-255
Fukuyama, Francis. Forthcoming. “Corruption as a political phenomenon,” In Kaushik Basu and Tito
Cordella (Eds.) Institutions, Governance and the Control of Corruption, Papers prepared for the
International Economic Association’s Roundtable, Palgrave Macmillan, London UK
Gerber, Alan S., Dean Karlan and Daniel Bergan (2009). “Does the Media Matter? A Field Experiment
Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinions.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 1:2, 35-52 (April).
Gibson, Clark C., Barak D. Hoffman, Ryan S. Jablonski (2015). “Did Aid Promote Democracy in
Africa? The Role of Technical Assistance in Africa’s Transitions.” World Development 68 (April):
323-335.
Gilens, Martin, and Benjamin I. Page. 2014. “Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest
Groups, and Average Citizens.” Perspectives on Politics 12 (3): 564–81.
Gintis, H., Bowles, S. and Boyd, R., Ernst Fehr, eds. 2005. Moral sentiments and material interests: The
foundations of cooperation in economic life.
Giuliano, P. and Spilimbergo, A., 2013. Growing up in a Recession. Review of Economic Studies, 81(2),
pp.787-817.
Glaeser, E., R. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and A. Shleifer, 2004, “Do Institutions Cause Growth?”
Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 271–303.
Glaeser, Edward, and Claudia Goldin, eds. 2006. Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s
Economic History. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.



                                                   50
Glaeser, Edward, and Cass Sunstein. 2013. “Why Does Balanced News Produce Unbalanced Views?”
NBER Working Paper 18975, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Golden, M. and Min, B., 2013. Distributive politics around the world. Annual Review of Political
Science, 16, pp.73-99.
Gottlieb, Jessica. 2016. "Greater Expectations? A Field Experiment to Improve Accountability in Mali."
American Journal of Political Science 60(1): 143-157
Greif, Avner. 1994. “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (5): 912–50.
Grindle, Merilee S. (2012). Jobs for the Boys: Patronage and the State in Comparative Perspective.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Grossman, G.M. and Helpman, E., 2001. Special interest politics. MIT press.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales. 2006. “Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 20 (2): 23–48.
Habyarimana, James, Macartan Humphreys, Daniel Posner, and Jeremy M. Weinstein. 2009.
Coethnicity: Diversity and the Dilemmas of Collective Action. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. 1998. “Toward an Economic Theory of Leadership: Leading by Example.”
American Economic Review 88(5): 1188–206.
Hicken, A., 2011. Clientelism. Annual Review of Political Science, 14, pp.289-310.
Kahan, Dan M. 2012. “Ideology, Motivated Reasoning, and Cognitive Reflection: An Experimental
Study.” Judgment and Decision Making 8 (4): 407–24.
Kahan, Dan, Ellen Peters, Erica Cantrell Dawson, and Paul Slovic. 2013. “Motivated Numeracy and
Enlightened Self-Government.” Yale Law School, Public Law Working Paper No. 307.
Keefer, Philip, and Stuti Khemani. 2014. “Radio's Impact on Preferences for Patronage Benefits.” Policy
Research Working Paper 6932, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Keefer, P. and Vlaicu, R., 2007. Democracy, credibility, and clientelism. The Journal of Law,
Economics, & Organization, 24(2), pp.371-406.
Khemani, Stuti (2015). “Buying votes versus supplying public services: Political incentives to under-
invest in pro-poor policies.” Journal of Development Economics 177: 84-93.
Kitschelt, Herbert and Steven I. Wilkinson, eds. (2007). Patrons, Clients, and Policies: Patterns of
Democratic Accountability and Political Competition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Krueger, A. O. (1993). Political economy of policy reform in developing countries. MIT press.
Cambridge, MA




                                                   51
Ladd, Jonathan McDonald and Gabriel S. Lenz (2009). “Exploiting a Rare Communication Shift to
Document the Persuasive Power of the News Media.” American Journal of Political Science 53:2, 394-
410 (April).
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Pop-Eleches, C. and A. Shleifer, 2004 “Judicial Checks and
Balances”, Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2), 445-470.
Lieberman, E.S., 2015. The Comparative Politics of Service Delivery in Developing Countries. In The
Oxford Handbook of Politics of Development.
Lieberman, E.S. and McClendon, G.H., 2013. The ethnicity–policy preference link in sub-Saharan
Africa. Comparative Political Studies, 46(5), pp.574-602.
Lizzeri, A., and N. Persico. 2001. “The Provision of Public Goods under Alternative Electoral
Incentives.” American Economic Review 91 (1): 225–39.
Lizzeri, A., and N. Persico. 2004. “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suffrage? Democracy and the Scope
of Government, With an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of Reform’.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119
(2): 707–65
Luttmer, E.F. and Singhal, M., 2011. Culture, context, and the taste for redistribution. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1), pp.157-179.
Mackie, G., Moneti, F., Denny, E. and Shakya, H., 2012. What are social norms? How are they
measured. University of California at San Diego-UNICEF Working Paper, San Diego.
Madestam, A. and Yanagizawa-Drott, D., 2011. Shaping the nation: The effect of Fourth of July on
political preferences and behavior in the United States. Unpublished paper
Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work?
World Bank Policy Research Report. Washington, DC
Mares, I. and Carnes, M.E., 2009. Social policy in developing countries. Annual Review of Political
Science, 12, pp.93-113.
Mullainathan, S. and Shleifer, A., 2005. The market for news. The American Economic Review, 95(4),
pp.1031-1053.
Myerson, R. 2008. “The Autocrat’s Credibility Problem and the Foundations of the Constitutional
State.” American Political Science Review 102 (1): 125–39.
Naidu, S., 2012. Suffrage, schooling, and sorting in the post-bellum US South (No. w18129). National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Nannicini, Tommaso, Andrea Stella, Guido Tabellini, and Ugo Troiano. 2013.”Social Capital and
Political Accountability.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (2): 222–50.
Osborne, M., and A. Slivinski. 1996. “A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-Candidates.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (1): 65–96.


                                                   52
Pande, Rohini. 2011. “Can Informed Voters Enforce Better Governance? Experiments in Low-Income
Democracies.” Annual Review of Economics 3: 215–37.
Persson, T., G. Roland, and G. Tabellini. 2007. “Electoral Rules and Government Spending in
Parliamentary Democracies.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 2 (2): 155–88.
Persson, T., and G. Tabellini. 2004. “Constitutional Rules and Fiscal Policy Outcomes.” American
Economic Review 94 (1): 25–45.
Pinheiro, A.C. and Schneider, B.R., 2017. Markets and Hierarchies in Public Services: Incentives,
Institutions, and Politics. In Improving Access and Quality of Public Services in Latin America (pp. 37-
65). Palgrave Macmillan US.
Posner, Daniel. 2005. Institutions and ethnic politics in Africa. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, R., R. Leonardi, and R. Y. Nanetti. 1993. Making Democracy Work. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Rajan, Raghuram G. 2009. "Rent Preservation and the Persistence of Underdevelopment." American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 178-218
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 2003. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the
power of financial markets to create wealth and spread opportunity, New York: Crown Business
Ravallion, M., 2016. Are the world’s poorest being left behind?. Journal of Economic Growth, 21(2),
pp.139-164.
Robinson, James and Thierry Verdier (2003). “The Political Economy of Clientelism.” CEPR Working
Paper No. 3205.
Rodden, J. and E. Wibbels, 2017. Decentralized Governance and Accountability: Academic Research
and the Future of Donor Programming. Commissioned by USAID’s DRG Centre.
Rodrik, Dani, 1996. “Understanding economic policy reform.” Journal of Economic Literature, March:
9-41.
Rodrik, D. 2006. Goodbye Washington consensus, hello Washington confusion? A review of the World
Bank's economic growth in the 1990s: learning from a decade of reform. Journal of Economic literature,
44(4), 973-987.
Romer, P.M., 1996. Preferences, promises, and the politics of entitlement. In Individual and social
responsibility: Child care, education, medical care, and long-term care in America (pp. 195-228).
University of Chicago Press.
Singh, P., 2015. How solidarity works for welfare: Subnationalism and social development in India.
Cambridge University Press.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Stanley L. Engerman. 2000. “History Lessons: Institutions, Factors
Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (3):
217–32.

                                                   53
Sturzenegger, F., & Tommasi, M. (1998). The political economy of reform. MIT Press.
Sunstein, Cass. 2007. “On the Divergent American Reactions to Terrorism and Climate Change.”
Columbia Law Review 107 (2): 503–57.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2009. Going to Extremes: How Like Minds Unite and Divide. Oxford: Oxford
University Press
Tsai, L.L., 2007. Accountability without democracy: Solidary groups and public goods provision in
rural China. Cambridge University Press.
Vicente, P.C. and Wantchekon, L., 2009. Clientelism and vote buying: lessons from field experiments in
African elections. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 25(2), pp.292-305.
Wantchekon, Leonard (2003). “Clientelism and Voting Behavior: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Benin.” World Politics 55: 399-422.
Weitz‐Shapiro, R., 2012. What wins votes: Why some politicians opt out of clientelism. American
Journal of Political Science, 56(3), pp.568-583.
World Bank, 2004. World Development Report: Making Services Work for Poor People, World Bank,
Washington DC
World Bank, 2006. World Development Report: Equity and Development, World Bank, Washington DC
World Bank, 2014. A Measured Approach to Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity. Policy
Research Report, Development Research Group, Washington DC
World Bank, 2016. Making Politics Work for Development. Policy Research Report, Development
Research Group, Washington DC
World Bank, 2017. World Development Report: Governance and the Law, World Bank, Washington
DC
Yanagizawa-Drott, David. 2014. “Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1947–94.




                                                  54
