          DISCUSSION PAPER                 NO. 1613




Issues for Civil Service Pension Reform
                  in Sub-Saharan Africa

                 Anita M. Schwarz and Miglena Abels




                                 November 2016
       Issues for Civil Service Pension Reform
                in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                   November 2016


                   Anita M. Schwarz and Miglena Abels

Abstract
The paper summarizes the main factors behind the projected increase civil service pension
costs in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). It discusses the benefits and potential downsides to
unifying civil service and national pension systems, drawing on regional and international best
practices and experience. The paper pays special consideration to the differences between
civil and national pension reform, emphasizing the unique challenges in civil service pension
reform posed by the fact that the government is the employer, the administrator of the
pension fund, and the guarantor of last resort of the pension system. Findings in the report
strongly suggest that civil service pension reform needs to be on the agenda in SSA countries,
as its costs are beginning to crowd out other budget expenditures. Among other conclusions
and recommendations, the report also urges practitioners to focus on the overall impact on
government finances and not on the finances of the pension fund when undertaking civil
service pension reform separately from the national system. The paper is intended to serve
as a resource in civil service pension reform efforts in the region.


JEL Classification: H55, J26
Key Words: national and civil service pension systems in Africa, public pension system
expenditure, design and performance indicators of civil service pension systems
                                      Acknowledgements

This paper was prepared by a World Bank team led by Melis U. Guven (Sr. Social Protection
Economist, Social Protection and Labor Global Practice) with financing from Rapid Social
Response Multi-donor Trust Fund. 1 The paper was authored by Anita M. Schwarz (Lead
Economist, World Bank) and Miglena Abels (Research Analyst, World Bank). The authors
gratefully acknowledge the guidance and useful contributions of Melis U. Guven in the
preparation of this paper.

The peer reviewers were Fiona Stewart (Lead Financial Sector Specialist) and Mitchell Wiener
Sr. Social Protection Specialist) and their comments as well as comments provided by Robert
Palacios (Global Pensions Lead) greatly benefited the final document. The paper was
prepared under the overall guidance of Dena Ringold (Practice Manager, Social Protection
and Labor for East and Southern Africa) and Stefano Paternostro (Practice Manager, Social
Protection and Labor, West Africa). Khurshid Banu Noorwalla (Program Assistant) provided
administrative support.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this document are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank,
the governments their represent, or the counterparts consulted during the preparation of
the document.




1
  The Rapid Social Response (RSR) program includes two trust fund programs, the RSR Multi-Donor Trust Fund
(RSR-MDTF with initial contributions from the Russian Federation and Norway) and the RSR Catalyst Trust Fund
(RSRC, with the United Kingdom as the sole contributor). During 2012-2013, three new donors joined the RSR-
MDTF; namely Sweden, Australia, and the United Kingdom.



                                                     i
                                                    Table of Contents

Introduction .............................................................................................................................. 1
1. Projected Explosion of Civil Service Pension Costs.......................................................... 2
2. Integration vs. Separate Civil Service Pension Systems ................................................ 15
3. Mechanics of Civil Service Pension Reform ................................................................... 21
4. Conclusions...................................................................................................................... 29
References .............................................................................................................................. 31
Annex ...................................................................................................................................... 33
   A.     Civil Service Pension Scheme Contribution Rates (% Wage) ................................... 33
   B.     Financing Mechanisms of Civil Service Pension Schemes........................................ 33
   C.     Evolution of Civil Service Pension Expenditures in Kenya ....................................... 34

Boxes
Box 1: The Nigerian Pension Reform Experience ................................................................... 20

Tables
Table 1: Wage Base for Pension Benefits in Select Sub-Saharan African Countries ................ 8
Table 2: Post-retirement Pension Indexation Measures ........................................................ 10
Table 3: Structure and Design of Civil Service Pension Schemes in Africa ............................. 16

Figures
Figure 1: Population over Age 65 in Sub-Saharan Countries .................................................... 2
Figure 2: Pension Spending as a Percentage of Health Spending ............................................ 3
Figure 3: Pension Spending as a Percentage of Education Spending ....................................... 4
Figure 4: Pension Spending as a Share of Government Revenues ........................................... 4
Figure 5: Civil Service Pension Beneficiaries as a Percentage of Population above Statutory
Retirement Age ......................................................................................................................... 5
Figure 6: Hypothetical Pension Spending as a Percentage of GDP if All Elderly Receive Civil
Service Pension Benefits ........................................................................................................... 6
Figure 7: Accrual Rates in Sub-Saharan Africa and the OECD .................................................. 7
Figure 8: Expected Duration of Retirement—Life Expectancy at Age 60 ............................... 13
Figure 9: Demographic Structure of Public Service Pension Fund and National Social Security
Fund in Tanzania ..................................................................................................................... 14
Figure 10: Administrative Costs as a Share of Contribution Revenue .................................... 24




                                                                      ii
                                           Introduction

Despite the youthful demographic of most Sub-Saharan African countries, many of their
civil service pension schemes are becoming expensive. The majority of the countries in Sub-
Saharan Africa for which there is data have separate pension schemes for public sector
workers. Seven countries have top-up systems, with civil servants eligible for national
pensions but also for an additional pension based on their civil service employment. Most of
these countries require contributions from civil servants.2 Only five do not. Although the
lifecycle of pension funds is still in its early stages in many of these countries, costs in some
countries are already high. In Tanzania and Madagascar, civil service pension spending has
reached 1.63 percent and 1.4 percent of GDP, respectively. It is lower in other countries, like
Uganda, where it is 0.4 percent of GDP. To look at costs from another angle, in some places
civil service pension spending is on the way to consuming as much of the budget as critical
national priorities. For example, pension payouts are 33 percent of education spending and
25 percent of health spending in Mauritius.

Civil service pension spending in Africa may not appear high relative to other countries 
but it is extraordinarily high when we consider the number of people receiving pensions.
In Uganda, for example, 0.4 percent of GDP is spent on civil service pensions, but this
spending covers only 2.5 percent of the elderly population and an even smaller share of the
overall population. If all of Uganda’s elderly received such pensions, payouts would be more
than 16 percent of GDP, significantly higher than the 9.5 percent of GDP spent by high income
countries with much older pension schemes. The generosity of the civil servant schemes is
particularly important since civil service schemes often set the expectations for private
pensions.

Civil service pension reform is complicated by the fact that the government takes multiple
roles: employer, fund administrator, and financier of last resort. As a result of this

2
 See Annex for more information on funding mechanisms and contribution rates of civil service pension
schemes in Sub-Saharan Africa.



                                                     1
multiplicity of roles, some standard reform prescriptions may not have the desired impact in
the context of civil servant schemes, and different policy prescriptions may be required.

The remainder of this note is organized in four sections: Section II, The Projected Explosion
of Civil Service Pension Costs; Section III, Pros and Cons of Unifying Civil Service and National
Pension Systems; Section IV, Special Considerations When Reforming Civil Service Pension
Systems; and Section V, Conclusions.


    1. Projected Explosion of Civil Service Pension Costs
Sub-Saharan Africa is generally thought of as a young region, but the percentage of the
population over age 65 is expected to double in most countries and rise by an even greater
percentage in a few of them. Figure 1 shows the percentage of population over the age of
65 in 2010, compared to what is projected for 2050. Given that the population is expected to
double in this timeframe, this indicates that the number of elderly in Africa are expected to
quadruple.

       Figure 1: Population over Age 65 in Sub-Saharan Countries (Percentage of Total)

 30%
 25%
 20%
 15%
 10%
  5%
  0%
          Sao Tome and…
                 Somalia
                 Gambia




                     Chad

          Guinea-Bissau
           Côte d'Ivoire




                  Guinea




                    Sudan
                  Zambia
                Comoros




                 Ethiopia
                    Benin
                   Eritrea
                  Malawi




                 Lesotho



                 Rwanda
                 Namibia
           Burkina Faso
                     Niger




                 Burundi

       Congo, Dem. Rep.




                    Kenya




                 Djibouti

            South Africa
           Sierra Leone




                   Ghana




             Cabo Verde
           South Sudan




              Seychelles
                      CAR

           Mozambique
                Tanzania



                     Togo
              Swaziland




                   Liberia




                   Gabon
                 Uganda




            Madagascar




               Mauritius
                      Mali




                 Senegal




               Botswana
                  Nigeria
              Zimbabwe




                  Angola




              Cameroon




                                                   2010   2050


Source: United Nations 2015.


Civil service pension costs in Sub-Saharan Africa are high relative to other social
expenditures and growing. Figure 2 and Figure 3 compare spending on civil service and



                                               2
national pension schemes to health and education spending in 17 Sub-Saharan countries for
which there is data. Overall, the amount spent on pensions represents an average of 18
percent of health spending and 28 percent of education spending. Of the overall pension
spending, 70 percent goes to civil service pensions. Pension spending costs as a share of
government revenues are generally in line with experience in other developing economies.
However, spending levels are high considering the small share of elderly in populations across
the region (Figure 4).

                 Figure 2: Pension Spending as a Percentage of Health Spending

           70%
           60%
           50%
           40%
           30%
           20%
           10%
            0%




                                 national pension spending, % health spending
                                 civil service pension spending, % health spending


         Source: National and civil service pension spending−administrative data; Education and
                 Health spending−World Development Indicators.
         Note: Data presented is for the latest year available.




                                                       3
                                     Figure 3: Pension Spending as a Percentage of Education Spending

                                 90%
                                 80%
                                 70%
                                 60%
                                 50%
                                 40%
                                 30%
                                 20%
                                 10%
                                  0%




                                                              national pension spending, % education spending
                                                              civil service pension spending, % education spending


                                Source: National and civil service pension spending−administrative data; Education and
                                Health spending−World Development Indicators.
                                Note: Data presented is for the latest year available.


                                       Figure 4: Pension Spending as a Share of Government Revenues

                                  Pension Spending as a Share of Government Revenues vs. Population 65+ as a
                                                           Share of Total Population
                           9%
                           8%
                                                   Mauritius NPF
                           7%
 population 65+, % total




                                               Seychelles

                           6%
                           5%                         Ghana SSNIT        Swaziland SPF
                                                                                                   South Africa GEPF

                           4%       Ethiopia POESSA
                                                                                  Botswana BPOPF
                           3%                                                                                                                 Liberia NPS
                                      Kenya NSSF
                           2%                                                                  Togo Civil Service
                                     Uganda NSSF                                                                            Madagascar CRCM
                                                                          Benin FNRB
                           1%                      Namibia GIPF
                           0%
                             0.0%             2.0%                4.0%            6.0%             8.0%             10.0%      12.0%             14.0%

                                                               pension spending, % government revenues


Source: Administrative data from respective countries; IMF 2015; and United Nations 2015.




                                                                                           4
Civil service pensions cover a fairly narrow portion of the elderly. Figure 5 shows the number
of beneficiaries above the statutory retirement age of the country (commonly 60 for men and
women) as a percentage of the population. The percentage of the elderly that actually receive
pensions is probably even lower than the numbers shown because in most cases, the data
covers pension beneficiaries irrespective of age. Many of these beneficiaries are younger than
retirement age because of early retirement provisions, suggesting that even fewer people
above retirement age are actually collecting pensions.

        Figure 5: Civil Service Pension Beneficiaries as a Percentage of Population
                               above Statutory Retirement Age

                                 Percentage of Elderly Receiving Pensions
           16.00%
           14.00%
           12.00%
           10.00%
            8.00%
            6.00%
            4.00%
            2.00%
            0.00%




          Source: Administrative data from the respective countries.

If current civil service pension benefits were expanded to cover all elderly, African countries
would spend more on pensions than high income countries with much larger elderly
populations. Figure 6 illustrates what would happen if civil service pension benefits were
expanded to cover all the elderly in Ghana, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia, and compares it
to pension spending as a percentage of GDP in high income countries. High income countries
are having difficulty financing pensions out of their much larger incomes and tax collections.
It is hard to imagine how poorer countries could spend an even larger share of their incomes
on pensions. While this is purely hypothetical, there are some lessons to be drawn.



                                                    5
First, civil service pension benefit levels are more generous in Sub-Saharan Africa than in high
income countries. Generous civil service benefit levels also tend to push up benefit levels for
the private sector, as the private sector tries to compete with the public sector for the most
competent workers. While countries can afford the generous benefits now, they may become
unaffordable in the future. It takes time to reduce benefit levels, since pensions are often
considered acquired rights and are sometimes even constitutionally protected.

Second, if the costs to cover all elderly are already high as a percentage of GDP, they will be
unimaginably high when the number of elderly doubles or even quadruples. So again, it is
worthwhile to think about reforming these civil service systems now when there is still time
to do so.

        Figure 6: Hypothetical Pension Spending as a Percentage of GDP if All Elderly
                           Receive Civil Service Pension Benefits

             18
             16
             14
             12
             10
              8
              6
              4
              2
              0
                       Ghana             Tanzania   Uganda   Zambia     High Income


           Source: Staff calculations.

Civil service pensions are expensive because benefits are generous and pensions are paid
out over a long period, in part due to early retirement. Generous benefits can arise from
various parameters of a pension scheme: (i) the accrual rate, the rate at which the benefit
entitlements build up for each year of service; (ii) the averaging period for wages included in
the pensionable wage; (iii) indexation of the pension post-retirement; and (iv) commutation
options.



                                                    6
Pensions in Sub-Saharan African accrue at an average rate of 2.2 percent of salary per year
of service, compared with an average rate of 1.2 percent in high income countries. The
accrual rates in high income countries, which are considered more or less fiscally sustainable
and international best practice, are nearly half of average accrual rates in Sub-Saharan African
countries. The African accrual rates translate into 66 percent of pensionable wage after 30
years of service. Kenya’s and Togo’s civil service pension schemes have accrual rates of 2.5
percent, promising to deliver replacement rates equal to 75 percent of previous earnings
after only 30 years of service. The accrual rate is even higher in Mozambique, where public
sector workers can expect their pensions to equal 86 percent of their wages. Furthermore,
the accrual rates in civil service schemes in Tanzania, Mozambique, and Togo are higher than
the accrual rates in the national pension systems, creating a disparity between civil servants
and private sector workers. The actual pension benefits received by a high income retiree
may not be significantly higher than for an African civil servant retiree, because the high
income retiree is expected to work 40 or more years to receive a full pension, rather than the
30 or, in most cases fewer years, typical in Sub-Saharan Africa.

                  Figure 7: Accrual Rates in Sub-Saharan Africa and the OECD

      3.5%
      3.0%
      2.5%
      2.0%
      1.5%
      1.0%
      0.5%
      0.0%
                 United States




                        Iceland
                         Turkey
                        Zambia

                   Madagascar




                          Kenya

                  Mozambique




               Slovak Republic
                        Canada




                       Norway




                        Austria

                  Netherlands
                         Poland
                          Korea




                      Slovenia
                     Germany




                          Spain
                      Tanzania
                      Namibia
                       Uganda




                   Cabo Verde
             Congo, Dem. Rep.
                        Estonia
                          Japan




                       Sweden


                       Belgium
                            Italy




                  Luxembourg
                           Togo
                    Cameroon

                    Swaziland




              SSA - Civil Service Pension Schemes       OECD - National Pension Systems


     Source: Staff notes; OECD 2015.




                                                    7
African civil service pensions are often based on last salary or on the last few years of salary,
in contrast to international best practice that bases pensions on average lifetime wages.
Another component of the benefit formula that influences generosity is the number of years
in the averaging period on which pension benefits are calculated. Many civil service pension
schemes in Sub-Saharan Africa base pensions on either last wage (Cabo Verde, Uganda,
Madagascar), the average of the best five years of wages (Sierra Leone), or the average of the
best three years of wages (Ghana) (Table 1). The logic behind basing pensions on lifetime
wages is based partly on fairness and partly on meeting a worker’s expectations. If a worker
has paid contributions on earned wages over a lifetime, then aligning benefits with
contributions would imply that pensions should be based on the average lifetime wage, since
the average contribution was based on the average lifetime wage. Presumably, one’s
consumption patterns are based on lifetime average wages and not just on final salary. These
historical wages are typically adjusted upward for inflation and typically also include upward
adjustments for growth in average economy-wide wages. Including average wage growth in
the calculation of past wage history is seen as providing an “interest rate” on past
contributions, much like an interest rate is paid on a bank account.

      Table 1: Wage Base for Pension Benefits in Select Sub-Saharan African Countries

                    Pension Scheme                     Country          Wage Base
          national                                 Benin             final 5
          both national and civil service          Ethiopia          final 3
          civil service                            Swaziland         final salary
          integrated                               Seychelles        last 5
          civil service                            Mauritius         last 5
          integrated                               Cabo Verde        final salary
          civil service                            Madagascar        final salary
          national                                 Sierra Leone      best 5 avg.
          national                                 Togo              final salary
          civil service                            Uganda            final salary
          national                                 Mozambique        final salary
          national                                 Ghana             best 3 avg.
          civil service                            Tanzania          final salary
          national                                 Tanzania          best 5 avg.
          civil service                            Namibia           final salary
          civil service                            Zambia            final salary
         Source: Administrative data from respective countries.




                                                    8
Civil servant pensions based on final salary can be costly since civil services wages increase
steadily each year and substantial promotions may come at the end of a career. Typically,
civil servants see steady increases in their salaries, as salaries are often based on seniority.
Private sector salaries, by contrast, often peak earlier in the career, around the late 40s or
early 50s, and then either hold steady or decline slightly. As a result, the overpayment in
benefits relative to average contributions noted above tends to be much higher for civil
servants. Furthermore, in many cases, civil servants receive promotions and large salary
increases just before retirement, which bumps up their pensionable salaries and results in
huge costs to the pension system.

Post-retirement indexation of benefits in Sub-Saharan Africa typically increases their
generosity. International best practice suggests indexation post-retirement should be by
inflation only, with the logic that an individual’s purchasing power should be maintained from
the first day of retirement throughout retirement, however long it lasts. However, the vast
majority of countries in Sub-Saharan Africa adjust civil service pensions to reflect civil service
wage growth or on an ad-hoc basis to approximate civil service wage growth, which is
typically higher than inflation (Table 2). Some countries go further and tie post-retirement
benefits to the wages of individuals who hold the same position as the worker last held. Thus,
if an individual retired as Permanent Secretary, his pension during retirement will increase
based on the increases in wages experienced by current Permanent Secretaries. Since wages
at the upper echelons of the civil service typically rise faster than for the average civil servant,
this type of indexation can further increase costs.




                                                 9
                    Table 2: Post-retirement Pension Indexation Measures

                    Country                    National                 Civil Service
              Cabo Verde                   ad-hoc                  ad-hoc
              Kenya                                                inflation
              Namibia                                              higher than inflation
              Seychelles                   inflation
              Tanzania                     ad-hoc                  ad-hoc
              Uganda                                               wages
              Zambia                       wages                   ad-hoc
              Ghana                        wages
              Benin                                                wage
              Ethiopia                     none                    none
              Madagascar                                           ad-hoc
              Sierra Leone                 wages
              Togo                         no indexation           wages
              South Africa                                         at least 75% inflation
              Sao Tome                     inflation
          Source: Administrative data from respective countries.

Commutation of pensions further increases costs, at the same time increasing the
likelihood that civil service pensioners will face poverty at the end of their life spans.
Commutation, a common feature of colonial expatriate benefits, allows individuals to take a
portion of their pension as a lump-sum at the beginning of their retirement period. For
expatriate civil servants, this was often an important feature which allowed them to purchase
a home in their homeland after having served abroad during their working years. Technically,
individuals who choose commutation should receive the present value of the portion of their
pension that is commuted and is based on the average life expectancy at the time of
commutation. Since the commutations are typically spent right away, the pension available
for the retiree is reduced, and particularly, if the retiree lives a long time, retirees may find
themselves facing poverty.

Generous commutation factors further increase the generosity of the pension. In practice,
the conversion from a pension to a lump-sum is done using a commutation factor, which is
often fixed in legislation. The life expectancy of civil servants as a distinct group is typically
unknown. What is known across a broad range of countries is that high income individuals



                                                   10
tend to live much longer than lower income individuals, and African civil servants are typically
high income or upper middle income individuals in their respective countries. A preliminary
version of a Social Protection Policy Note, which uses data from formal sector workers in
Ghana, suggests that mortality rates during retirement may be more than 25 percent lower
than UN national averages for males and more than 60 percent lower for females in the
formal sector.3 As a result, even actuarially fair commutation factors based on national life
expectancies are likely to produce very generous commutations for civil servants. The factors
are also often written in law and do not adjust as life expectancy or other pension system
parameters change. Furthermore, some countries have a restoration feature. They consider
that an individual has “bought,” for example, 12 years of reduced pension payments in
advance by receiving a lump sum. Should the individual live longer than 12 years, the full
pension is restored. What this restoration ignores is that if the life expectancy were actuarially
fair, for every individual living beyond 12 years, there would be a person who lives fewer than
12 years, and the commutation balances the overpayment to the shorter-lived person with
the underpayment to the longer-lived person. Restoration removes that balancing
mechanism, making the pension system more expensive.

Pension benefits in Sub-Saharan Africa are paid out for more years than average. It is a well-
documented fact that life expectancy in Africa is lower than in other regions of the world.
Sub-Saharan African countries have an average life expectancy at birth of 54 years, while high
income countries have a life expectancy at birth of 79.4 years, a difference of slightly more
than 25 years. However, much of the mortality occurs at infancy and childhood: those who
reach retirement age in Sub-Saharan Africa still have a lower life expectancy than those in
high income countries, but the gap closes to less than seven years when looking at life
expectancy at age 60. While the normal retirement age in the civil service schemes in Sub-
Saharan Africa tends to be 60 for both men and women, a number of countries allow early
retirement with no or limited reductions in benefits. In Rwanda, people are allowed to retire
as early as 40, while in Botswana, Uganda, and the Gambia, early retirement is allowed as

3
    Majoka and Palacios 2014.



                                               11
early as 45. Kenya allows early retirement at 50 and Tanzania at 55. High income countries
allow full retirement only at 65 in some cases; in others 67 or 68. This creates a 28-year gap
between the earliest civil service retirement age in an African country and the oldest
minimum retirement age in a high income country. The difference in life expectancies cannot
justify such a huge gap. Even at age 60, the duration of retirement would be well above the
international best practice of 15 years in all Sub-Saharan African countries but Sierra Leone
and the Gambia, as shown in Figure 8. It should also be noted that the life expectancies shown
in Figure 8 are for the national populations, which as discussed above underestimate the life
expectancies of civil servants.

As civil service pension systems in Sub-Saharan Africa mature, costs are expected to
increase even further. When pension systems first begin, they have relatively large numbers
of contributors, but few beneficiaries. Typically, in order to qualify for a benefit, an individual
needs to have contributed or belonged to the system for a minimum number of years. Once
that minimum number of years has passed, cohorts of individuals begin to retire. However,
each of these individuals will have barely met the minimum criterion to qualify for a pension
and would be unlikely to qualify for a full pension. Only 30 or 40 years after inception of a
pension system does the first cohort of employees with a full career of contributions begin
to retire. Even when this cohort retires, the bulk of pensioners receive smaller pensions since
they only had partial contribution careers and thus partial pensions. It is only when all
pensioners are likely to be full contributors that the pension system reaches maturation and
the full costs of the pension system become evident. The time for this maturation depends
on how long it takes for a new entrant to the civil service to reach retirement and the life
expectancy after retirement. System maturation thus is expected to take 50–70 years
depending on the country. Given that many of the African countries obtained their
independence after World War II and began to set up their civil service systems after
independence, many of the countries are reaching system maturation only now.




                                                12
             Figure 8: Expected Duration of Retirement—Life Expectancy at Age 60

             Duration of Retirement, Male                                Duration of Retirement, Female
  85                                                           90
  80                                                           85
  75                                                           80
  70                                              17 17        75                                                 22
          16 1515 16 18 16 15 16 17 13 16 18 1717                                     22
  65                   11                                      70          17 17 16 18 19 18 16 17 21 14 19 18 18
     1616                                                      65 17 17 17               11
  60                                                           60
  55                                                           55
  50                                                           50
  45                                                           45
  40                                                           40




                                                                          Zambia
                                                                            Benin




                                                                    Sierra Leone
                                                                         Rwanda




                                                                            Kenya
                                                                             Togo
                                                                           Liberia

                                                                     Cabo Verde




                                                                           Ghana
                                                                        Tanzania

                                                                      Seychelles
                                                                   Mozambique




                                                                         Uganda
                                                                    Madagascar


                                                                   Guinea Bissau

                                                                       Mauritius
                                                                    The Gambia
                                                                          Nigeria

                                                                       Botswana
             Zambia
               Benin
            Rwanda




       Sierra Leone




               Kenya
                Togo




        Cabo Verde
              Liberia




      Mozambique
              Ghana
           Tanzania
            Uganda




         Seychelles
       Madagascar


      Guinea Bissau

          Mauritius
       The Gambia
             Nigeria

          Botswana




        retirement age      life expectancy at age 60                 retirement age     life expectancy at age 60


Source: Retirement age—administrative data; Life expectancy at age 60—United Nations, latest update of
        December 2012.

Prior to system maturation, even if the parameters of a pension system are actuarially
unbalanced, the system will show relatively low expenditures and relatively high revenues.
Prior to maturation, a pension system has many contributors and few beneficiaries, with the
beneficiaries it does have receiving lower benefits due to making only few years’ worth of
contributions. After maturation, both benefit levels and the number of beneficiaries increase
but revenue levels remain similar to what they were before. This switch can make the
actuarial imbalance in the pension system more obvious.

The demographic structure of many African civil service pension systems is also much older
than the general population, suggesting that contribution-based civil servant systems will
begin to show deficits long before the comparable national systems. It seems odd to speak
of the African civil services as suffering from aging, but in fact, the civil services expanded in
the 1960s and 1970s. While increases in some civil service positions, such as teachers and
police, are often tied to population growth, in other cases the size of the civil service is
affected by other factors, such as budgetary expansions and slowdowns. After an initial
ramping up of the civil service, most countries have slowed growth due to budgetary



                                                          13
pressures. With fewer young, new entrants, and aging of the existing civil servants who live
longer than the general population, the age structure of participants often looks more like
that of an aging country than of a young country, with all the fiscal problems that older
countries face in financing their pensions. Contribution revenues are declining while pension
expenditures continue to rise. For example, the demographic structure of the Public Service
Pension Fund in Tanzania is significantly older than that of the National Social Security Fund
(Figure 9). The system dependency ratethe ratio of old age beneficiaries to effective system
contributorsis more than three times as high in the civil service scheme than it is in the
national pension scheme.

    Figure 9: Demographic Structure of Public Service Pension Fund and National Social
                                Security Fund in Tanzania

                                 30%

                                 25%
        SYSTEM DEPENDENCY RATE




                                 20%

                                 15%                                                 PSPF
                                                                                     NSSF
                                 10%

                                 5%

                                 0%
                                       2016
                                       2019
                                       2022
                                       2025
                                       2028
                                       2031
                                       2034
                                       2037
                                       2040
                                       2043
                                       2046
                                       2049
                                       2052
                                       2055
                                       2058
                                       2061
                                       2064
                                       2067
                                       2070
                                       2073
                                       2076
                                       2079




     Source: Staff calculation.

For all of the reasons given above, civil service pension schemes in Sub-Saharan Africa are
already costly given the limited number of people they cover, and their costs are expected
to accelerate over time. The costliness of the civil service can largely be attributed to the
following features: (i) generosity in benefit levels per year of service; (ii) benefits based on
final salary or salary in a very limited number of years; (iii) generous commutation rules; (iv)
long duration of benefits, both because of long life expectancies and prevalence of early
retirement; (v) system maturation; and (vi) “aging” of the civil service in contributory systems.


                                               14
   2. Integration vs. Separate Civil Service Pension Systems
Most countries in Sub-Saharan Africa have separate civil service systems. Of the 44
countries reviewed, 33 have separate schemes for public sector workers. In seven countries
(Botswana, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, South Africa, Liberia, and Swaziland) public sector
workers are typically covered by some type of social pension, in some cases a means-tested
pension, in addition to their civil service pension. Eleven countries (Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Ethiopia, Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome e Principe, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, and Zambia) have an integrated pension system. In the case of Cape Verde,
integration of the national and civil service pension schemes has been done quite recently.
Eritrea and South Sudan have not yet established private sector pension schemes.

International experience reveals that fully or partially integrated pension systems are
strongly preferable to a separate public sector pension system. Only nine OECD countries
have entirely separate institutions and benefits for civil servants. Seven countries (Chile,
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Mexico, Poland, and Slovak Republic) have completely
integrated pension systems. In five countries (Denmark, the Netherlands, Finland, Iceland,
and Israel), there are institutionally separate pension systems that provide very similar
benefits. Another set of countries (Australia, Canada, Ireland, Italy, Japan, New Zealand,
Norway, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States) have fully integrated
systems with top-up arrangements for civil servants. The United Kingdom presents a rather
complicated example of a partially integrated system with a top-up scheme. It is important
to emphasize that while many developed countries still often maintain some separate
systems, there has been a notable movement toward more integration.

The optimal design for a civil service pension system may be to integrate it with the national
system. Integration typically allows better labor market mobility and tends to avoid some of
the extreme generosities in civil service systems.




                                              15
          Table 3: Structure and Design of Civil Service Pension Schemes in Africa
                                       Structure of Civil Service     Design of Civil Service Scheme
 No.             Country                   Pension Scheme            (if separate, otherwise national)
  1     Botswana                   Separate                         FDC
  2     Cabo Verde                 Integrated                       PAYG DB
  3     Guinea Bissau              Separate                         PAYG DB
  4     Kenya                      Separate                         DC
  5     Lesotho                    Separate                         FDC
  6     Namibia                    Separate                         FDB
  7     Rwanda                     Integrated                       PAYG DB
  8     Seychelles                 Integrated                       PAYG DB
  9     Tanzania                   Separate                         PAYG DB
 10     Uganda                     Separate                         PAYG DB
 11     Zambia                     Integrated                       PAYG DB
 12     Zimbabwe                   Separate                         PAYG DB
 13     Ghana                      Integrated                       Hybrid
 14     Mauritius                  Separate                         PAYG DB
 15     Angola                     Separate                         PAYG DB
 16     Benin                      Separate                         PAYG DB
 17     Cote d'Ivoire              Separate                         PAYG DB
 18     Ethiopia                   Integrated                       PAYG DB
 19     Gambia, The                Separate                         PAYG DB
 20     Liberia                    Separate                         PAYG DB
 21     Madagascar                 Separate                         PAYG DB
 22     Mozambique                 Separate                         PAYG DB
 23     Niger                      Separate                         PAYG DB
 24     Nigeria                    Integrated                       FDC
 25     Sao Tome and Principe      Integrated                       PAYG DB
 26     Senegal                    Separate                         PAYG DB
 27     Sierra Leone               Integrated                       PAYG DB
 28     South Africa               Separate                         FDB
 29     Swaziland                  Separate                         FDB
 30     Togo                       Separate                         PAYG DB
 31     Burkina Faso               Separate                         PAYG DB
 32     Burundi                    Separate                         PAYG DB
 33     Cameroon                   Separate                         PAYG DB
 34     Central African Republic   Integrated                       PAYG DB
 35     Chad                       Integrated                       PAYG DB
 36     Congo, Dem. Rep.           Separate                         PAYG DB
 37     Congo, Rep.                Separate                         PAYG DB
 38     Malawi                     Separate                         PAYG DB
 39     Mali                       Separate                         PAYG DB
 40     Mauritania                 Separate                         PAYG DB
 41     Guinea                     Separate                         PAYG DB
 42     South Sudan                Separate                         PAYG DB
 43     Sudan                      Separate                         PAYG DB
 44     Eritrea                    Separate
Source: Administrative data from respective countries.



                                                   16
Three advantages of a separate, generous civil service pension system are often cited: (i) a
generous pension package back loading the overall compensation package induces people
to remain in the civil service and discourages corrupt practices; (ii) a mandatory retirement
age for civil service workers can accompany the pension plan; and (iii) a generous pension
package attracts individuals to civil service. The rationale for the first is that if the
compensation package is back loaded, and a civil servant is found guilty of corruption, he or
she has more to lose than if the compensation package were structured differently. On the
second point, civil servants are more likely to remain with the same employer throughout
their careers: salary increases are almost always tied to tenure in the job, since productivity
in the public sector is hard to measure. Civil servants also are more likely to want to continue
working because of non-salary benefits they would lose upon retirement. Mandatory
retirement ages, which are rarely appropriate in private sector pension schemes, might have
a place in public employment pension schemes. In countries without mandatory retirement,
there are examples of 80-year-old civil servants coming to work and sleeping most of the day
just to collect a paycheck. The third reason for separate systems in high income countries
with vibrant private sectors is that the public sector often pays lower salaries than the private
sector. It uses generous benefits as a mechanism to continue to attract high quality workers,
mostly because it is easier for politicians to promise higher future benefits than to pay higher
salaries today. Lower-income countries adopted the pension and compensation structures of
higher income countries, but in many of these countries, the public sector is the most
lucrative form of employment. As a result, these countries provide an unnecessary incentive,
since civil service employment typically pays both higher wages and higher benefits than the
private sector.

The advantages of a unified national system typically far outweigh the advantages of a
separate system in most countries, by removing impediments to labor mobility. Many types
of work are not specific to the public sector; clerical work and administrative tasks are often
similar in both the private and public sectors. 4 Setting up a separate pension system for public

4
    See Sluchynskyy 2015 for a detailed analysis of pension system administrative costs.



                                                        17
sector workers discourages workers from pursuing opportunities across sectors because
eligibility for benefits are usually dependent on working or contributing for a minimum
number of years to the pension system, with benefits dependent on how long a worker
contributes. Careers spent in different pension systems invariably end up with workers losing
some of the benefit they would otherwise have been entitled to. In some larger countries,
where municipal or state workers have their own pension systems separate from federal
workers, the separate pension systems even discourage teachers and health workers from
moving from one state or city to another. These issues are even more important for
developing economies than for developed ones as the formal sector is still evolving, with new
job opportunities still developing and with new workers moving to urban areas. A unified
national system allows workers to move to the best job opportunities without fears of losing
pension rights. 5 It also gives the public sector more flexibility to downsize or right size its
workforce, given that workers have more opportunities for other types of employment.

Various limitations might prevent public and private systems from being unified in the short
and medium term: (i) There may not be a viable private sector pension system for public
sector employees to join; (ii) the private sector system might also be overly generous, or
there might be a tendency to apply the more generous public sector provisions to the
private sector as well; (iii) the transition to a unified system may require unavailable fiscal
resources; (iv) policymakers may be reluctant to combine systems running financial
surpluses with those running deficits; 6 and (v) it may be difficult to reconcile any redundant
administrative capacity. In most countries, civil servants are the first group to be covered by
a pension system. This is partly because civil service careers tend to be stable and continuous,
making benefit administration easier than in the private sector, where compiling
contributions from various employers and tracking employees as they change jobs can be
more challenging. As a result, there may be no comprehensive private pension system.
Another problem is that the private sector system might not offer comparable benefits,


5
    See Palacios and Whitehouse 2006.
6
    See Palacios forthcoming.



                                              18
resulting in pressure to bring it up to the level of the civil pension scheme. Alternatively, the
private scheme might also offer generous benefits, which could mean increased future
liabilities if the civil sector is integrated with it. Transitioning from one system to another
might result in unaffordable fiscal costs, particularly if the private sector system has lower
contribution rates or is set up as a savings system. If the private sector system is newer with
fewer beneficiaries, it may be reluctant to take on a public sector system that is already
running deficits; or a public system with surpluses might be reluctant to join a private sector
system with deficits. The administrators of each of several pension funds may also have
concerns about whether unification will result in redundancy of jobs.

As a result, the policymaker is often tasked with reforming the civil service pension system
separately from the national system. In many cases, policymakers will undertake reforms in
the civil service pension system apart from the national system. However, it is always
worthwhile looking at what exists for private sector workers and trying to see what can be
harmonized between the two. This may improve some of the labor mobility issues and help
set the stage for further integration in the future.

As swelling pension costs increase pressures on national fiscal accounts (particularly in civil
service pension schemes), some Sub-Saharan countries have undertaken reforms aimed at
containing costs and improving the overall efficiency of the social insurance sector. In some
cases, the reforms have involved a conversion from a PAYG DB scheme to a funded DC
scheme (Lesotho). Other countries have enacted pension reforms aimed at integrating
national and civil service schemes (as Cabo Verde has done recently) without changing the
financing mechanism or design of the pension system. Nigeria accomplished one of the most
ambitious and radical pension reforms in the region. The Pension Reform Act of 2004 did
away with the PAYG DB system for public sector workers and established a fully-funded
defined contribution (FDC) integrated pension system for public and private sector workers
alike (Box 1). Namibia (Government Institutions Pension Fund—GIPF) and South Africa
(Government Employees Pension Fund—GEPF) provide examples of well-managed funded
DB schemes.


                                               19
                         Box 1: The Nigerian Pension Reform Experience
Prior to 2004 reform, the Nigerian pension sector was characterized by extensive fragmentation
and heterogeneity of eligibility conditions, financing mechanisms and benefit levels between the
various public and private sector pension programs. In addition, the pension system had
accumulated large-scale pension arrears in the public sector and had consistently failed to pay out
promised pensions.
The first national pension scheme in Nigeria was established after the country gained independence
in the early 1960s. It was developed out of the provident fund scheme that had catered to colonial
civil service: a severance payment scheme that paid a lump sum on retirement. In 1994, the
National Social Insurance Trust Fund (NASTF) was created—the first in-country pension scheme
that paid out annuities. NASTIF extended pension coverage only to private sector workers. On the
other hand, the NASTIF scheme was a PAYG scheme financed from employee and employer
contributions.
Numerous parallel civil service schemes also served different branches of the public sector. The
pension schemes for federal, state and local civil servants were non-contributory and unfunded.
The differences between public and private sector pension schemes extended far beyond the
financing mechanisms. Public sector pensions could be obtained earlier than the standard
retirement age if a certain number of years of service were met; they were also far more generous
than private sector pensions. Not surprisingly, pension spending for retired public sector workers
greatly exceeded pension spending for private sector retirees.
As a result of the different eligibility conditions and generosity levels between private and public
sector pension system, among numerous other problems, Nigeria faced an inequitable pension
sector and rapidly rising civil service pension costs. The Pension Reform Act of 2004 ushered in a
mandatory funded contributory pension scheme (FDC) for employees in the public and private
sectors, a reform largely regarded as the most radical reform initiative in the region to date. Key
elements of the reform included:
 • An Individual Retirement Savings Account (RSA), which every employee was to open and
   maintain in his/her name with any pension fund administrator of his choice (total contribution
   rate is 18 percent, 10 percent for employers and 8 percent for employees);
 • Licensed Pension Fund Administrators (PFAs) were to open retirement savings accounts for
   employees, invest and manage the funds in fixed income securities and other instruments as
   may be determined by the Regulatory Agency, the National Pension Commission (NPC);
 • Pension Assets Custodians (PACs) were licensed to warehouse pension fund assets;
 • A Retirement Benefits Bond Redemption Fund, maintained by the Central Bank of Nigeria,
   covers the gap created by the switch from the DB scheme to a DC funded system. The Federal
   government credited the Fund with an amount equal to 5 percent of the total monthly wage
   bill of federal workers. The Fund also settled the pension debt accrued under the old scheme;
 • The National Pension Commission (NPC) was introduced as the regulatory body that oversees
   the new contributory scheme.
                                                                                        (Continued)




                                                20
                         Box 1: The Nigerian Pension Reform Experience (Continued)
    The pension industry witnessed 1.76 percent growth in the scheme membership during the second
    quarter of 2016, increasing from 6,581,031 contributors at the end of the preceding quarter to
    6,696,793. The expansion in industry membership was solely driven by the RSA Scheme.
    Membership in the Closed Pension Fund Administration Scheme (CPFA) experienced negative
    growth, while membership of the Approved Existing Scheme (AES) remained unchanged.
    The private sector continued to lead in RSA membership, with 52.13 percent (3,457,029) of total
    RSA registrations as at the reporting period. The sector also witnessed a higher growth of 2.17
    percent (73,573) than the public sector. This can be attributed to an increased level of compliance
    by the private sector as a result of the various steps taken by the Commission to improve
    compliance and coverage, as well as marketing strategies of the PFAs.
    Although this appears to be a positive development in Nigeria’s pension sector, detailed evaluation
    of the performance of pension funds is not possible because of a lack of information on investment
    returns and generally limited public availability of data. In addition, the pension sector in Nigeria
    continues to operate in a largely informal 7 labor market environment, which poses significant
    implications for extending coverage to workers who fall outside the formal labor market. Nigeria
    also continues to face challenges related to governance and transparency, which can negatively
    affect the performance of the pension system.
    The 2014 Pension Reform Act (PRA), signed into law on July 1, replaces the social security pension
    system established in 2004 with a new pension system modeled on the current one. Some of the
    key changes to the current system include closure of stand-alone pension plans (provided in lieu of
    participation in the social security plan) to new members and an increase in contribution rates
    (previously contribution rates were set at 15 percent, evenly split between employer and
    employee). In addition, small employers (fewer than three employees) and the self-employed are
    now permitted to participate in the pension system on a voluntary basis.
    Source: Watson 2014; Nigeria National Pension Commission 2016.




       3. Mechanics of Civil Service Pension Reform

Since civil service pension reform is often undertaken as a self-standing reform, it is
important to understand the similarities and differences between it and national system
reform.

While the mechanics of civil service pension reform may mimic the mechanics of national
pension reform, key differences arise from the fact that the government is the employer,
the administrator of the pension fund, and the guarantor of last resort of the pension


7
    For more the labor market situation in Africa, see Filmer & Fox 2014.



                                                        21
system. The many different roles that the government plays in a civil service pension system
lead to conflicting objectives and can sometimes lead to misguided reform attempts.

Countries are often advised to move away from simple civil service pension systems where
the government pays pensioners directly from the budget, and instead to set up a separate
pension fund to which the workers and government as employer make contributions.
National systems typically collect contributions from employers and their employees and
hold them in a pension fund, paying benefits from this pension fund as the employee reaches
retirement age. The pension fund is typically administered by government employees. Should
the fund not have sufficient reserves to pay pensions, the government is legally obliged to
pay benefits from general government revenues. In theory, the advantages are that the
employee has a third party, the pension fund, making sure that the employer pays
contributions on time, a third party managing the reserves and holding them so even if the
employer goes bankrupt the funds will be there, and a fourth party, namely the government,
guaranteeing that the legally defined benefits will be paid. And given that the government
has an interest in limiting the amount of deficits it has to pay, it has some interest in making
sure that the employers pay the contributions and the pension fund manages the reserves
judicially. In practice, not all pension funds actually realize these advantages.

When the government is also the employer, a separate pension fund may provide little
additional protection for the worker. If the government is liable for pension payments when
a worker retires, it really does not matter to the worker whether the government as employer
makes contributions on a regular basis. If the government finds itself cash-strapped, it may
be sensible to make only the contributions necessary to pay today’s pensions while
recognizing that there will be additional payments necessary in the future. It makes very little
sense for the government to borrow in the market in order to make contributions to the
pension fund that will accumulate there as reserves. In addition, pension fund reserves might
have become an additional asset of the government under the simple system. Whether the
government accumulates reserves today or “invests” the reserves in politically important
priorities becomes a question of whether the government prefers to pay today or pay in the


                                               22
future. As might be imagined, governments frequently make the choice of paying in the
future by running arrears to the civil servant pension fund or borrowing from the fund or
having the fund “invest” in the government’s political priorities. Political investment of
reserves can also take place in national pension funds, but typically the government needs to
be more accountable to the employees and employers who are providing the financing than
when the government is the prime financier.

Creating a pension fund results in a new interest group, the pension fund administration,
whose interests may not align with those of the workers or of the government as employer
or as payer of last resort. The pension fund administration has separate interests from the
government. Pension fund administrators gain political and economic clout by accumulating
reserves. These reserves can be invested in the economy, with the pension fund
administrator frequently having a lot of leeway in where and how they are invested. Control
of these off-budget surpluses gives the pension fund administration both economic and
political clout. As a result, pension fund administrations often request that contribution rates
be raised, even if they are to sit in a surplus fund, or that deficit-running pension funds be
closed, with the deficits being passed to the government, and a new pension fund opened
that can accumulate reserves. The finance and labor ministries, which often are heavily
involved in supervising pension funds in older, deficit-laden countries, may be less diligent in
supervising pension funds that are running surpluses, as they are not perceived as causing
problems for the Treasury. Furthermore, pension fund administrations sometimes spend
heavily on administrative costs by investing in buildings and cars as well as perks for their own
staff, none of which are in the best interests of the workers or the government.




                                               23
                Figure 10: Administrative Costs as a Share of Contribution Revenue 8

                  0.6
                  0.5
                  0.4
                  0.3
                  0.2
                  0.1
                    0




                                              National        Civil Service


         Source: Administrative data for each respective country and pension scheme; Sluchynskyy 2015.

The only benefit of maintaining an actual pension fund for civil servants is the increased
cost transparency of hiring additional civil servants. If the government as employer needs
to make contributions to a pension fund, hiring an additional civil servant will clearly cost
more than if the initial cost is only salary with the promise of a pension sometime in the
future. The more actuarially balanced the pension system is, with expected contribution
revenue equal to expected pension expenditures, the more transparency is added to civil
service hiring decisions. Actuarially balanced schemes can also encourage policymakers to
think twice before randomly increasing benefits, as additional costs will be borne by the
budget immediately. However, most pension schemes are not actuarially balanced, reducing
this advantage of maintaining a separate pension fund. Additional costs will also be borne
immediately by the budget in the case of funded DB schemes, such as those in South Africa
and Namibia. This is also the case in the context of fully funded DC schemes (Botswana and
Nigeria).




8
    See Sluchynskyy 2015 for more on administrative costs.



                                                         24
Even simple reforms such as raising contribution rates have different implications for
national systems and civil service systems. In a national system, raising contribution rates
typically brings in additional revenue as both employees and employers contribute higher
percentages of salary to the pension system. Assuming that benefits are kept the same,
raising contribution revenue typically reduces the deficits that the government needs to
finance. If contribution rates are already quite high, raising rates may induce workers and
employers to evade the system, resulting in little additional revenue; but typically it either
increases surpluses or reduces deficits. In a civil service system, by contrast, raising employer
contribution rates essentially raises government costs. Whether the government faces
additional deficits or higher contribution costs is immaterial from its perspective. Even the
ability to raise revenue by raising employee contribution rates is often compromised by the
strength of civil service unions that object to a decline in net salaries. As a result, governments
often end up raising wages of civil servants to compensate for the increased contributions,
which completely counterbalances the positive impact of higher contributions on the overall
government balance. So while the pension fund balance improves, the overall government
fiscal picture might not. This is one of the many cases where the interests of the pension fund
manager in maintaining surpluses might diverge from the interests of the government, which
is interested in overall fiscal sustainability. In Uganda, for example, the civil service pension
reform proposal included a one-time compensational pay raise in the form of a one-time 5
percent wage growth adjustment on top of the normal pay raise to compensate workers for
a higher contribution rate. On the other hand, if the increased costs can be imposed primarily
on employees without an accompanying wage increase, there might be some improvement
in the fiscal picture because, unlike participants in national systems, civil servants are less
able to evade contributions. In some cases, governments begin to hire workers as contractors
rather than civil servants to avoid the higher cost of the civil servant employee.

Raising the contribution rate for a system that is in surplus can do more harm than good. A
rising contribution rate makes even less sense in a system that is accumulating reserves,
because it can result in the government borrowing funds to finance the increased



                                                25
contributions and increased wages, simply to generate a larger surplus in the pension fund.
To be sure, while additional government costs contribute to a tighter fiscal constraint today,
they potentially relieve future costs. But for those future savings to materialize, the savings
need to be invested in a way that generates fairly high returns. Otherwise the government
faces higher costs today and higher costs tomorrow. This is even truer if the government has
to borrow the fiscal resources to pay for the increased contributions today. If the borrowed
funds are just going to accumulate in a reserve fund, the fund has to earn a higher rate of
return than the cost to the government of borrowing. The benefit of the higher contribution
rates accumulating in a fund is that each generation is ostensibly paying for its own pensions.
But if the reserves do not generate reasonably high returns, contributions for future workers
or their taxes will have to increase to pay future pensions anyway.

Increasing the retirement age, which benefits national pension systems, does not
necessarily save money in civil service pension systems. In a private sector system, raising
the retirement age increases the number of contributors, if the contributors choose to
continue working, and thus increases the amount of revenue going into the pension system.
At the very least, it reduces the number of beneficiaries, decreasing expenditures, thus
bringing the pension system closer to balance. In a civil service system, the employee is
unlikely to leave employment or move to private sector employment. Keeping the civil
servant employed for more years costs the government more in wages. Given that civil
service wage scales are typically tightly linked to seniority, this is an increase in the number
of the most highly paid employees, resulting in a substantial increase in the wage bill. On the
pension side, there is a reduction in the number of pension beneficiaries, but note that
because of the increased seniority and the higher wages, the pension when it does get paid
will be higher. Since civil service pensions are more often linked to last salary then private
sector pensions, the higher wages before retirement will result in much higher pensions
(higher both because of the greater years of service and because of the higher wage on which
they are based) paid for fewer years. From the perspective of the pension fund, if it exists,
this is likely to be deficit-reducing. But from the overall Government’s perspective, it is not



                                              26
clear. The Government, as a whole will have to pay the worker a high wage and employer
contributions on that wage instead of paying a pension that might have been only 50 percent
of the previous lower wage. Depending on a number of factors, including the worker’s
productivity, the steepness of the seniority based wage profile, the level of employer
contributions, the benefit generosity in the pension system, and the tax treatment of
pensions and wages, the Government, as a whole, may be better off letting the worker retire
at a younger age, as long as it is not ridiculously young.

Reforms that result in lower benefits affect both private sector pension systems and civil
service pension systems positively. Reforms like reducing the indexation of the pension
system to inflation, increasing the averaging period of the pensionable wage base, and
lowering the accrual rate will all have positive impacts on the private sector system, civil
service pension systems, the pension fund finances, and the overall government fiscal
balance.

Pension funds may urge that one pension system and a new, reformed pension system
opened. As noted above, no matter how generous or actuarially unbalanced a pension
scheme may be, in the beginning it typically generates surpluses. As the pension system
matures, these surpluses shrink and can turn into deficits, particularly if the scheme is too
generous. Since pension fund administrators do not like to oversee a deficit-laden scheme,
they often propose closing the old scheme, passing the liabilities on to the government and
opening a new, reformed scheme with more fiscally sustainable parameters. They argue that
they should not contaminate the new, more actuarially fair scheme with the liabilities of the
old scheme. While this might make sense from the pension fund’s perspective, it makes little
sense for the government, which would inherit the liabilities of the old scheme while the
contributions from new contributors generate surpluses for the pension fund. Even if the new
pension scheme starts out actuarially balanced, the same political pressures that made the
old system more generous over time are likely to affect the new scheme, and once it faces
maturity, it too is likely to face deficits. In some countries, this game has been played
repeatedly, with the liabilities of as many as four successive pension schemes passed to the


                                               27
government as new pension schemes are begun. Unless contributions from current workers
are invested in individual, portable accounts, they should always be used to pay benefits to
the retired, disabled, and survivors before general government resources are tapped. Reform
can still take place, with successive cohorts of civil servants facing different accrual rates or
different averaging periods for their pensionable wage base. Reform in most cases does not
require that the current system be closed and a new one opened.

The only reform that might require closing the current pension system is a move from a
defined benefit system to a fully funded, defined contribution system. 9 Most systems
operate on the basis of a defined benefit system, in which contributions from current workers
are taken in by the government or the pension fund in return for benefits defined as a
proportion of salary per year of service. At the end of the day, if the pension fund does not
have sufficient funding to pay the promise, the government provides the resources. In a fully
funded, defined contribution system, by contrast, the individual’s contributions are invested
and are owned by the individual, rather than the government or pension fund. Pensions are
paid from the amount of money in an individual’s account at retirement, from contributions
and the interest earned on those contributions. The government typically has no liability to
the pensioner, as the pensioner receives only what is in the account. If a pension system
transitions completely from a defined benefit system to a fully funded, defined contribution
system, the liabilities from the old defined benefit system are indeed passed on to the
government. The government takes those liabilities now in return for avoiding future
contingent liabilities for workers in the new system. In the case of transition to a mixed
system, the Government takes on part of the liabilities of the old system while some continue
to be financed by the portion of the contribution going to the defined benefit.




9
    Examples include Kenya and Nigeria.


                                               28
   4. Conclusions

Civil service pension reform clearly needs to be on the agenda in Sub-Saharan African
countries, as its costs are beginning to squeeze out other budget expenditures. Ideally
countries want to think about integrating their civil service pension systems with their
national pension systems to promote a unified and flexible labor market. However, in many
cases the national systems are not developed or comprehensive enough to incorporate the
civil service. In these cases, the civil service pension reform may need to be undertaken as a
self-standing reform.

When undertaking civil service reform separately from the national system, practitioners
need to focus on the overall impact on the government, not on the finances of the pension
fund. In national system reforms, almost anything that improves the finances of the pension
fund improves the finances of the government, since the government is responsible for
financing deficits of the pension fund. In integrated systems, even though civil servants are
included it is still true that whatever is good for the pension fund finances improves
government finances, since there are typically more private sector workers than civil
servants. However, in civil servant systems, improving a pension fund’s finances may have
net negative impacts on overall government finances. For example, raising contribution rates
will impose costs on the government as employer; and raising the retirement age can force a
government to continue paying high salaries to less productive workers  and to pay these
workers even higher benefits when they retire, which can also be negative for government
budgets.

Civil service pension funds also may conflict with government priorities as they attempt to
maintain actuarial balance. One typical method for improving actuarial balance is to declare
a pension system closed, pass its liabilities to the government, and start fresh with new
contributions and no old liabilities. While this might improve the finances of the pension fund,
it makes government finances much worse and should be avoided at all costs. In fact, it calls
into question the rationale for having a separate civil service pension fund. It would be better



                                              29
for the government to have contributions flow into the Treasury with pensions paid directly
from the Treasury.

Reforms to civil service systems are also tricky because they require civil servants to enact
reforms that might not be in their own personal interest. Given that most civil service
pension schemes are relatively generous, reforms will likely require some reduction in
benefits. From a political economy standpoint, civil servants are being asked to propose,
lobby for, and implement reforms that will reduce the generosity of their own benefits. Even
the members of parliament who have to vote for the reforms are often covered by the
schemes. Too often, the temptation is to apply reform parameters only to new entrants, with
the result that savings accrued under these reforms will be realized in the far distant future,
long after problems become acute.

Despite these challenges, civil service pension reform is too important to be postponed.




                                              30
References

Dorfman, M. 2015. "Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa," Social Protection & Labor
       Discussion Paper No. 1503, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Filmer, D., and L. Fox. 2014. Youth Employment in Sub-Saharan Africa. A copublication of the
       Agence Francaise de Developpement and the World Bank. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. "World Economic Outlook Database," October,
       IMF, Washington, DC.

Majoke, Z, and R. Palacios. 2014. “Assessing Mortality Differentials: The Case of Pension Fund
       Members in Ghana”, August (preliminary).

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2015. Pensions at a
       Glance 2015: OECD and G20 indicatord. OECD: Paris.

Palacios, R. Forthcoming. "Ethiopia’s Pension System: Background, Current Status and
       Prospects for Future Expansion," working paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

PenCom      (Nigeria     National   Pension        Commission).   2016.    Retrieved     from
       http://www.pencom.gov.ng/index.php.

Sluchynskyy, O. 2015. "Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures
       of Mandatory Social Security Programs," Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper
       No. 1501, World Bank, Washington, DC.

United Nations. 2015. World Population Prospects. The 2015 Division. Key Findings & Advance
       Tables. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. New York:
       United Nations.

Palacios, R., and E. Whitehouse. 2006. "Civil-service Pension Schemes Around the World,"
       Social Protection and Discussion Paper No. 0602, World Bank, Washington, DC.


                                              31
WillisTowersWatson. 2014. "Nigeria: Changes in 2014 Pension Reform Act Increase Need for
       Preparation and Communication," Retrieved from WillisTowersWatson Global News
       Briefs, August 27.

World Bank. 2014. World Bank Workshop on Coherent Pension Policy in Africa, Accra, Ghana,
       December.

World Bank. 2016. World Development Indicators, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Zviniene, A., and M. Guven. 2015. "Cabo Verde: Long Term Projections of the Pension
       System," Working paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                           32
Annex

    A. Civil Service Pension Scheme Contribution Rates (% Wage)

 40%
 35%
 30%
 25%
 20%
 15%
 10%
  5%
  0%
                              Central African Republic




                                                                                                                                                          Mauritania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Civil Service Average
                                                                                                                                               Ethiopia




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Madagascar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                                                              Zambia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kenya




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Senegal


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              National Average
                                                                             Lestho
                                                                                      Sao Tome and Principe




                                                                                                                                                                               Botswana


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Benin
        Seychelles
                     Rwanda




                                                                                                                                                                       Ghana


                                                                                                                                                                                          Tanzania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Guinea Bissau



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Namibia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Niger




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Africa
                                                                Cabo Verde




                                                                                                                       South Sudan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mali




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Togo
                                                         Chad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Swaziland
                                                                                                                                     Eritrea




                                                                                                                                                                Employer                             Employee


Source: Administrative Data for Respective Countries.

    B. Financing Mechanisms of Civil Service Pension Schemes
       Country                                                                                                            Civil Service Scheme Contribution/Financing Mechanism
                                                                                                                          Employer            Employee           Total
       Uganda                                                                                                                                                    budget
       Zimbabwe                                                                                                           5%-7%               0                  5%-7%
       Mauritius                                                                                                          budget              6%
       Angola                                                                                                             Budget              7%
       Burundi                                                                                                            Budget
       Cameroon                                                                                                           Budget              10%
       Congo, Dem. Rep.                                                                                                   Budget
       Gambia, The                                                                                                        Budget
       Malawi                                                                                                             Budget
       Mozambique                                                                                                         Budget              7%
       Liberia                                                                                                            Budget
    Source: Administrative Data for Respective Countries.




                                                                                                                                                                                33
C. Evolution of Civil Service Pension Expenditures in Kenya


                   30.00

                   25.00

                   20.00
   KSHS, Billion



                   15.00

                   10.00

                    5.00

                      -




   Source: World Bank Workshop on Coherent Pension Policy in Africa, Accra Ghana,
           December 2014.




                                         34
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2014-2016

No.    Title

1613   Issues for Civil Service Pension Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Anita M. Schwarz and Miglena Abels, November 2016

1612   How to Target Households in Adaptive Social Protection Systems? Relative Efficiency of Proxy
       Means Test and Household Economy Analysis in Niger
       by Pascale Schnitzer, October 2016

1611   Pensions for Public-Sector Employees: Lessons from OECD Countries’ Experience
       by Edward Whitehouse, October 2016

1610   Pension Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa: Brief Review of Design Parameters and Key Performance
       Indicators
       by Miglena Abels and Melis U. Guven, October 2016

1609   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 2 – Annexes
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1608   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 1 – Report
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1607   Benefits and Costs of Social Pensions in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Melis U. Guven and Phillippe G. Leite, June 2016

1606   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Germany-
       Turkey Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçacı Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1605   Do Bilateral Social Security Agreements Deliver on the Portability of Pensions and Health Care
       Benefits? A Summary Policy Paper on Four Migration Corridors Between EU and Non-EU Member
       States
       by Robert Holzmann, May 2016

1604   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the France-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Florence Legro and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1603   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Belgium-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Jacques Wels and Pamela Dale, May 2016
1602   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Austria-Turkey
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçaci Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1601   The Greek Pension Reform Strategy 2010-2016
       by Georgios Symeonidis, July 2016

1507   Integrating Disaster Response and Climate Resilience in Social Protection Programs in the Pacific
       Island Countries
       by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko, September 2015

1506   Effectiveness of Targeting Mechanisms Utilized in Social Protection Programs in Bolivia
       by Ignacio Apella and Gastón Blanco, September 2015

1505   Kyrgyz Republic: Social Sectors at a Glance
       by João Pedro Azevedo, Paula Calvo, Minh Nguyen and Josefina Posadas, August 2015

1504   Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices with Safety Nets in Urban Areas
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2015

1503   Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Mark Dorfman, July 2015

1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015

1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014
1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012

1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012

1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011

1413   Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013

1412   Mali Social Safety Nets
       by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411   Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
       by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410   Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
       by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409   Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
       by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408   Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
       Protection Expenditures
       by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407   Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
       by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011

1406   Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
       by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013
1405        Botswana Social Protection
            by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
            and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013

1404        Cameroon Social Safety Nets
            by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403        Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402        Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
            Women
            by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014

1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract

The paper summarizes the main factors behind the projected increase civil service pension costs
in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). It discusses the benefits and potential downsides to unifying civil
service and national pension systems, drawing on regional and international best practices and
experience. The paper pays special consideration to the differences between civil and national
pension reform, emphasizing the unique challenges in civil service pension reform posed by
the fact that the government is the employer, the administrator of the pension fund, and the
guarantor of last resort of the pension system. Findings in the report strongly suggest that civil
service pension reform needs to be on the agenda in SSA countries, as its costs are beginning to
crowd out other budget expenditures. Among other conclusions and recommendations, the report
also urges practitioners to focus on the overall impact on government finances and not on the
finances of the pension fund when undertaking civil service pension reform separately from the
national system. The paper is intended to serve as a resource in civil service pension reform efforts
in the region.




About this series

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.

                                  © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
