Landscape of Inclusive Business
Models of Healthcare in India
Business Model Innovations
Contact
Pallavi Shrivastava | pshrivastava1@ifc.org
Tanu Chhabra Bahl | TBahl@ifc.org


This report titled ‘Landscape of Inclusive Business Models of Healthcare in India’ has been written for the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) and Wadhwani Initiative for Sustainable Healthcare (WISH) by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India.

Disclaimer
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, creates opportunity for people to escape poverty and improve their lives. We
foster sustainable economic growth in developing countries by supporting private sector development, mobilizing private
capital, and providing advisory and risk mitigation services to businesses and governments. This report was commissioned
by IFC through its Inclusive Business Models Group, which aims to create transformational solutions to critical development
challenges.
The conclusions and judgments contained in this report should not be attributed to, and do not necessarily represent the
views of, IFC or its Board of Directors or the World Bank or its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. IFC
and the World Bank do not guarantee the accuracy of the data in this publication and accept no responsibility for any
consequences of their use.
Foreword

                 Improvement in delivery of affordable quality healthcare is a clear
                 development challenge to address the needs of the base of the
                 pyramid (BoP) population. Over the last few years, there has been an
                 emergence of innovative self-sustainable, ‘inclusive business models’
                 and India is emerging as the hub of such innovations which cater to
                 the healthcare needs at the BoP. Some of these are working directly
                 with the BoP segment whereas others are working in partnership
                 with Governments and/or part of Government healthcare schemes to
maximize reach and impact.

Whereas these innovative models have shown great potential, only a few have gone to
scale and thereby maximized impact. Hence, it is important to view the eco-system in
which they operate including regulatory issues, value chains of which they are a part,
support services, as well as enterprise-level issues. This would enable stakeholders to
gauge what is needed and examine what role they can play to improve the ecosystem. In
addition, knowledge of the various healthcare innovations is also scattered. A systematic
information base and understanding of health inclusive businesses, their challenges and
success drivers, is a felt need for this sector.

The World Bank Group places great importance on healthcare and In India the joint World
Bank-IFC Inclusive Business program is focused on catalyzing the growth of inclusive
business to increase and improve access to healthcare services for the under-served.
The Wadhwani Initiative for Sustainable Healthcare (WISH Foundation) is focused on
promoting universal access to healthcare for the BoP population.

IFC and WISH have partnered to launch this study on ‘Landscape of Inclusive Business
Models in Healthcare in India’. This report is accompanied by a database of 85 health
inclusive businesses which will be updated by WISH periodically and covers a range of
sub-sectors. The report presents issues relating to barriers for scaling at different levels
for a health Enterprise. It provides suggestions on key drivers for success and also the
challenges to be overcome. Finally, it informs the ecosystem enablers on how they can
facilitate by providing support services including funding.

We hope that the study will provide information and analyses to facilitate a dialogue
on developing an enabling ecosystem which supports scale and sustainability of these
innovative and inclusive business models.




Anil Sinha
Regional Head Inclusive Business, South Asia
World Bank Group



                                                                                               3
    Acknowledgements
    This report is a product of collaboration between International Finance Corporation (World Bank Group)
    and Wadhwani Initiative for Sustainable Healthcare (WISH). It aims to inform the healthcare ecosystem of
    the opportunities in the health inclusive business space and suggestions for catalyzing growth of innovative
    business models in the health sector.

    The study was led by the IFC South Asia Inclusive Business Program team Pallavi Shrivastava,
    Nimarta Chugh and Yuvraj Ahuja. The research and documentation was conducted by Monitor-Deloitte.

    IFC would like to thank the stakeholders interviewed and enterprises featured in the report for
    openly sharing their insights and experiences, and to the WISH team (Mr. Sunil Wadhwani and
    Mr. Soumitro Ghosh) for their invaluable partnership in preparation of this report.

    The team is also grateful to colleagues from across the World Bank Group: Mr. Matthew Eliot,
    Ms. Ishira Mehta, Mr. Rahul Pandey, Ms. Carolyn Florey and Mr. Aneesh Jain for their invaluable inputs at
    various stages.

    Our special thanks to Mr. Anil Sinha, Regional Head of Inclusive Business, for his vision, guidance and
    overall leadership.




4
Contents

            List of Abbreviations                                              7

            Operational Definitions                                            8

            Executive Summary                                                  9

Chapter 1   Introduction                                                       17

            Background                                                         18

            Need and Objectives of the Study                                   18

            Approach and Methodology                                           19

Chapter 2   Healthcare Context in India                                        21

            Introduction                                                       22

            Healthcare Statistics                                              22

            Healthcare Expenditure and Insurance Coverage                      24

            Industry size, Growth and Structure                                25

            Healthcare Delivery                                                25

            Medical Devices and Technologies                                   26

            Key Gaps in Healthcare Provision                                   27

            Trends in Healthcare                                               29

            Landscape of Healthcare Inclusive Business Models (IBMs)
Chapter 3                                                                      33
            in India

            Introduction                                                       34

            Which Healtcare Needs and Diseases do IBMs Focus on?               34

            How old are the IBMs? Organizational Stage of Development          38

            Where are the IBMs? Geographical Distribution of Healthcare IBMs   39

            What Population Segments do IBMs Focus on                          42

            How do IBMs Raise Funds                                            43




                                                                                    5
    Contents

    Chapter 4       Healthcare Inclusive Business Models (IBMs)
                                                                                           47
                    —Models and Challenges Faced

                    Model 1: Primary Care Delivery and Outreach                            51

                    Model 2: Secondary and Tertiary Care Hospitals                         59

                    Model 3: Standalone Devices and Consumables                            67

                    Model 4: Networked Devices and Technologies                            74

    Chapter 5       Moving into Action
                                                                                           81
                    —Enabling Success, Overcoming Challenges

                    How Can Ecosystem Enablers Help Inclusive Business Modelss (IBMs)?     82


                    Impact Investors                                                       82


                    Donors, Foundations, and Development Agencies                          83


                    Governments                                                            84


                    Networks, Incubators, and Accelerators                                 85


                    How Can Inclusive Business Models (IBMs) Leverage Facilitation?        86



                   ANNEXURES                                                               87

    Annexure I     Approach and Methodology for the Study                                  88


    Annexure II    List of Inclusive Business Models (IBMs) Included in Primary Research   89


    Annexure III   List of Stakeholders Interviewed                                        90




6
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ASHA     Accredited social health activist
B2B      Business to business
B2C      Business to consumer
BoP      Bottom of the pyramid
CGHS     Central Government Health Scheme
CHC      Community health center
CHW      Community health worker
COPD     Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
DFID     Department for International Development
ECG      Electrocardiogram
HER      Electronic health records
GDP      Gross domestic product
GIAN     Grassroots Innovations Augmentation Network
GNM      General nurse midwives
HDI      Human development indicators
HMIS     Health management information system
HNI      High net-worth individuals
HRH      Human resources for health
IBM      Inclusive business model
IDF      International Diabetes Federation
IFC      International Finance Corporation
IMR      Infant mortality rate
IBM      Inclusive Business Models
MIM      Monitor inclusive markets
MMR      Maternal mortality ratio
MNC      Multi-national corporations
NCD      Non-communicable diseases
NGO      Nongovernmental organization
NHM      National Health Mission
NIPI     Norway India Partnership Initiative
O&M      Operation and management
PE       Private equity
PHC      Primary health center
PPP      Public-private partnership
RCH      Reproductive and child health
RSBY     Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana
TB       Tuberculosis
USAID    United States Agency for International Development 
VCF      Venture capital fund
WHIMS    Wireless health incident monitoring system


                                                               7
    OPERATIONAL DEFINITIONS
         Sl.No.               Term                                                Operational Definition

                                                  Population earning below $3,000 per person per year in purchasing power
           1       Bottom of the pyramid
                                                  parity (as defined by IFC and WRI)[1]

                                            Organizations that help expand access to goods, services, and livelihood
           2       Inclusive business model opportunities for those at the base of the pyramid in commercially viable,
                                            scalable ways.[2]

                                                  As per the scope of this study, the identified healthcare focus areas are hospitals/
           3       Healthcare focus
                                                  clinics and outreach models, and healthcare technologies.

                                                  An investment approach that intentionally seeks to create both financial return
           4       Impact investing
                                                  and positive social or environmental impact that is actively measured.[3]

                                                  The environment – social, economic and political – within which a healthcare
           5       Ecosystem                      organization is located and the different stakeholders that exist and influence
                                                  its functioning.

                                                  Entities that are not themselves direct participants in healthcare provisioning,
                                                  but play a vital and catalytic role in helping healthcare organizations to become
           6       Industry facilitator           operational and achieve scale. They are present in the wider ecosystem of
                                                  the concerned firm, and often influence trends and a collection of firms/
                                                  organizations.

                                                  Organizations that do not have a stated profit motive from the sale/provision
           7       Not-for-profit                 of their offerings. Typically registered as societies, trusts, and Section-25
                                                  Companies (in India).

                                                  Organizations with a clearly stated profit motive through the sale of their
           8       For-profit
                                                  offerings. Typically registered as sole proprietorships and companies.

                                                  Not-for-profit and non-governmental charitable or grant-based organizations
           9       NGOs
                                                  working primarily to provide social goods or mobilization to poor communities

                                                  Partnerships set up between governments or quasi-governmental institutions
                                                  and private organizations (either for-profit or not-for-profit) to provide specific
                   Public-private                 health products/services while leveraging the unique skill-sets of both parties.
          10
                   partnerships (PPP)             This does not include outsourcing of mandated government services to private
                                                  providers, but where private organizations sell their offerings to the poor by
                                                  using public systems or public financing.

          11       Tier I cities                  Cities with a population of 1 million and above

          12       Tier II cities                 Cities with a population between 500,000 to 1,000,000

          13       Tier III cities                Cities with a population between 100,000 to 500,000




    1	     http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/as_ext_content/what+we+do/inclusive+business/news+and+highlights/defining
           +the+base+of+the+pyramid, accessed on December 2, 2013
    2	     Jenkins, B; Ishikawa, E; Geaneotes, A; Baptista, P; and Masuoka, T (2011). Accelerating Inclusive Business Opportunities:
           Business Models that Make a Difference. Washington, DC: IFC
    3	     World Economic Forum Mainstreaming Impact Investing Working Group




8
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Introduction
An estimated four billion people who earn less than $3,000 a year (or approximately $8 a day)[4] form the
base of the pyramid (BoP)[5]. BoP populations are chronically underserved when it comes to basic necessities
–especially healthcare. Despite challenges of access, the BoP population represents a significant unfulfilled
demand. The BoP healthcare market in Asia is estimated at around $95.5 billion.[6]

Traditionally, the government is the major provider of healthcare services for the poor, especially in rural
and peri-urban areas. Charitable trusts and NGOs have played a complementary role. The private sector
is predominantly focused on providing healthcare services in urban areas—tier I and II cities. However,
more recently, the private sector has started to address the large market potential in smaller towns, and is
expanding focus to tier III towns and beyond. The private sector is developing innovations to address the
challenges of health inequities, improving healthcare access and balancing quality care with affordability.

IFC defines inclusive business models (IBM) as enterprises that help expand access to goods, services, and
livelihood opportunities to those at the base of the pyramid in commercially viable, scalable ways.[7]

The context of India—poor health indicators, a globalized economy, the government’s willingness to work with
the private sector, and recognition of the poor as clients rather than beneficiaries—has led to the emergence
of inclusive business models in the Indian economy.

A number of for-profit and not-for-profit organizations have emerged as inclusive business models in India.
Also, many organizations work with the government to provide healthcare services through public-private
partnership (PPP) models. This IFC and WISH study provides an overview of the landscape of inclusive
business models in the healthcare sector. It includes challenges they face, strategies they adopt to succeed,
and suggestions on how the ecosystem can enable and facilitate their growth.



Key Research Findings
This study involved a mixed-method approach using secondary and primary research to identify 165 inclusive
business models in India. Twenty-four organizations were selected for primary research and deep-dive
analysis through in-depth interviews with key stakeholders – investors, donors, policy makers, and sector
experts. The details of 165 IBMs were analyzed to determine area/disease focus, geography, financing
options, year of inception, and target segments. The findings are discussed briefly in the following section:




4	   IFC and World Resources Institute used purchasing power parity methodology to arrive at a cut off of $3,000 per person per
     year to describe those living at the base of the pyramid.
5	   http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/as_ext_content/what+we+do/inclusive+business/news+and+highlights/defining+the+bas
     e+of+the+pyramid, accessed on December 2, 2013.
6	   The Next 4 Billion - Market Size and Business Strategy at the Base of the Pyramid by World Resources Institute and IFC
7	   Jenkins, B; Ishikawa, E; Geaneotes, A; Baptista, P; and Masuoka, T (2011). Accelerating Inclusive Business Opportunities:
     Business Models that Make a Difference. Washington, DC: IFC




                                                                                                                                  9
     What healthcare needs and diseases do IBMs focus on?

     The most common category is the hospital and outreach model, which constitute 65 percent of Indian
     IBMs. 35 percent work in the area of medical technologies. The majority of IBMs focus on multiple
     diseases – ranging from TB and malaria to cardiovascular and neurological diseases (48 percent).
     This allows the IBMs to have high patient volumes, leading to increases in efficiencies and profitability.
     Reproductive and child health (RCH) and nutrition is the second most popular focus at 16 percent. Here
     IBMs are able to access funding as well as leverage public systems/programs.


     How old are the IBMs?

     Almost 70 percent of the IBMs are less than 10 years old. Older IBMs are primarily in the hospitals and
     outreach category – the more traditional and less risky model to serve healthcare needs. IBMs in the
     technology category are relatively young with—55 percent of IBMs less than three years old.


     Where are the IBMs?

     IBMs are not equitably distributed across the country. In India, most enterprises are located in the
     southern states (33 percent), more specifically in the two cities of Chennai and Bangalore (17 percent).
     A significant number (31 percent) in the healthcare technology category are in these two cities. Other
     cities with high proportion are Delhi (12 percent) and Mumbai (10 percent). IBMs are concentrated in
     areas where there are facilitative ecosystems and incubators. Availability of infrastructure, such as
     transport connectivity, is also a factor impacting the presence of IBMs. This is a primary reason for the
     majority of IBMs being located in the southern states.


     What population segments do IBMs focus on?

     The need to balance between servicing a target segment with low paying capacity (and no insurance)
     and running a profitable business has led most for-profit IBMs to largely focus on people earning $5 to
     $8 a day. Lower income categories are catered to by not-for-profit organizations and the government.


     How do IBMs raise funds?

     The institutional statuses of organizations determine primary sources of funding that IBMs access.
     The Indian landscape has equal numbers of for-profit and not-for-profit entities; around 41 percent
     and 42 percent respectively. Around 16 percent of IBMs are public-private partnerships (PPPs).

     Almost all IBMs had more than one source of funding. Impact investors were the major source of
     funding, at 46 percent.




10
Models of Healthcare IBMs - Challenges and Success Strategies
IBMs were classified into two categories to understand challenges they faced and strategies used:

    ®®    Business to Consumer (B2C) models or those that predominantly serve end-consumers directly and

    ®®    Business to Business (B2B) models or those that supply to institutions that further serve
          end consumers.

Each category has two models:

    ®®    B2C models: (i) primary care delivery and outreach and (ii) secondary and tertiary care hospitals

    ®®    B2B models: (i) standalone devices and consumables and (ii) networked devices and technologies.


The models and their key features are described in the following table:



         Models                               Key Features                                    Examples


                       First contact care providers, located close to patients   Swasth India
   Primary care
   delivery and        Focus mainly on promotive-preventive care, health Ziqitza
     outreach          education, basic curative care                    Arogya Parivar

                       Hospital chains focusing on in-patient care               Glocal Healthcare
  Secondary and
   tertiary care       Provide diagnostic tests and treatment, including surgical Vaatsalya
     hospitals         procedures across multiple specialties                     GNRC

                       Frugal innovations and healthcare products                Embrace Innovations
    Standalone
    devices and        Innovative low-cost diagnostics and therapeutic devices AYZH
   consumables         not dependent on technology/information networks or
                       infrastructure/skilled caregivers                       Axio Bio Solutions

                       Technology-enabled integrated medical devices that Swasthya Slate
    Networked          conduct diagnostic tests and leverage communication
                                                                            Dimagi
    devices and        networks to provide effective care
   technologies                                                             Dhilcare
                       Information systems including software solutions for
                       hospitals, clinics, laboratory, etc.




                                                                                                              11
     IBMs in healthcare have unique challenges in serving the poor while maintaining profitability. The scaling
     barriers framework formulated by Monitor Inclusive Markets was used to analyze challenges faced by B2C
     and B2B IBMs at four different levels: the firm level, value-chain level, public-goods level, and regulatory and
     policy level. The different levels are described in the following figure:




                                                 Challenges to IBMs at Different Levels




                           Firm                       Value Chain                      Public Goods                     Government*




       Challenges that are either         Challenges which lie in            Challenges faced by a firm          Challenges to an
       intrinsic to a firm or may         the value chain of a firm,         due to unavailable/                 organization or a business
       originate at any of the            impacting its ability to           ineffective public goods .          model due to laws,
       other levels. These are            manufacture and sell               These are commodities/              regulations, and
       manifested strongly at the         products/ services to the          services that are usually           procedures that inhibit the
       firm level affecting its           end consumer. For                  provided by the                     firm from operating its
       business model and scale           instance, weak sourcing            government and benefit              model easily. For instance,
       - for instance limited ability     channels, weak                     society as a whole: for             complicated and multiple
       to attract skilled medical         distribution channels, lack        instance education,                 approvals required to set
       staff, limited ability to raise    of support service                 infrastructure, public              up hospitals, etc.
       capital.                           providers, etc.                    domain knowledge, etc.




     * 	 For this study, the outermost layer Government is considered a ‘regulatory environment’ and not a provider/funder of
         healthcare services




12
B2C models of primary care and outreach units and secondary and tertiary care hospitals: challenges and
business model initiatives

The following table summarizes the major challenges faced by B2C models and some business model
initiatives to overcome these challenges.

                                Challenges                                   Business Model Initiatives
                                 Firm Level

 	 Limited viable business models in primary care
 	 Large patient volumes and catchment size critical for viability
 	 Need for a combination of medical and managerial skills puts
    pressure on the business model
 	 Limited ability to attract well-trained paramedical and
    medical personnel.

                             Value-chain Level
                                                                          	 Improve value proposition
 	 Shortage of well-trained medical personnel                               by offering additional
                                                                             diversified services
 	 Limited paying capacity of patients and inadequate insurance
    coverage                                                              	 Leverage local community
 	 Weak referral linkages with public/private primary care providers        as health educators/
                                                                             outreach workers to
 	 Lack of low-cost, high-quality medical equipment and
                                                                             optimize on costs
    maintenance services
 	 Delays in payments by institutional customers                         	 Increase productivity/
    (including government)                                                   efficiency of resources
                                                                             using capacity building and
 	 Limited investor interest in primary care models.
                                                                             para-skilling
                            Public-goods Level
                                                                          	 Build hub and spoke
 	 Low ability of patients to assess/differentiate quality of services      models to expand coverage
                                                                             while increasing efficiency
 	 Poor health-seeking behavior leading to delays in seeking care
 	 Lack of market information and cross-learning from                    	 Asset light strategies to
    successful models                                                        reduce capital costs

 	 Poor infrastructure and lack of supportive ecosystem impedes          	 No frills strategy to reduce
    attraction and retention of personnel                                    operating costs.
 	 Poor connectivity, limiting access and reach of patients to
    the hospital.

               Government/Regulatory-environment Level

 	 Regulaions restricting scope of care provided by paramedics to
    address the scarcity of health personnel
 	 Complicated and multiple approvals required to set up hospitals
 	 Risk of lack of continuity of government policy/ regulations.




                                                                                                            13
     B2B models of standalone devices and consumables and networked devices and technologies: challenges and
     business model initiatives

     The following table summarizes the major challenges faced by B2C models and some business model
     initiatives to overcome these challenges.

                                    Challenges                                     Business Model Initiatives

                                     Firm Level
     	 Long product development cycle and lack of opportunities to test
        efficacy delays commercialization and revenue generation
     	 Need for high investments at early stages
     	 Lack of robust marketing/distribution strategies and networks/linkages
        with other stakeholders
     	 Need for a combination of technical and managerial skills puts
                                                                                 	 Leverage existing
        pressure on the business model.
                                                                                    distribution channels
                                 Value-chain Level                                  and resources to
                                                                                    market products
     	 Low-cost products require high purchase volumes to attain viability
                                                                                 	 Conduct pilot programs or
     	 Dependence on healthcare providers/partners who can utilize                 proof-of-concept studies
        solutions/take these solutions to consumers                                 for new products to attract
     	 Weak technical skills of distribution partners impeding use of              customers and investors
        innovative solutions                                                     	 Form strategic
     	 Linkages with government are difficult due to complex                       partnerships with
        procurement rules.                                                          healthcare delivery
                                                                                    players to increase
                                Public-goods Level
                                                                                    acceptance and expand
     	 Lack of awareness among channel partners/buyers/patients about              distribution chains
        availability and benefits of innovative products                         	 Expand scope of products
     	 Inertia and resistance to change in ‘remote care delivering’ behavior       to provide analytics
        by doctors using mHealth, telemedicine models                               services, program
                                                                                    management, etc. in
     	 Consumers tend to associate low price with poor quality leading to
                                                                                    addition to one-time sale
        lower acceptance for frugal innovations
                                                                                    of products or software
     	 Irregular and unreliable telecommunications networks and electricity
                                                                                 	 Reduce cost of
        supply impede successful use of solutions
                                                                                    manufacturing by
     	 Lack of market information, incubators, and research settings to test       indigenous production.
        efficacy of the innovations,

                   Government/Regulatory-environment Level

     	 Ambiguous regulations for medical devices industry leading to limited
        indigenous manufacturing and, thereby, higher costs
     	 Absence of quality standards certifying efficacy/accuracy
        for new solutions.




14
Suggestions to Enable Success and Overcome Challenges
The ecosystem within which IBMs operate significantly influence their own success and growth. Firms
often are unable to effectively resolve key systemic barriers. Their own key enablers—impact investors,
donors, governments and networks, incubators and accelerators—can undertake various initiatives to
encourage new IBMs and facilitate existing ones to reach their desired impact and scale. To be truly
effective, industry facilitators must respond not only to scaling barriers in a given situation, but also
specific constraints on firms that prevent them from resolving these barriers. The following section
presents brief descriptions of the roles of ecosystem enablers.


Impact Investors

Impact investing offers opportunities to creatively fund projects that may otherwise go unfunded. It also
helps to scale up organizations with viable business models that meet pressing healthcare challenges,
which are often not attractive for commercial investors. Impact investors could support IBMs by:

    ®®   Innovative financing

    ®®   Investing in idea/early-stage innovations

    ®®   Forming investor networks and circles

    ®®   Providing advisory services and mentorship

    ®®   Providing trading platforms and results measurement.


Foundations, Donors, and Development Agencies

Donors and development agencies can play an important role providing organizations technical support,
supporting development of standard treatment protocols, quality guidelines, and advocating critical
reforms to create a more facilitative ecosystem. They could support IBMs by:

    ®®   Channeling funding and technical support to IBMs and support research, proof of concepts

    ®®   Taking funding decisions to be responsive to context

    ®®   Supporting initiatives like defining quality standards, raising health awareness

    ®®   Supporting advocacy.


Government

The government’s support—as a regulator, as a vehicle for scale, and with its ability to overcome
challenges related to public good—is essential to encourage new IBMs and facilitate existing ones to
reach their desired impact and scale. Some ways in which the government could facilitate growth and
scaling up include:

    ®®   Purchasing and scaling innovative solutions

    ®®   Relaxing procurement rules for IBMs offering innovative products

    ®®   Incentivizing the private sector to serve BoP markets

    ®®   Reducing bureaucratic delays and simplifying procedures/approvals




                                                                                                            15
         ®®   Accrediting and endorsing new solutions

         ®®   Setting up venture funds/allocating part of existing funds to healthcare IBMs

         ®®   Strengthening demand-side financing

         ®®   Generating health awareness

         ®®   Increasing availability of human resources for health

         ®®   Undertaking systematic need-gap assessment to better plan medical education

         ®®   Facilitating and exploring reforms for para-skilling

         ®®   Improving infrastructure.


     Networks, Incubators, and Accelerators

     Networks and associations can play an important role by undertaking initiatives that facilitate industry as
     a whole, but may not be attractive or possible for individual organizations. Incubators or accelerators can
     help early-stage impact enterprises by providing mentorship, incubation and technical assistance. Specific
     suggestions for them include:

         ®®   Facilitating ecosystem growth

         ®®   Mentorship and strategic advisory services.



     The Way Forward
     This report focuses on the context in which inclusive business models have emerged in India. The
     complexities of the healthcare sector impact these organizations – posing challenges to their operations,
     sustainability, and scale. While governments, impact investors, donors, and other key stakeholders need to
     play a crucial role in catalyzing the growth of these initiatives, the IBMs, in turn, need to leverage this support
     and facilitation strategically.




16
CHAPTER   1
INTRODUCTION
     BACKGROUND
     An estimated four billion people live at the base of the pyramid (BoP)[8], a term that describes individuals
     earning less than $3,000 a year (or approximately $8 per day)[9]. The BoP population is chronically
     underserved when it comes to basic necessities, especially healthcare. Poor health outcomes contribute
     negatively to overall human development and are detrimental to economic productivity.

     Despite challenges of access, the BoP population represents a significant unfulfilled demand. For instance,
     the health sector market for the four billion BoP population globally is estimated to be approximately
     $158 billion. Asia, with its large BoP population (2.9 billion)[10], has the largest BoP health market of
     $95.5 billion. This market represents 83 percent of the region’s population and 42 percent of its aggregate
     purchasing power—a significant share of Asia’s rapidly growing consumer market. In spite of this sheer
     size and demand, BoP markets are primarily rural, challenged with deep inequities, are poorly served, and
     dominated by the informal economy and hence often not integrated into the global market economy.


     Inclusive Business Models

     Healthcare has seen high numbers of innovations in the last decade. While these have spanned the entire
     spectrum of the care and the value chain, a significant number has focused on serving the BoP on demand
     or supply side. Several inclusive business models exist in healthcare delivery and outreach and in medical
     technologies that have significant potential to improve the landscape and health outcomes for the poor.



     NEED AND OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY
     An understanding of IBMs in the healthcare sector, the challenges they face, and the strategies they adopt
     is lacking. A deeper understanding will allow key stakeholders to play an enabling role in catalyzing inclusive
     business activity in healthcare in South Asia.

     This study addresses this need by mapping healthcare IBMs in India. It covers the following elements:

           ®®   Setting the healthcare context in India

           ®®   In-depth analysis of the IBM landscape: organizational stage of development, area of healthcare
                focus, disease priorities, geographical distribution, and key sources of funds

           ®®   Analysis of models that organizations have adopted to serve healthcare needs of the poor

           ®®   Understanding the major challenges organizations face in reaching desired impact and scale

           ®®   Suggestions and potential action points for stakeholders in the ecosystem that will enable growth
                and scaling up of IBMs in healthcare.




     8	    http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/as_ext_content/what+we+do/inclusive+business/news+and+highlights/defining+the+bas
           e+of+the+pyramid, accessed on December 2, 2013.
     9	    IFC and World Resources Institute used purchasing power parity methodology to arrive at a cut off of $3,000 per person per
           year to describe those living at the base of the pyramid.
     10	   The Next 4 Billion- Market Size and Business Strategy at the Base of the Pyramid by World Resources Institute and IFC




18
APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY
The landscape analysis involves a mixed-method approach, with detailed literature review of publications,
analysis of secondary data, and collection and analysis of primary data through in-depth interviews.
Data from all sources were triangulated and analyzed. The following figure provides an overview of the
methodology followed.


                               Figure 1: Methodology followed for the study
                        Figure 1: Methodology followed for the study
                                                                                Conduct landscape
                                          Select IBMs for primary
     Map 165 IBMs in India                                                   analysis and recommend
                                                  research
                                                                                      solutions

                                                                                Conducted primary
      Undertook a detailed
                                       Selected 24 IBMs for further          discussions with impact
 secondary search to identify a
                                                 analysis                 investors, donors, government
  long list of 165 IBMs in India
                                                                                   stakeholders


                                                                            Analyzed landscape of IBMs
                                         Conducted in-depth and            in terms of their geographical
                                     focused primary interviews with         distribution, disease focus,
                                      stakeholders of selected IBMs            stages of development,
                                                                                   sources of funds


                                                                           Analyzed strategies adopted
                                                                          and challenges faced by IBMs


                                                                             Provided suggestions for
                                                                          ecosystem enabler to engage
                                                                          with IBMs and provide support
                                                                                    for scale




Annexure I details this study’s approach and methodology.




                                                                                                            19
     Secondary Review

     Review of IBMs: A list of 165 IBMs in India was compiled after extensive secondary research.

     Review of Literature: The team reviewed relevant documents obtained from secondary sources. These
     documents were mainly of two types: (i) literature about the healthcare scenario in India, the social enterprise
     and impact investing sectors, policy and ecosystem initiatives, and other sectoral publications (including
     reports and Points of View published by Deloitte and Monitor Inclusive Markets); and (ii) literature about
     specific IBMs/organizations in the form of case studies, evaluations, news reports, and other literature.


     Primary Research

     Twenty-four organizations were selected for primary research and deep-dive analysis. The organizations
     included in the deep-dive are listed in annexure II.

     Data collection methods used for primary research included in-depth interviews with stakeholders from the
     selected IBMs and with experts from the sector representing investors, donors, and policy-makers. Annexure
     III lists stakeholders interviewed as a part of this study.




20
CHAPTER   2
HEALTHCARE
INTRODUCTION
CONTEXT IN
INDIA
     INTRODUCTION
     India is one of the world’s fastest growing economies, as well as home to approximately 35 percent of the
     world’s poorest people[11]. The state of healthcare in the country shows this dichotomy as well.

     India is recognized as a destination for world=class healthcare. The private sector has created state-of-the-art
     infrastructure, quality clinical processes, and efficient administrative systems. The public health sector has
     also made significant progress, Flagship public health programs like the National Health Mission (NHM)
     and the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY), have helped improve key health indicators such as the
     maternal mortality ratio, infant mortality ratio, institutional deliveries, and polio eradication.

     However, given India’s vast population and the complex nature of healthcare delivery, there remain huge
     challenges in ensuring equitable and quality healthcare for the entire population.



     HEALTHCARE STATISTICS
     Despite considerable progress, India lags behind global averages and other low and middle-income countries
     in terms of health indicators such as maternal mortality ratio (MMR)[12] at 178, infant mortality rate (IMR)[13]
     at 42, and life expectancy at 68 years.[14]




                                                 Figure 2: Key health indicators[15]


               250
                                                               210
               200                    178
               150
               100                                                                       97
                            68                      70                       77                      74            69
                50               42                       37
                                                                                    13                    14
                  0
                               India            Global Average                 China                    Brazil

                 Life Expectancy at Birth                 Infant Mortality Rate            Maternal Mortality Ratio




     11	   R. Kanbur and A. Sumner, “Poor Countries or Poor People? Development Assistance and the New Geography
           of Global Poverty” (grey paper, Institute of Development Studies, Brighton, UK, 2011)
     12	   SRS, 2013
     13	ibid
     14	   WHO 2012
     15	   Source: World Bank 2010, World Bank 2011, World Bank 2012 and SRS 2013




22
India also faces a dual disease burden. On one hand, it struggles with issues related to poor reproductive
and child health and communicable diseases like malaria and TB, while, on the other, the incidence of
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) has increased from 33 percent of the disease burden in 1999[16]
to 45 percent in 2010[17]. NCDs are expected to increase to 76 percent of the disease burden by 2030.
According to the International Diabetes Federation (IDF), India will become the diabetes capital of the
world; the number of diabetes cases in adults is expected to increase from 38 million in 2010 to 46 million
by 2015[18]. Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death in India. There were 47 million coronary
heart disease patients in 2010; this is expected to increase to 62 million by 2015[19]. Similarly, patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the second leading cause of death in India, will increase to
23 million in 2015, from around 21 million in 2010.[20]

In addition, there are increasing disabilities and mortalities due to accidents. In fact, India accounts for
around 10 percent of road crash fatalities worldwide.[21]




                                               Figure 3: Burden of disease[22]


                           100%
                                             17              12
                                                                                   Injuries
                             80%
                                             33              45
                             60%
                                                                                   Non -
                             40%                                                   Communicable
                                                                                   Diseases
                                             50              43
                             20%
                                                                                   Communicable
                                0%                                                 Diseases
                                           1999            2010




16	   Global Burden of Disease, 1999
17	   Global Burden of Disease, 2010
18	   National Health Profile, 2010
19	ibid
20	   Indian Study on Epidemiology of Asthma, Respiratory Symptoms and Chronic Bronchitis (INSEARCH), 2012 and
      Lung India 2012
21	   WHO, 2013
22	   Source: Global Burden of Disease, 1999 and 2010




                                                                                                                   23
     HEALTHCARE EXPENDITURE AND INSURANCE COVERAGE


     India spends only 4 percent of its GDP on healthcare, which is much lower than other countries. As a result,
     India’s per capita expenditure on health at $61 is also lower than other countries. Figure 4 shows healthcare
     expenditure as a percentage of GDP and per capital expenditure on health in India, the U.S., United Kingdom,
     Brazil, and China. Public expenditure on health in India, at 1.3 percent of the GDP, is among the lowest
     in the world.[23] Out-of-pocket spending on healthcare is approximately 67 percent of the country’s total
     health expenditure.[24]


                                                  Figure 4: Healthcare expenditure[25]


                                                   17.90
               10000                               8,895                                                   20%
                8000                                                                                       15%
                6000                                                   9.40                9.30
                                                                                                           10%
                4000                                                   3,647                       5.40
                                  4
                2000                                                                                       5%
                                                                                         1,056
                                  61                                                               322
                     0                                                                                     0%
                                India               USA                 UK                Brazil   China

                                                Per-capita expenditure on healthcare ($)
                                                Healthcare expenditure as a % of GDP




     Overall, health insurance coverage is low with only around 19 to 21 percent of the population insured. Of this,
     16 percent is covered by social insurance like the government’s RSBY and other state-sponsored insurance
     schemes[26] where financial protection offered is extremely limited (less than $500 on a family floater basis).
     Private schemes that offer a higher value protection cover only 3 to 5 percent of the population.[27] In addition,
     both commercial and social health insurance schemes cover only in-patient care and do not cover out-patient
     consultations and diagnostic expenses or expenditure on drugs and medicines.




     23	   The World Bank
     24	   Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Annual Report to the People, September 2010
     25	   The World Bank
     26	   The World Bank - Government Sponsored Health Insurance in India: Are You Covered?
     27	ibid




24
INDUSTRY SIZE, GROWTH AND STRUCTURE

The Indian healthcare industry has grown from $51 billion in 2008 to $78 billion in 2012 (CAGR 11 percent).
It will grow at an estimated annual rate of 19 percent to reach $280 billion by 2020.[28] Healthcare delivery
through hospitals and clinics contribute to the largest share of revenue at 71 percent. Pharmaceutical and
medical equipment and supplies contribute 13 percent and 9 percent respectively. Insurance contributes to
only 4 percent of market revenues.[29]


                                   Figure 5: Healthcare revenue share-2012 ($78 billion)




                                                                                               Hospitals

                                                                                               Pharmaceuticals

                                                                                               Medical equipment &
                                                                                               supplies
                                                                                               Medical insurance

                                                                                               Diagnostics



This report focuses on healthcare delivery and medical technology sectors. The sections below give a brief
description of how these sectors cater to the needs of the population.



HEALTHCARE DELIVERY
The healthcare delivery space in India is highly fragmented and populated by various players adopting
different formats, providing varied levels of service, and catering to different patient segments.

Public healthcare follows a three-tier structure comprising primary, secondary, and tertiary care. It
encompasses hamlet-level community health workers, village-level sub-health centers, and primary health
centers (PHCs), block-level community health centers (CHCs), district-level secondary care hospitals, and
state-level tertiary care hospitals.

The private sector, on the other hand, is heterogeneous with diversity in kinds of players. It ranges from
not-for-profit and for-profit organizations, corporate hospitals, and standalone healthcare service providers.


28	   Indian Healthcare : The Growth Story [http://www.indianhealthcare.in/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&catid=131
      &id=168%3AIndian+Healthcare:+The+Growth+Story]
29	   IBEF (India Brand Equity Foundation)




                                                                                                                                 25
      Figure 6 below provides a snapshot of India’s healthcare delivery sector.


                                              Figure 6: India’s healthcare delivery structure




                                                                     India’s healthcare delivery sector



                                           Government/public healthcare
                                                                                                          Private healthcare sector
                                                    sector

                                                Contribute 37 percent of                                    Contribute 63 percent of
      Number of beds
                                                  total hospital beds                                         total hospital beds
                                                      (~580,000)                                                  (~980,000)
     Beds growth rate                                    5 percent                                                  13 percent

                                       • Tertiary care – Medical colleges-                         • Tertiary care – Large multi-specialty
                                         cum-hospitals and district hospitals                        hospitals/single-specialty hospitals/
                                       • Secondary care – Community health                           corporate hospital chains
               Types of                  centers (30-bed facilities)                               • Secondary care – Nursing homes,
              hospitals                • Primary care – Primary health                               small hospitals
                                         centers (6-bed facilities), sub                           • Primary care – Outpatient clinics
                                         centers

                                           Largely present in rural areas;                           Largely concentrated in urban areas
               Areas of                  medical colleges-cum-hospitals are                                   (cities and towns)
              operation                  located in cities (including metros)


      Rural and peri-urban areas are served largely by public facilities. The organized private sector is concentrated
      in metros. Tier I cities and smaller towns depend on small clinics and nursing homes. The private sector is
      growing rapidly and is expanding to smaller cities and towns.


                                                                              [30]
      MEDICAL DEVICES AND TECHNOLOGIES
      The Indian medical device, equipment and technology market was valued at $4.4 billion in 2013. It is growing
      at a CAGR of 15 percent and is expected to become $7.8 billion by 2016.[31]

      The growth of the medical devices industry is largely being driven by growing awareness among providers
      and consumers on advances in medical technology, increased investments in healthcare services, and the
      country’s evolution into a medical tourism hub.




      30	   Medical devices, medical equipment and medical technologies are being used interchangeably in the industry
      31	   “Progressive change Impetus to Medical Technology through Innovation, Incentivisation and Regulation” - A theme paper
            released at the 6th Medical Technology Conference – “Medical Technology and its Vital Place in Healthcare in India,” by CII and
            Grant Thornton, 2013




26
                           Figure 7: Medical technology market industry split[32]

                            India medical technology market split (by value 2012)
                                  Source of products       Local manufacture
                                                                 focus



                                                                   54%    Exports
                                Imports
                                          77%




                                                                   46%    Domestic
                                Locally                                   consumption
                          manufactured    23%



While the medical technology market is expanding, there is significant reliance on imports to meet domestic
consumption. Figure 7 depicts the market split of medical technology in India. Around 77 percent of medical
devices sold in India are still imported. Simultaneously, 54 percent of what devices manufactured in India are
exported to the U.S., Europe, Middle East, and Southeast Asia.

The medical technology industry in India faces some challenges. The regulatory environment is ambiguous
and complex. Multiple levels of government agencies/departments are involved in enforcing guidelines. The
medical devices industry has no distinct status and is clubbed with pharmaceuticals. As a result, challenges
that are unique to the medical devices industry are often not recognized.



KEY GAPS IN HEALTHCARE PROVISION
These are the key gaps in healthcare provision in India:

Low levels of expenditure on healthcare: As discussed in the previous section, India’s expenditure on
healthcare is extremely low at 4 percent of its GDP, translating to a per capita expenditure of $61. This
results in inadequate infrastructure and resources for healthcare, which impacts quality of care available
to the population.

Inadequate infrastructure and human resources for health: There is a huge shortfall in infrastructure and
human resources for health. India lags far behind the global average in terms of number of doctors, nurses,
and hospital beds. This has a direct impact on the quality of healthcare available to the people.




32	   Espicom BMI 2012




                                                                                                                 27
     India requires an estimated 1 million more doctors and 2.3 million more nurses to meet healthcare needs
     of the existing population.[33]


                                  Table: Infrastructure and human resources for health

                             Infrastructure and Human resources                         India         Global median
                                                                     [33]
                     Number of physicians/10,000 population                               6                   15
                     Number of nursing and midwifery personnel/10,000
                                                                                         10                   33
                     population[34]
                     Total number of hospital beds/10,000 population[35]                  9                   30

     Low affordability of healthcare services due to high levels of poverty and low insurance cover:
     Almost 70 percent of India’s population lives below $2 a day.[37] As discussed in the previous sections,
     insurance cover in India remains low. Only around 20 percent of the population is covered by social or
     commercial insurance. This impacts affordability of healthcare services for a majority of the population.

     These gaps are further compounded by the complexities of healthcare in India.

     Needs vs. wants conundrum: While there is a universal ‘need’ for healthcare, health-seeking behavior
     and ‘want’ for healthcare services is low due to lack of awareness and low affordability. This is especially
     true of preventive and promotive care service.

     Broad range of determinants of health: Outcomes in health are a function of several determinants
     that lie outside the ambit of the healthcare domain. Apart from biological factors, socio-cultural, and
     political factors also determine health status, health-seeking behavior, and access to care. For instance,
     early marriages and early childbearing, religious and cultural dietary practices, are social issues that
     impact health.

     Multiple ministries and departments handling different aspects of health:[38] Several government
     departments are responsible for different health determinants: nutrition, sanitation, pharmaceutical
     products, etc. This leads to the lack of a cohesive and integrated health policy and action.

     Different kinds of private sector providers cause difficulties in ensuring compliance with
     regulations and in providing quality services: The urban rich population has access to state-of-the-art,
     world-class medical infrastructure and quality care while 70 percent of the population in rural areas
     grapple with basic healthcare challenges. Healthcare services are provided by a range of for-profit/
     not-for-profit/NGOs/charitable organizations, formal/informal practitioners, standalone/chain providers,
     single specialty/multi-specialty facilities, and traditional Indian systems of medicines. This makes it
     difficult to uniformly ensure quality and compliance with regulations and protocols.

     33	   WHO 2013
     34	   World Bank 2010
     35	   World Bank 2010
     36	   World Health Statistics 2013, WHO
     37	   World Bank, 2010
     38	   The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Department of Pharmaceuticals
           under Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, the Department of Biotechnology under Ministry of Science and Technology
           look after different aspects of healthcare policy and provisioning




28
Complex and changing disease burden: As discussed in the previous section, India struggles with
a complex disease burden with poor RCH indicators, prevalence of communicable diseases, and an
increasing burden of non-communicable diseases. Interventions must be designed in the context of the
changing disease burden, age, gender, and socio-cultural factors.



TRENDS IN HEALTHCARE

Public-private partnerships

Given the lack of access to and availability of quality affordable healthcare (public or private) for the
majority of the population and the complex disease burden faced by the country, the Indian government
has engaged the private sector to provide health services through public-private partnerships (PPP). In
a PPP, the government enters into a partnership with one or more private partners. The private partners
deliver services so that the objectives of the government of delivering quality healthcare services are
aligned with the profit or other objectives of the private partners.

Traditionally, the government has engaged with the private sector by contracting or outsourcing
services. For instance, the Chiranjeevi Yojana was a PPP between the Gujarat government and
private health facilities to address shortage of obstetricians at public hospitals. Other PPPs include
private players providing advanced diagnostic services like CT scans and MRIs by setting up diagnostic
centers at government hospitals and emergency ambulance transport services using call centers across
the states.


  Operation Asha uses eCompliance, a biometric tool which uses fingerprint scanners to track TB patients’
  adherence to medication. The TB centers in villages and urban slums are training community members
  to become TB health workers and eCompliance- has been designed for last mile delivery to the BoP.
  Operation Asha works in partnership with the government and the Revised National Tuberculosis
  Control Programme.



Recently however, PPP models are moving towards true partnerships where government collaborates
with creators of innovative and cost-efficient health solutions to provide quality healthcare. In fact, in
several cases, innovators create solutions tailored to the government as a potential user/buyer and the
poor as target customers.

The government is expected to continue playing a key role in providing healthcare by increasingly
engaging the private sector.




                                                                                                             29
     Increasing Investment in Healthcare by Private Equity Players, Entrepreneurs, and Corporations

     The healthcare sector has seen an immense increase in investments from private equity (PE) players. The
     total PE investments in healthcare increased from $0.5 billion (29 deals) in 2011 to $1.3 billion (44 deals)
     in 2012.[39] The healthcare delivery segment has driven the bulk of healthcare investments, accounting for
     60 percent of the total funds invested. Seven of ten PE deals, by size, were in the delivery segment. Further,
     investments were across the care spectrum. Primary care NationWide clinics, single specialty ophthalmology
     chain Vasan Eye Care, in-vitro fertilization chain Bourn Hall India, and tertiary care hospitals Medanta’ and
     Fortis, among others, received funding from various players. This trend is expected to continue and healthcare
     delivery will remain a key investment area for PE firms.

     A number of corporate houses and entrepreneurs have also entered the healthcare space. For instance,
     the HCL group has forayed into healthcare by setting up a chain of primary clinics. The promoters of Dabur
     India have formed a joint venture with the U.K.-based Healthcare at Home to tap the under-penetrated home
     healthcare market. HCG started as an oncology hospital and now has a network of 27 centers across India.
     Existing corporate hospitals are looking to expand their presence and set up health facilities in tier II and
     tier III towns.


     Frugal Innovations

     The private sector, MNCs and Indian players, are increasingly driving frugal innovations in healthcare.
     Technology is increasingly being used in both product and process innovations to increase healthcare cover in
     scalable and cost-efficient ways. For example, healthcare providers use telemedicine to connect remote rural
     populations to medical advice from specialists, which was, until now, unavailable to them. Organizations like
     GE and Philips have developed low-cost point-of-care support and diagnostic devices. Indian organizations
     like Forus, MediVed, and Perfint Healthcare have also developed innovative and low-cost solutions. Patient
     monitoring, emergency medical response, and HIS are some other areas where technology is playing a key
     role in expanding healthcare.


     Emergence of Inclusive Business Models to Cater to the BoP 	

     Traditionally, only the non-governmental sector has considered those at the bottom of the pyramid as
     beneficiaries. Over the past decade however, the private sector has recognized the large market potential
     at the BoP. The BoP health market in Asia is estimated at around $95.5 billion.[40] The private sector is
     now looking at this largely untapped market by developing innovations to address the challenges of health
     inequities, improving healthcare access and balancing quality care with affordability.




     39	   India Private Equity Report 2013: Indian Private Equity and Venture Capital Association
     40	   The Next 4 Billion- Market Size and Business Strategy at the Base of the Pyramid by World Resources Institute and IFC




30
IFC defines inclusive business models (IBMs) as enterprises that help expand access to goods, services,
and livelihood opportunities for those at the base of the pyramid in commercially viable, scalable ways.[41] The
fundamental thought behind the concept of IBMs is to integrate the BoP into the value chain – on the demand
side as clients and consumers and on the supply side as employees, producers, and business owners.


                Figure 8: Integration of the low income communities in the value chain for IBMs


                                                  Significant pent-up demand
                                               • 4 billion people at BoP, 2.9 billion
                                                 in Asia
      IBM characteristics                      • BoP health market is $158 billion
      • Access of goods and                    • Asia has the largest BoP health
                                                 market at $95.5 billion
                                                                                                                   BoP characteristics
        services to BoP
                                                                                                                   • Individuals living below
      • Employment                             • BoP health market in Asia
                                                                                                                     $3000/person/year
        opportunities to BoP                     constitutes 83 percent of the
                                                                                                                   • Challenges in access
      • Commercially viable                      region’s population and 42
                                                                                                                     to basic goods,
        and scalable                             percent of its aggregate
                                                                                              Buy goods/             services, and
      • Integrates BoP into the                  purchasing power
                                                                                              services at            economic
        value chain                 Sell goods/
                                                                                              affordable             opportunities
                                    services to
                                                                                                prices             • Chronically
                                    BoP market
                                                            BoP as consumers                                         underserved in
                                                                                                                     healthcare



                        Inclusive business model                                                   BoP communities


                               Buy local                                                               Sell services and
                      resources creating                                                               contribute to
                         higher incomes                        BoP as suppliers/                       value creation
                                                          distributors/entrepreneurs




IBMs build bridges between businesses and poor communities for mutual benefit in the supply chain, in the
workplace, and in the marketplace, while not losing sight of economic profitability. For the poor this means
higher productivity, sustainable earnings, and greater empowerment.

In India, IBMs have emerged in the context of poor health indicators, a globalized economy, willingness of the
government to work with the private sector, and the recognition of the poor as clients rather than beneficiaries.




41	   Jenkins, B; Ishikawa, E; Geaneotes, A; Baptista, P; and Masuoka, T (2011). Accelerating Inclusive Business Opportunities:
      Business Models that Make a Difference. Washington, DC: IFC




                                                                                                                                                31
     Figure 9 depicts the evolution of the economy in India and the emergence of IBMs.


                                                                  Figure 9: Emergence of IBMs in India


                                                                      Trust hospitals are
                                                                                                                     The focus of for-profit
                                                                      increasingly changing                          providers has been on
                                                                      operating models to                            metros and Tier 1, 2,
                                                                      function like corporate                        and 3 towns and
                                                                      hospitals in urban areas                       beyond
                                        Urban
                  Population coverage




                                                                                                                             Emergence of for-profit
                                                                                                                             IBMs
                                        Peri-urban




                                                                                                                        Need/opportunity to provide
                                                                                                                        healthcare services to improve
                                                                                                                        health indicators
         Majority of
                                        Rural




         rural poor in                                                                                                  Recognition of the large market
         remote                                                                                                         potential at the BoP
         areas are
                                                                                                                        Facilitative ecosystem with basic
         largely                                                                                                        infrastructure in place, collaborative
         catered to by                                                                                                  networks and value-chain
         government                                                    Not-for-profit          Private for-profit
                                                     Government
                                                                    (NGOs, trusts, donors)   (corporate hospitals,      Availability of funding for social
                                                                                              commercial IBMs)          entrepreneurs through impact
                                                                                                                        investors, donors, etc.              6
                                                            Diversity of healthcare providers




     Numerous inclusive business models operate in the healthcare space. This study specifically considers IBMs
     focusing on:

     Healthcare delivery and outreach through primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare services for the BoP
     by innovations in processes and/or business models, and affordable distribution and delivery channels for
     healthcare services, medicines, and/or devices.

     Medical technologies, including transformative and disruptive innovations such as low-cost technologies in
     diagnostics, radiology, pathology, and mobile-based interventions.




32
CHAPTER   3
LANDSCAPE OF
HEALTHCARE
IBMs IN INDIA
     Introduction
     Numerous social enterprises/inclusive business models in the healthcare space help expand access to
     products and services to BoP populations in commercially viable, scalable ways. The healthcare IBM
     landscape in India includes enterprises that are trying to address a range of challenges that the poor face
     as consumers. While some IBMs attempt to address the challenges of providing good quality affordable
     healthcare, others try to provide basic services at scale, while still others introduce new healthcare solutions
     through disruptive innovations.

     This chapter presents answers to five key questions, helping build a nuanced understanding of the IBM
     landscape in India, namely:

         1.	   What healthcare needs and diseases do IBMs focus on?
         2.	   What was the evolution of the inclusive business sector?
         3.	   Where are the healthcare IBMs across the country?
         4.	   What is the IBM’s target population?
         5.	   How do healthcare IBMs raise funds?

     The analysis in the following sections is based on triangulated data from (i) the secondary analysis of
     the 165 IBMs that form the “universe” of this study, (ii) in-depth primary research through case studies
     and detailed profiling of the 24 IBMs selected, and (iii) primary research through in-depth interviews with
     key stakeholders and sector experts representing IBMs, investors, donors, policy-makers, and other
     industry facilitators.




        What healthcare needs      What was the evolution of   Where are the healthcare   What is the IBM’s target   How do healthcare IBMs
        and diseases do IBMs       the inclusive business      IBMs across the country?   population?                raise funds?
        focus on?                  sector?




     WHICH HEALTHCARE NEEDS AND DISEASES DO IBMs FOCUS ON?
     This section focuses on the analysis of the distribution of IBMs across hospitals and outreach models, and
     medical technology; and the diseases that are being commonly addressed by the healthcare IBMs in India.
     The analysis is based on the long-list of the 165 IBMs in India.


     Area of Healthcare Focus Of IBMs – Healthcare Delivery and Outreach and Medical Technologies

     A majority of the IBMs focus on a combination of two or more healthcare areas. However, for the purpose of
     this study, discrete categories have been considered based on the predominant focus of the IBMs.

     Most of the 165 IBMs focus on healthcare delivery and outreach, constituting 65 percent of the IBMs.
     35 percent of IBMs work in the area of medical technologies.




34
Figure 10 classifies of IBMs according to healthcare focus.


                               Figure 10: Healthcare focus of IBMs in India




                                    Healthcare                Healthcare focus          Long list (165)
                                    delivery and
      35%
                                    outreach                  Healthcare delivery               107
                                                              and outreach
                   65%              Medical                   Medical                            58
                                    technologies              technologies




               CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTHCARE AREAS
 Research for this study found different trends and strategies to address needs of BoP patients in the two
 healthcare focus areas of healthcare delivery and outreach and emerging medical technologies:

 ®®   Healthcare delivery and outreach is subject to increasing competition, rising real estate costs,
      and tough operating environments. A large number of healthcare providers are exploring new IBMs to
      tap BOP patient segments, lesser penetrated geographies, while enhancing service offering levels.
      For example, some IBMs have set up chains of multispecialty outpatient clinics for primary care.
      Investments in primary care contribute to preventing complications in chronic diseases and reduce
      secondary and tertiary overcrowding by managing simpler health problems at the primary level. This
      allows secondary and tertiary centers to focus on high-end treatment and, in turn, improve processes
      and cost efficiencies.

      Enterprises also leverage existing channels/systems, involve local communities in supply chains,
      and train women from poor communities to function as frontline health workers, who diagnose basic
      illnesses, distribute essential medicines and other health products such as locally manufactured
      sanitary napkins in their catchment geographies. These models help decentralize healthcare, improve
      referral linkages, leverage local resources, and above all, generate employment and build capacities.

 ®®   The use of technology in both product and process innovations in healthcare is key to achieving
      the goal of coverage through scalable and cost-efficient ways. IBMs have used telemedicine to
      connect remote rural populations to medical advice from specialists, which were until now unavailable
      to them. IBMs have also developed low-cost medical devices and diagnostic tools to reduce the costs
      of healthcare.




                                                                                                              35
     Disease Focus of IBMs

     In the context of BoP patients, most diseases contribute to disproportionately high burdens of mortality
     and morbidity. The poor are also under-served with respect to healthcare services and products. Given
     this reality, IBMs must consider epidemiology and scope for profitability and scale in choosing their primary
     focus for interventions.

     An analysis of the disease focus of IBMs was undertaken by free listing all diseases mentioned in the
     secondary data. Eight disease categories were arrived at by combining similar diseases/broader disease
     areas. Figure 11 presents these disease categories and the distribution of IBMs across these categories.


                                         Figure 11: Disease focus of IBMs in India


                                                                                                  Long list (165)
                                                                        Disease focus
                    5%                                                                                India
                          5%             Communicable diseases
                               4%
            16%                          Disease neutral
                                                                  Communicable diseases                  8

                            8%           Emergency care           Disease neutral                        8
      12%                           2%
                                         Eye care                 Emergency care                         7

                                         HIV/AIDS                 Eye care                               13
                    48%                  Multiple disease focus   HIV/AIDS                               4
                                         Non communicable         Multiple disease focus                 79
                                         diseases
                                         RCH/nutrition            Non communicable diseases              20

                                                                  RCH/nutrition                          26



     The majority of IBMs in India focused on multiple diseases (48 percent), ranging from TB and malaria to
     cardiovascular and neurological diseases. Reproductive and child health (RCH) and nutrition was the second
     most popular focus, with 16 percent working in this area. It is also apparent that Indian IBMs have diversified
     into non-communicable diseases and eye care.

     Further analysis also shows that certain specific areas such as mental health, disability, and cancers are still
     significantly underserved.




36
     FACTORS DETERMINING FOCUS ON SPECIFIC DISEASES
This study shows that IBMs have a skewed disease focus because they choose their disease focus
based on high volumes, epidemiological trends, and availability of funding. The following key insights
were derived from stakeholder analysis on reasons behind IBMs’ choices of diseases:

®®   Target multiple diseases for high patient volumes, which leads to increases in efficiencies
     and profitability: IBMs focus on a range of diseases to improve cost efficiencies since almost the
     same capital expenditure and channels can optimally be used to serve more patients. From a revenue
     perspective, focusing on multiple diseases diversifies the risk of limiting the revenue stream to just
     one area.

®®   Focus on RCH ensures greater availability of funding and the ability to leverage public systems/
     programs due to donor and government priorities: Most international donor agencies including
     DFID, USAID, and BMGF prioritize funding for maternal and child health issues. Additionally, several
     government programs and subsidies in India such as the Janani Shishu Suraksha Yojana (JSSK),
     ambulance services for institutional deliveries, and childhood immunization has made it possible
     for IBMs to leverage their benefits. Stakeholders also reported that volumes in this area are very
     high (given the high total fertility rates) and the risks and need for specialization are limited. This
     increases efficiencies, reduces costs of setting up services, and avoids the challenges of attracting and
     retaining highly specialized medical professionals.

®®   Target non-communicable diseases, due to high volumes: The emerging burden of non-
     communicable diseases is contributing to higher volumes. As a result, many IBMs focus on NCDs,
     primarily diabetes and cardio-vascular diseases. Of the 20 IBMs focusing on NCDs, seven addressed
     cardio-vascular diseases and four diabetes. This is congruent with epidemiological data that shows the
     rising incidence of NCDs in India, with the number of diabetes cases expected to increase from nearly
     60 million in 2011 to 100 million by 2030 and a loss of 4.3 million DALYs (disability-affected life years)
     by 2020 to heart disease.

®®   Focus on eye-care due to the lower risk and lower investments involved: Another reason behind
     the choice of eye-care is the success of the Aravind Eye Care model, which has inspired newer
     enterprises to adopt different elements.

®®   Low focus on mental health, disabilities and oncology due to complexities related to the
     diseases, low patient loads and limited opportunities for scale due to a low prioritization
     by the government.



To conclude, IBMs focus on diseases that offer large volumes of patients, involve less complex and
standardized procedures, and require low investment to maintain sustainability and profitability.




                                                                                                                  37
        What healthcare needs         What was the evolution of   Where are the healthcare         What is the IBM’s target         How do healthcare IBMs
        and diseases do IBMs          the inclusive business      IBMs across the country?         population?                      raise funds?
        focus on?                     sector?




     HOW OLD ARE THE IBMs? ORGANIZATIONAL STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT
     This section focuses on the organizational stage of development of the IBMs. The analysis was made from
     the list of 165 IBMs across different categories. healthcare delivery and outreach and medical technology.

     Figure 12 classifies IBMs according to how many they have been in existence/operation.


                                       Figure 12: Life-stages of healthcare IBMs in India


                                                                                                  Stage                       Long list (165)
                        0%
                                                                                             0 – 3 years                             31
                                                      0 – 3 years
                                19%                                                          4 – 6 years                             36
                                                                                                                                     36
               20%
                                                      4 – 6 years
                                                                                             7 – 10 years                            44
                                                      7 – 10 years
       12%                        22%                                                        11 – 15 years                           20
                                                      11 – 15 years

                                                      > 15 years                             > 15 years                              33
                      27%
                                                      NA                                     NA                                       1


     The inclusive business space in India is young. The traditional approach of the private sector serving the poor
     was primarily through charitable organizations/NGOs supported by grants and which typically do not have
     cost recovery mechanisms or revenue streams. Recognizing the BoP as a potential market for products and
     services, seeing them as clients rather than beneficiaries, is a relatively new development in India. As a result,
     involvement of the private sector in healthcare for the poor has expanded to include business models with
     clear revenue streams.

     An analysis of the life-stages of the 165 healthcare IBMs shows that almost 70 percent of the IBMs in India
     are less than 10 years old. This shows that the inclusive business sector is India is relatively new and is in its
     early stages of development.

     A more nuanced analysis of the IBMs at different life-stages correlated with their area of healthcare
     intervention is interesting; older IBMs are primarily in the areas of healthcare delivery and outreach, which is
     the more traditional and less risky model. IBMs in medical technologies are relatively younger.


       The IBM space is relatively new in India with the majority of IBMs (70 percent) less than 10 years old.

       A majority of IBMs, which are more than 15 years old, are primarily engaged in healthcare delivery and
       outreach while the younger IBMs (0-3 years) are involved in medical technologies.


38
   What healthcare needs                    What was the evolution of              Where are the healthcare                      What is the IBM’s target   How do healthcare IBMs
   and diseases do IBMs                     the inclusive business                 IBMs across the country?                      population?                raise funds?
   focus on?                                sector?




WHERE ARE THE IBMs? GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF
HEALTHCARE IBMs

A geographical analysis of the list of 165 IBMs shows that enterprises are not equitably distributed across
the country. There are two levels of inequity that was found in the distribution of IBMs: (i) locations of IBMs
and (ii) reach of their products/services.

Most enterprises are located in the southern states (33 percent), more specifically in the two cities of
Chennai and Bangalore (17 percent). A more nuanced analysis shows that a significant proportion
(31 percent) of IBMs in medical technologies category are in these two cities. The two other cities with the
highest proportion of IBMs are Delhi and Mumbai at 12 percent and 10 percent respectively. Figure 13
shows geographical distribution of IBMs across all the states of India. The northeastern region has
extremely limited representation either in location of the enterprise or in reach of services. It is noteworthy
that no enterprise from the long list of 165 organizations is present in Sikkim, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh,
Meghalaya, and Nagaland. Tripura and Manipur had one IBM each.


Locations of IBM headquarters

                   Figure 13: Map of India showing the geographical location of IBMs (HQ of IBMs)



                                              Jammu and
                                              Kashmir


                                                  Himachal
                                                  Pradesh
                                            Punjab
                                                      Uttarakhand
                                              Haryana
                                                     Delhi                                                       Arunachal Pradesh
                                                                                            Sikkim
                                Rajasthan                   Uttar Pradesh
                                                                                                        Assam            Nagaland
                                                                                  Bihar              Meghalaya
                                                                                                                       Manipur
                                                                               Jharkhand               Tripura
                           Gujarat             Madhya Pradesh                              West                   Mizoram
                                                                                           Bengal
                                                                Chhattisgarh

                                                                               Odisha
                                      Maharashtra

                                                                                                                                     High density (>15)
                                                      Andhra
                                                      Pradesh
                                Goa                                                                                                 Medium density (4-15)

                                        Karnataka                                                                                   Low density (<4)

                                                    Tamil
                                                    Nadu                                                                            No IBMs
                                         Kerala


                                                    * 	 A representational map of the areas in which the study was conducted (prior to
                                                        the formation of Telangana state)




                                                                                                                                                                                     39
     Reach of IBMs products/services

     With regard to the spread of services, a number of IBMs have targeted under-served and vulnerable
     geographies such as the Empowered Action Group states[42] where the health needs are very high and
     availability of services limited. The gaps in numbers and quality of existing healthcare services in some of
     these states increase the viability of setting up business, with a large untapped consumer base and unmet
     healthcare needs. It is interesting that only some of the vulnerable states are served by IBMs – Bihar,
     Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and Chhattisgarh. Other states, like the north eastern states,
     Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, and Haryana continue to remain underserved.

     Figure 14 shows the geographical reach of IBMs’ products/services across the country.


                        Figure 14: Map of India showing the geographical reach of IBMs’ offerings



                                               Jammu and
                                               Kashmir


                                                   Himachal
                                                   Pradesh
                                             Punjab
                                                       Uttarakhand
                                              Haryana
                                                      Delhi                                                       Arunachal Pradesh
                                                                                             Sikkim
                                 Rajasthan                   Uttar Pradesh
                                                                                                         Assam            Nagaland
                                                                                   Bihar              Meghalaya
                                                                                                                        Manipur
                                                                                Jharkhand               Tripura
                            Gujarat             Madhya Pradesh                              West                   Mizoram
                                                                                            Bengal
                                                                 Chhattisgarh

                                                                                Odisha
                                       Maharashtra


                                                       Andhra
                                                       Pradesh
                                                                                                                                  High density (>20)
                                 Goa


                                         Karnataka
                                                                                                                                  Medium density (10-20)

                                                     Tamil                                                                        Low density (<10)
                                                     Nadu
                                          Kerala


                                                      * 	 A representational map of the areas in which the study was conducted (prior to the
                                                          formation of Telangana state)




     42	   The Empowered Action Group states include Bihar, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
           Orissa, and Rajasthan




40
This study indicates that the strength of the ecosystem, the value-chain, and presence of industry
facilitators are important in determining where IBMs are located.

   ®®   Facilitative Ecosystem: The presence of technology companies in Bangalore is a significant
        contributor to the higher number of healthcare technology IBMs in this city. The presence of
        development organizations, donor/funding agencies and access to policy-makers are the main
        reasons behind the high concentration of IBMs in Delhi. Mumbai being the financial capital with a
        high number of investors and corporate head-quarters is the main reason behind the preference
        for this city. The presence of other IBMs and a vibrant private sector encourages the growth of
        IBMs in certain geographies.

   ®®   Presence of Incubators: The presence of industry facilitators and incubators in the southern
        states/cities of Bangalore, Chennai, and Hyderabad determines of why these cities have more
        IBMs. This includes the IIT Chennai IT Park and the IKP Knowledge Park.

   ®®   Better human development indicators: Maharashtra and the southern states have relatively
        better HDIs in terms of poverty, literacy, and health. This impacts the paying capacity and
        awareness levels of target consumers and the availability of trained human resources.

   ®®   Better governance indicators: This is the determining factor in Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Karnataka,
        and Maharashtra

   ®®   Better infrastructure: Chennai, Bangalore, Delhi, and Mumbai, especially due to their
        metropolitan status, have better road, rail, and air transport connectivity, access to and ability to
        retain better human resources, and existing channels of distribution to consumers. Primarily due
        to these factors, most IBMs are concentrated in urban and peri-urban rather than in rural
        areas. The number of IBMs that have focused on rural India are negligible. Poor infrastructure
        poses a barrier for services offered by IBMs, access of IBMs to other geographies, HR talent,
        and other facilities

   ®®   Political unrest and conflicts that disrupts markets is one of the main reasons behind the
        absence of IBMs in Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, and the north-eastern states of India.

   ®®   Scale and expansion of the services of IBMs do not follow specific trajectories, but are
        determined by different factors. While some have expanded into areas where they see market
        potential, others have expanded based on partnerships they have developed. IBMs have typically
        begun in tier I and tier II cities and then spread to other geographies based on several factors.
        Expansion is generally upwards or horizontal.




                                                                                                                41
           What healthcare needs   What was the evolution of   Where are the healthcare      What is the IBM’s target   How do healthcare IBMs
           and diseases do IBMs    the inclusive business      IBMs across the country?      population?                raise funds?
           focus on?               sector?




     WHAT POPULATION SEGMENTS DO IBMs FOCUS ON?
     IBMs have the twin objectives of profitability and social impact. The organizations need to price and position
     their services in a certain way to meet these objectives.

     The BoP population—those living below $8 a day—can be segmented into those below the poverty line
     (described as those living below $2 a day) and those living between $2 and $8 a day.

     This study found that while many IBMs begin with the aim of providing services to the poorest, pressures
     to be profitable prompts them to focus on segment s that have the ability to pay, as well as bear the indirect
     costs associated with healthcare. Hence, the target population for IBMs is those living between $2 to $8 a day.
     The segment living below $2 a day are dependent on government and charitable organizations. Those living
     below $2 a day are not a focus segment for IBMs. However, IBMs cater to this segment through PPPs and
     government insurance schemes like RSBY and Arogyasri.


                                     Figure 15: Target population for IBMs in India[43]




                                                $5-8/day
                                                                                          Focus of IBMs


                                                $2-5/day

                                                                                          Largely catered to by
                                                                                          government and
                                                 <$2/day                                  charitable organizations


     IBMs find that the population segment living between $5 to $8 a day are generally easier to reach due to their
     geographical locations (urban and peri-urban areas). This segment also has higher levels of literacy and
     hence, demand for healthcare services is generally higher.




     43	    Figure not to scale




42
   What healthcare needs      What was the evolution of    Where are the healthcare        What is the IBM’s target         How do healthcare IBMs
   and diseases do IBMs       the inclusive business       IBMs across the country?        population?                      raise funds?
   focus on?                  sector?




HOW DO IBMs RAISE FUNDS?
This section examines how different IBMs, based on their legal status (for-profit, not-for-profit, or hybrid) raise
funds. The analysis has been carried out on the long list of 165 healthcare IBMs. The section also describes
the different kinds of funders: impact investors, donors, angel investors, and high-net worth individuals.

One critical differentiator in raising funds is whether the IBM is for-profit, not-for-profit, or a hybrid of both.
This determines the primary sources of funding that IBMs access, and within that, the different financial
instruments available to them.


                                  Figure 16: Institutional status of IBMs in India




          17%                                                                         Institutional                   Long list (165)
                                                                                         status
                                                   Not- for-profit
                            42%                                                 Not- for - profit                           69
                                                   For-profit

          41%                                      PPP                          For- profit                                 68

                                                                                PPP                                         28




Our analysis of the 165 IBMs shows that the Indian landscape has equal numbers of for-profit and not-for-
profit entities at around 41 percent and 42 percent each. The third category includes PPPs, which constitute
16 percent of the IBMs.

A growing trend observed in the Indian landscape is the emergence of hybrid models or the transformation
of not-for-profits into for-profits, as these are better placed to secure financing and scale over time. The
reverse trend is also apparent, where for-profit enterprises have set up not-for-profit arms, primarily as part of
expansion of value chains and diversification. For example, two for-profit IBMs, Ziqitza, and GNRC, have set
up training institutions as not-for-profits. The main reason behind this is to access tax benefits and subsidies
available to not-for-profits, especially in the area of training/education.




                                                                                                                                                     43
     Almost all IBMs had more than one source of funding, either more than one investor category, or different
     investors within the same category.

     Figure 17 presents the major sources of funding for IBMs in India.




                               Figure 17: Major sources of funding for IBMs in India

             46%


                                   33%
                                                          29%



                                                                                 17%

                                                                                                        8%




      Impact investors      Donors (includes        Angel investors         Incubators/         Parent company
                             governments)                                   investment
                                                                              networks

     The instruments of finance that most IBMs use include equity, grants, and debt. Impact investors are the
     main source of equity, while grants come from donor agencies. PPPs access funds from governments, paid
     for services rendered to the BoP, or for operation and management (O&M) contracts.

     It was also noted that the instruments and investor interest varied across life-stages, and consequently
     risks, of the IBMs. Early stage IBMs with higher risks are mainly set up through promoter’s capital
     and investments from high net-worth individuals or angel investors. Entry of institutional investors and
     investment funds occur only after IBMs achieve proof of concept, and typically complete about two years of
     operations. 100 percent of the 165 IBMs are above two years of age.


     Impact Investors

     Development finance institutions are leading capital providers in the impact investment market.
     Generally, they prefer to be catalytic and provide anchor funding, and thus are most active in first-time
     funds or investments. A common way for mainstream investors to invest in IBMs is through impact
     investment funds. Equity is the most common instrument used by impact investors to finance IBMs.




44
These funds are differentiated by their institutional context, target sector or geography, use of subsidy, and
expectations of returns. Generally, these funds target market returns, although many are structured as
non-profit organizations and typically provide a mix of grants, subsidized loans, and equity investments in
undercapitalized sectors in frontier markets. They also often provide pioneer funding and seed capital. Select
examples of such organizations that have invested in healthcare IBMs include Acumen, Ennovent, India
Innovations Fund by IKP Investment Management Company, UNITUS Seed Capital, Insitor Management,
and Aavishkaar.

Impact investing in India extends back to 1982, when the Ashoka Foundation provided grants to Indian social
entrepreneurs. However, it was not until recently that India witnessed an increase in the number and size
of investments in businesses with clear triple bottom lines. In 1997, Grassroots Innovations Augmentation
Network (GIAN) became India’s first non-profit socially-minded venture capital fund (VCF). In 2001,
Aavishkaar became the country’s first for-profit counterpart. Since then the number of players and the size of
each fund have increased considerably. Some of the largest actors in the healthcare field include Aavishkaar,
Acumen Fund, and Unitus.

The recent growth in capital available to IBMs indicates that the market is far from saturated, but at the same
time, very few funds have made successful exits from their investments. However, as business models
evolve and mature, this is likely to change. The number of IBMs seeking investments at various stages of
development is increasing rapidly. The recent growth in capital available to IBMs indicates that the market is
far from saturated. However, the balance between creating impacts and getting financial returns is difficult.
Besides this, investment instruments have not kept up with innovations. Often, traditional instruments are not
enough to address the needs of IBMs and their promoters at different life-stages of the enterprise. While most
impact investors provide IBMs with ‘patient capital’, financial returns remain a high priority.


Donors

Donors and foundations are key sources of funds for IBMs that are registered as not-for-profits. Additionally,
for-profit IBMs also access donors for awards or research grants instituted by these agencies.

In India, donor agencies and foundations play a complimentary role to investment funds in promoting IBMs.
Areas such as research, developing proof of concepts/pilot tests, and scaling into geographies and client
bases involve unviable costs and are unattractive for commercial investors. Support from donors in the form
of grants or awards have proved extremely valuable in these cases. The Gates Foundation partnered with IKP
Knowledge Park for a grand challenge to fund innovations in delivery of TB care. IKP Investment Management
Company has launched the India Innovation Fund focused on innovative healthcare and life-science
solutions. The World Bank’s Development Marketplace, USAID’s SHOPS, and DFID through its UK-AID are
also examples of donor agencies being involved in the inclusive business space. USAID-FICCI’s Millennium
Alliance acts as platform to bring together impact investors, venture capitalists, corporate foundations, early
investors, and donors to support and scale innovations. The Millennium Alliance provides social enterprises
with seed funding, business incubation, networking opportunities, and technical assistance and also assist
organizations to access equity and debt financing.




                                                                                                                  45
     Donor agencies and foundations have greater scope to engage more effectively with the IBMs registered
     as for-profit entities. Common funds like the India Innovation Fund can be used as instruments to support
     for-profit enterprises.


     Angels and High-Net Worth Individuals

     High-net worth individuals (HNIs) and angel investors are a popular source of funds for IBMs. Angels and
     HNIs have flexibility and a high level of discretion when making investment decisions. In many instances,
     they have more autonomy than other capital providers. They also often have fewer stakeholders to manage.
     Due to these reasons, angels are often the primary and only source of capital (besides promoter capital) for
     idea stage IBMs. Almost all IBMs in our primary research reported having at least one angel investor during
     their first two years.




46
CHAPTER   4
HEALTHCARE
IBMs - MODELS
AND CHALLENGES
FACED
     Providing healthcare services, especially to the poor, present a number of complexities and
     challenges. For-profit IBMs in the healthcare space address health needs of the poor, while
     ensuring financial viability. Social enterprises/IBMs have adopted different models to address these
     needs in innovative ways. This chapter is based on primary research conducted for this study.


     Healthcare IBMs – Models Overview

     The preceding chapter analyzed IBMs in the healthcare space, classifying them into hospitals and
     outreach models and medical technologies. IBMs can also be classified into four distinct models.
     These models were formulated on the basis of type, characteristics, and operating models of the
     organizations. The models are:

         ®®   Primary care delivery and outreach

         ®®   Secondary and tertiary care hospitals

         ®®   Innovative devices and consumables

         ®®   Networked devices and technologies.

     IBMs serve end consumers directly (B2C models) or they serve institutions that further serve
     end consumers (B2B models). The first two models— primary care delivery and outreach and
     secondary and tertiary care hospitals— are predominantly B2C models, while the other two
     models— innovative devices and consumables and networked devices and technologies— are
     mainly B2B.

     The following table lists the key features of each model and organizations which are representative
     of the model.




48
                                        Table: Models and key features of healthcare IBMs

      Model                                                  Key Features                                                     Organizations

                        	 First contact care providers and principal points for continuing
                           care. Located close to patients either through clinics, outreach
                           workers, health camps, or mobile medical vans
                        	 Focus mainly on promotive/preventive care, health education,
                           basic curative care, screening, diagnostics, provision of over-                               	 Swasth India
  Primary care             the-counter drugs                                                                             	 ERC Eye Care
  delivery and          	 Wide disease focus including communicable diseases,                                           	 Arogya Parivar
  outreach                 non-communicable diseases, basic reproductive and                                             	 SevaMob
                           child health services, and emergency care. Also focus on                                      	 Ziqitza[44]
                           determinants of health like nutrition, sanitation, etc.
                        	 Healthcare providers like community health workers, para-skilled
                           professionals, paramedical professionals, medical social
                           workers often play an important role in this model.

                                                                                                                         	 Glocal Healthcare
                                                                                                                         	 Vaatsalya
                        	 Hospital chains focusing on in-patient care                                                      Healthcare
  Secondary             	 Provide diagnostic tests and treatment including surgical                                     	 Soalni Healthcare
  and tertiary             procedures. Also provide specialized consultative services by                                 	 NephroPlus
  care                     doctors specializing in specific diseases/organ systems                                       	 GNRC Medical
  hospitals             	 Hospitals provide medical and surgical interventions across                                   	 LifeSpring
                           multiple specialties.                                                                            Hospitals
                                                                                                                         	 Welcare
                                                                                                                            HealthSystems

                        	 Frugal innovations and healthcare products that make healthcare
                           available, affordable and accessible to the poor                                              	 Embrace
  Standalone                                                                                                                Innovations
                        	 Innovative low-cost diagnostics and therapeutic devices
  devices and
                        	 These devices/consumables are not dependent on                                                	 AYZH
  consumables
                           technology/information networks or infrastructure/skilled                                     	 Axio Bio Solutions
                           caregivers for their use.

                                                                                                                         	 Swasthya Slate
                        	 Technology enabled integrated medical devices and
                                                                                                                         	 Dimagi
                           information systems
                                                                                                                         	 Dhilcare
  Networked             	 Integrated devices screen patients and conduct diagnostic tests,
                                                                                                                         	 iKure Techsoft
  devices and              and leverage communication networks/technology solutions to
  technologies             provide effective care                                                                        	 OTTET
                                                                                                                            Telemedicine
                        	 Information systems include software solutions for hospitals,
                           clinics, laboratories, etc.                                                                   	 uNotify
                                                                                                                            E-Compliance



44	   Ziqitza provides emergency ambulance care but has been included in the Primary Care Delivery and Outreach model since it is the
      first point of contact for patients. It also has outreach services in the form of mobile medical vans and provides primary care tele-
      consultations through a medical helpline




                                                                                                                                                 49
     Healthcare IBMs – Challenges Framework Overview

     IBMs in healthcare face unique challenges serving the poor while maintaining profitability, given the
     complexities of healthcare sectors in low-resource settings like India.

     This report uses the scaling barriers framework formulated by Monitor Inclusive Markets to analyze the
     challenges faced by IBMs at four different levels:

          ®®   Challenges at the firm level

          ®®   Challenges at the value-chain level

          ®®   Challenges in the sphere of public goods

          ®®   Challenges due to regulatory and policy frameworks



     Figure 18 shows the framework being used to describe the challenges at the various levels.


                                           Figure 18: Challenges to IBMs at different levels




                           Firm                       Value Chain                      Public Goods                     Government*




       Challenges that are either         Challenges which lie in            Challenges faced by a firm          Challenges to an
       intrinsic to a firm or may         the value chain of a firm,         due to unavailable/                 organization or a business
       originate at any of the            impacting its ability to           ineffective public goods .          model due to laws,
       other levels. These are            manufacture and sell               These are commodities/              regulations, and
       manifested strongly at the         products/ services to the          services that are usually           procedures that inhibit the
       firm level affecting its           end consumer. For                  provided by the                     firm from operating its
       business model and scale           instance, weak sourcing            government and benefit              model easily. For instance,
       - for instance limited ability     channels, weak                     society as a whole: for             complicated and multiple
       to attract skilled medical         distribution channels, lack        instance education,                 approvals required to set
       staff, limited ability to raise    of support service                 infrastructure, public              up hospitals, etc.
       capital.                           providers, etc.                    domain knowledge, etc.




     * 	 For this study, the outermost layer Government is considered a ‘regulatory environment’ and not a provider/funder of
         healthcare services




50
The following sections describe the four healthcare models − primary care delivery and outreach, secondary
and tertiary care hospitals, standalone devices and consumables, networked devices and technologies.

Challenges faced by organizations under each model are described through the framework described in figure
18. The sections also present some strategies used by the organizations to provide affordable, high-quality
healthcare to the poor. Data from primary research, as well as secondary literature was used to define and
illustrate each of these models, challenges, strategies, and case-studies.

Many challenges/barriers to scale are common among the four different models. However, the framework was
applied to each model to comprehensively understand these challenges and their unique implications for the
different kinds of IBMs.



Model 1: Primary care delivery and outreach models
The primary care delivery and outreach model comprises first contact care providers. A key feature of
primary care is the universal need for it. Typically, primary care and outreach models—including clinics,
pharmacies, mobile units, health camps, and home-based care—are located closer to the patient, and
facilitate access to healthcare.

The structure of primary care practice includes teams of medical and paramedical/non-medical health
professionals. Dependence on advanced skills is minimal and crucial roles are played in service
delivery by non-medical providers like community-health workers, para-skilled professionals, and
paramedical professionals.

IBMs within this model are engaged in a range of healthcare services such as preventive/promotive care,
health education and health behavior change, basic curative care, and pre-hospital care to patients, including
forms of emergency care.

Of the organizations surveyed for this study, those representing this model are:

    ®®   Swasth India: Provides primary healthcare
         services through a network of clinics in Mumbai’s
         urban slums. Its services includes general
         healthcare, dental healthcare, pathology, and
         medication. It also undertakes community
         outreach to generate health awareness.




    ®®   ERC Eye Care: Provides basic ophthalmic
         and optometrist services through a network
         of clinics in Assam. It also undertakes
         community outreach through house-to-
         house visits and vision camps.




                                                                                                                 51
          ®®      SevaMob: Delivers primary care through mobile medical units
                  in underserved areas in four states: Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka,
                  Jharkhand, and NCR. Services includes basic primary care,
                  medicines and prescriptions delivered to the premises of
                  subscribers using mobile technology. SevaMob also recently
                  launched a tele-health marketplace enabling patients to
                  get video consultations, second opinions, and in-clinic
                  appointments from 400 participating healthcare providers.

          ®®      Arogya Parivar: A social initiative by Novartis (a multi-national
                  pharmaceutical firm) that increases access to medicines in
                  underserved areas through health camps and collaborations
                  with local doctors and pharmacies. It also provides health
                  education to raise awareness on local diseases and preventive
                  health measures.

          ®®      Ziqitza: Provides a range of emergency care and
                  pre-hospitalization services through its fleets of ambulances, and
                  primary care through medical helplines and mobile medical units.


     Figure 19 shows the different challenges for this model at different levels:
     firm, value chain, public good, and government.

                           Figure 19: Challenges faced by primary care delivery and outreach models




                            Firm                   Value Chain                    Public Goods                         Government*




         ■ Limited viable business         ■ Shortage of well-trained       ■ Low ability of patients to       ■ Regulations restricting
               models exist in primary       medical personnel                 assess/differentiate              scope of care provided by
               care – IBMs are still                                           quality of services               paramedics to address
                                           ■ Lack of insurance
               evolving/young and yet                                                                            the scarcity of health
                                             coverage and financing         ■ Lack of awareness/poor
               to demonstrate success                                                                            personnel.
                                             mechanisms                        health-seeking behavior,
         ■ Need for a combination                                              especially for
                                           ■ Poverty and limited
               of medical and                                                  primary/preventive health
                                             paying capacity of
               managerial skills puts                                          services
                                             patients
               pressure on the business
                                                                            ■ Overall weak
               model                       ■ Delays in payments by
                                                                               infrastructure/ facilities in
                                             institutional customers
         ■ Lower compensation and                                              resource-poor settings
                                             (including government)
               difficult work conditions
                                                                            ■ Lack of market
               are barriers to attract     ■ Limited investor interest
                                                                               intelligence and
               scarce medical                in primary care models.
                                                                               information on primary
               personnel
                                                                               care industry.
         ■ Lack of capital for
               growth.

     * 	 For this study, the outermost layer Government is considered a ‘regulatory environment’ and not a provider/
         funder of healthcare services




52
Challenges at the firm level

Financially viable and sustainable models that focus on stand-alone primary care are still evolving,
and are yet to demonstrate success. Primary care models have low revenue potential due to absence of
services like surgeries and in-patient care. This is further compounded by a lack of awareness among BoP
patients about the need for and value of preventive/promotive care, resulting in a lower willingness to pay for
such services.[45] This impacts the viability of IBMs in this space. Because of this, primary care and outreach
services were traditionally delivered by government through the public health system, emerging only recently
in the inclusive business space.



  In ERC Eye Care’s initial year of operation, regular check-ups and preventive measures were not
  readily sought by local communities, despite scarce ophthalmic care in the area and high incidence
  of loss of vision. Similarly, Arogya Parivar faced challenges in selling preventive medicines like
  calcium supplements to prevent onset of osteoporosis, a disease that disables a large proportion of its
  catchment population.



Overall scarcity of trained health personnel in India is a challenge at the value chain level making it
difficult to attract good-quality medical and paramedical personnel. This challenge is magnified at the
firm level for IBMs located in underserved areas like remote rural areas or urban slums with weak
infrastructure and difficult working conditions. IBMs often offer lower compensation than what is offered at
non-IBM settings. As a result, employment with IBMs is often not as attractive as with mainstream
commercial ventures.



  Arogya Parivar is often constrained to find personnel for its health awareness activities in remote rural
  areas, especially in states with poor literacy.



Additionally, these healthcare firms require core staff to have a combination of medical and
management skills. With limited resources for salaries, firms often have to choose between either set of
skills. A lack of formal training in medicine/public health limits decisions based on epidemiological trends and
health-seeking behavior, while limited management skills results can compromise critical business areas like
growth/expansion, resource optimization, and managing cost efficiencies. This can also lead to
overburdening of personnel entrusted with both sets of responsibilities.



  Both Swasth India, promoted by engineering graduates, and ERC Eye Care, promoted by an
  ophthalmologist, have faced challenges in balancing the requisite medical and managerial skills.




45	   The challenge of low awareness levels amongst the BoP population is discussed in detail in the section on public
      good challenges




                                                                                                                         53
     Lack of capital for growth is a common firm level challenge faced by IBMs. Lack of capital affects the
     ability of primary care models to grow and expand business or offer more value-added services. These
     firms are young, with a higher gestation period and need patient capital (that is, investment with longer-term
     horizon for return on capital), without which the firms find it very difficult to sustain and develop to the point of
     mainstream investability.


     Challenges at the value-chain level

     Poverty among target consumers. This has multiple implications, the most direct being low paying capacity
     for healthcare. As seen from primary research, IBMs in the primary care model serve the poor, with average
     income levels of typical consumers ranging from $2 to $8 per day. The poor have low willingness to access
     and pay for primary/preventive healthcare. Poverty also poses other barriers to desired health outcomes, for
     instance, the poor are cannot bear the high indirect costs of forgoing daily wages to access care.

     Lack of demand-side financing and insurance coverage for primary care in the context of high poverty.
     This is another challenge for IBMs in this model. Currently, both social health insurance schemes like the
     Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) and commercial health insurance schemes offered by private
     insurers cover out-patient costs, costs of medicines, or of other related primary care. This makes it
     challenging for organizations to create and maintain sustainable demand for their offerings in the BoP market.



       The absence of comprehensive demand-side financing mechanisms impacts the affordability of primary
       care services offered by Swasth India, ERC Eye Care, and Arogya Parivar. SevaMob’s intervention
       attempts to address this issue by packaging its primary care services with insurance coverage. However,
       most consumers continue to access primary care services only to the extent of the specified free visits
       covered by insurance.



     Procurement and payment processes in the government system often subject to bureaucratic delays.
     This impacts IBMs for whom government is a significant customer. Tenders and selection of suppliers or partners
     for public private partnerships (PPPs) for the public health system is a long process, creating uncertainty in
     predicting revenue inflows and developing future plans. Once the firm is selected as a supplier, payments due
     to them for services offered are not timely. This creates problems meeting operational expenses as IBMs are
     not usually cash rich.



     Ziqitza works with government in various states through public-private partnerships. It regularly faces
     delays in procurement. as well as in payments for their ambulatory services due to long approval processes.




54
Grave shortages of trained health personnel. India has an estimated shortage of at least one million
doctors and two million nurses, given its population.[46] In 2010, India had only six physicians and
ten nurses/midwifes per 10,000 people, much lower than the global average of 15 and 33 respectively.[47]

Limited investor interest in primary/preventive care models lead to difficulties in expansion of
operations. Investors, commercial lenders, and private-equity/venture capital firms are often uninterested
in the primary care model as it requires patient capital with long gestation periods. Lack of funds makes it
challenging for the firms to expand operations, which in turn leads to limited scale and low revenues.


Challenges at the public-goods level

Lack of awareness and poor health-seeking behavior among the BoP population. With primary care, this
is aggravated by its “push” nature (products/services that poor consumers can and should buy because it will
improve their lives significantly, but that they do not readily desire or demand) A lack of programs on
awareness generation and health education from the government side has resulted in information
asymmetries and, combined with limited paying capacity, made the BoP population less likely to spend on
primary/preventive healthcare. Additionally, the poor typically access care only in an advanced stages of
diseases when it becomes debilitating, rather than at early stages.




  SevaMob, Swasth India, and ERC Eye Care faced challenges on an ongoing basis where target
  consumers were unaware of the benefits of investing in primary/preventive health. In response to the low
  demand for eye care despite widely prevalent loss of vision, ERC Eye Care has invested significantly in
  organizing regular eye camps and recruits community health workers to generate awareness, diagnose
  problems, and refer patients to treatment where appropriate.




BoP populations are often unable to the assess quality of healthcare services. Lack of information
prevents customers from distinguishing between high-quality reliable care and easily available but
irresponsible or low-quality care.



  Swasth India says that the biggest competition they face is from “quacks” or untrained informal
  practitioners in urban slums due to their use of injections and antibiotics for minor illnesses that
  often do not require such medication.




46	   WHO 2013
47	   World Bank 2010




                                                                                                               55
     Poor infrastructure like road networks, erratic power supplies, and unreliable telecommunications
     networks common in India, especially in rural areas and urban slums. IBMs delivering primary care and
     outreach services must be able to reach customers close to where they reside. Poor infrastructure poses a
     huge barrier to achieving this on a sustainable basis, increasing costs to reach underserved communities.


       Ziqitza’s emergency services have faced this challenge in various rural regions of the country where the
       lack of all-weather road networks delays response times. Arogya Parivar, SevaMob. and ERC Eye Care
       have faced challenges in ensuring sustainable access to their offerings in remote, hard-to-reach areas.



     Lack of market intelligence and information. The industry is unable to consolidate and disseminate
     information to help young primary-care IBMs refine their models and scale up their services. Vibrant
     networks and accelerators for primary care firms that can provide facilitation and support for advocacy
     efforts do not exist.


     Challenges at the regulatory and policy level

     Regulations restricting scope of clinical care provided by paramedical staff constrain primary care and
     outreach IBMs. Regulations restrict the scope of healthcare services that an experienced nurse can provide,
     despite multiple years of on-the-ground experience or training. This prohibits paramedical staff from providing
     curative care even if this is the best option in resource-poor settings.


     Business model initiatives to address challenges faced by primary care and outreach IBMs

     The major business model elements adopted by primary care and outreach model IBMs are meant to improve
     their value proposition to end-consumers by providing diverse services and integrated and comprehensive
     care to the patients. Additionally, they optimize delivery by increasing efficiency, sharing resources among
     multiple facilities, and employing people from the community as health educators/outreach workers. These
     elements can be described as follows:

        a.	   Improve value proposition by offering additional diversified services: Consumers often demand
              higher forms of care or specialized care that goes beyond the scope of primary and outreach care IBMs.
              To maintain their relevance and value-proposition to target consumers, primary care firms expand their
              value-chain to offer other related services. These are provided either directly or through referral networks
              with secondary/tertiary care facilities or in partnership with other healthcare-based institutions (like health
              insurance players)



      In addition to outreach emergency care, Ziqitza provides training on basic and advanced life-support, and
      offers placement services to other organizations to address the human resource gap in the area. Ziqitza,
      in partnership with state governments, also operates a health helpline that offers free tele-consultations
      with doctors. ERC Eye Care is expanding to include secondary care ophthalmic hospitals to address the
      huge unmet need in its areas of operation. SevaMob has partnered with a public health insurance player
      to offer personal accident and hospitalization cover to its target patient base, which can be purchased
      along with outpatient care.




56
 b.	 Leverage local community as health educators/outreach workers to optimize on costs: Most IBMs in
     this model have integrated components of health education and community awareness to increase health
     seeking by target consumers. Firms have also commonly involved local communities as distributors
     of their offerings, training them as community outreach workers, health educators, and drug distributors.



ERC Eye Care’s Vision Assistants (EVAs) are women from local villages trained to raise awareness on
eye care. They contribute significantly towards increasing demand for ERC’s services. Swasth India’s
community outreach workers are residents of local communities. They undertake health awareness in
their catchment slums and organize school health camps.



 c.	   Build hub and spoke models to expand coverage while increasing efficiency: In this, IBMs set up
       clinics (or facilities) in a hub and spoke model. The spokes are generally the first point of contact for
       the patients, while hubs have advanced facilities. Facilities located in central locations (hubs) receive
       referrals from facilities set up in remote/low-population areas (spokes). This helps IBMs achieve a wider
       coverage of patients with lower investment.



While basic diagnostic tests are conducted at Swasth India’s medical centers, more advanced tests are
done at the central hub, which also has the laboratory.




                                                                                                                   57
                               Illustrative Case Study – Swasth India
     The case of Swasth India illustrates key features and challenges of the primary-care delivery and outreach model.


                                                         Swasth India provides low-cost primary healthcare services
                                                         to the urban poor in Mumbai’s slums. Starting operations in 2011,
                                                         Swasth has a network of 12 primary healthcare centers.

                                                         Each Swasth medical center offers end-to-end basic healthcare
                                                         solutions. A typical Swasth clinic offers consultations, medicines,
                                                         diagnostic tests, computerized health records, and discounted
                                                         referrals. Health services like consultations and medicines are
                                                         bundled as packages; rates depend on the complexity of the health
                                                         issue, with an average bill of around $1.50. The centers maintain
                                                         detailed patient histories as electronic medical records, which are
                                                         available across centers and accessible to patients. Centers are
       staffed by one doctor, one dentist, and two or three health assistants. Doctors are available eight hours a day at
       the centers, especially in the evenings to suit the working population.

       To create and sustain demand for its primary care offerings, Swasth employs local community members as outreach
       workers. These workers engage in awareness generation on diseases, drugs, and the importance of early detection
       through home visits. To complement this, regular Swasth Melas are organized within the communities, which offer
       check-ups and health education.

       With increasing demand from their catchment communities, Swasth expanded its value chain to include diagnostic
       tests and some specialized care. Pathology tests are conducted in-house, while more advanced tests are
       conducted through partnerships with Apollo and Thyrocare. Additionally, specialized care offerings such as dental
       services were introduced at select centers. Swasth also has a referral network connecting patients to advanced
       care facilities, which patients can access at discounted rates.

        Despite its nominal prices, Swasth faces challenges in generating demand for its general consultations due to
       lack of awareness among consumers and poor health-seeking behavior.

       Another major challenge is inadequate access to finance. Swasth has not received institutional funding, and has
       largely sustained itself on ad-hoc angel investments.

       Despite these challenges, Swasth reaches a population of around 1.2 million low-income people, with its centers
       reporting around 2 million patient visits till date. In addition to its centers’ coverage, Swasth’s twelve health workers
       and twelve empanelled schools reach out through community mobilization and health-awareness activities.

       Data from a 2013 study indicates that 62 percent patients were visiting Swasth clinics for more than two
       months, implying that once a user visits a clinic, there is a high probability of him/her returning. Also, 87 percent
       respondent customers were earlier visiting informal clinics, indicating that, over time, the community has started to
       acknowledge the benefits offered by Swasth. This indicates that Swasth’s model is attractive to target consumers
       and has the potential to demonstrate impact over time.




58
Model 2: secondary and tertiary care hospitals
The secondary and tertiary care model comprises hospital chains or standalone facilities providing in-patient
hospitalization care. This model provides specialized consultative healthcare services through doctors
specializing in specific diseases/organ systems (such as oncology, cardiology, neurology, and gynecology). The
services consist of medical investigations and treatment, including surgical procedures, management of chronic
diseases, skilled attendance during childbirth, intensive care and forms of emergency care. Super-specialized
tertiary care services such as cardiac surgery, joint replacement surgery, advanced neonatology services and
other complex medical and surgical interventions also form a part of the offerings. Services also include special
diagnostic and therapeutic services such as biopsy, medical imaging, pathology, and dialysis.

Most models also provide primary care services through outpatient physician consultations, basic
diagnostics, and, in some cases, outreach services. These services are provided with the aim of
becoming an integrated provider and using primary care services as a driver to attract a wider population
base for inpatient hospitalization.

Typically, facilities under this model address select diseases based on existing demand-supply situations in
catchment regions, disease incidence and prevalence rates, availability of specialist doctors, capital investment
required, and paying capacity of target populations.

Of the organizations surveyed for this study, those representing this model are:

    ®®   Glocal Healthcare: Operates a chain of
         five 100-bed hospitals in West Bengal,
         providing primary and secondary care
         services for 95 percent of the disease load
         in its catchment areas. Glocal is expanding
         and opening hospitals in Uttar Pradesh,
         Bihar, and Odisha. It also owns a company,
         Indigram, that provides customized training
         for manpower skills development.

    ®®   LifeSpring Hospitals: Operates a network
         of small (20-25 bed) maternity care
         hospitals in Andhra Pradesh. The
         hospitals provide antenatal care, postnatal
         care, deliveries, family planning services,
         pediatric care, diagnostic services,
         and healthcare education in
         surrounding communities.

    ®®   Vaatsalya: Operates a network of
         hospitals providing primary and secondary
         care in tier II and III towns in Karnataka
         and Andhra Pradesh. The hospitals focus
         on gynecology, pediatrics, general surgery
         and general medicine, nephrology, and
         orthopedic care.




                                                                                                                    59
     ®®   Soalni Hospital: Operates a hospital in
          Palwal, Haryana that offers inpatient and
          outpatient services, diagnostics, critical
          care, and pharmacy.




     ®®   Nephroplus: Operates a chain of clinics/
          set-ups in hospitals providing kidney
          dialysis services. It also runs Enpidia, a
          training academy for dialysis technicians
          and nurses.




     ®®   Welcare Health Systems: Offers
          diagnostic and consultation services for
          diabetic retinopathy through screening
          set-ups inside existing diabetes
          centers, general hospitals, and other
          health centers.




     ®®   GNRC Medical: Operates a 100-bed
          tertiary care hospital in Guwahati,
          Assam. The hospital provides care in
          most specialties (OPD, IPD, diagnostics,
          and pharmacy). GNRC also runs two
          mobile medical units to raise awareness
          and improve health-seeking behavior
          in the community.




60
Figure 20 shows the different challenges that operate at the different levels for this model.

                   Figure 20: Challenges faced by secondary and tertiary care delivery models




                    Firm                      Value Chain                    Public Goods                        Government*




   ■ Need for high investment        ■ Shortage of well-trained         ■ Lack of awareness/ poor         ■ Complicated and multiple
      for growth                        medical/paramedical and            health-seeking behavior,         approvals required to set
                                        hospital management                leading to delays in             up hospitals
   ■ Large patient volumes and
                                        professionals                      seeking care
      catchment size critical for                                                                         ■ Risk of lack of continuity of
      viability                      ■ Patients’ lack of ability to     ■ Lack of market                    government
                                        pay; inadequate insurance          information and cross-           policy/regulations
   ■ Limited ability to attract
                                        coverage/demand-side               learning from successful
      well-trained paramedical                                                                            ■ Regulations restricting
                                        financing                          models of
      and medical personnel,                                                                                scope of care provided by
                                                                           secondary/tertiary
      especially super-              ■ Weak referral linkages                                               paramedics to address
                                                                           hospitals that can be
      specialists                       with public/private primary                                         scarcity of health
                                                                           replicated and scaled
                                        care providers                                                      personnel.
   ■ Reliance on government
                                                                        ■ Poor infrastructure and
      for revenues, making the       ■ Lack of low-cost, high-
                                                                           lack of supportive
      model vulnerable to policy        quality medical equipment
                                                                           ecosystem impedes
      changes                           and maintenance services,
                                                                           attraction and retention of
                                        thereby increasing costs of
   ■ Need for a combination of                                             personnel
                                        providing care.
      medical and managerial
                                                                        ■ Poor connectivity, limiting
      skills puts pressure on the
                                                                           access and reach of
      business model.
                                                                           patients to the hospital.

* 	 For this study, the outermost layer Government is considered a ‘regulatory environment’ and not a provider/funder of
    healthcare services


Challenges at the firm level

High investments required to set up secondary and tertiary care hospitals. Costs of land, buildings,
equipment, and other infrastructure is high. Availability of sufficient capital, therefore, becomes a basic
requirement for establishment and scale up of secondary/tertiary care hospitals.

Viability of hospitals is critically dependent on large patient volumes and bed occupancy. However,
patient volumes depend on the size of the catchment population, disease incidence rates, and paying
capacity. The situation is worsened by the lack of transportation infrastructure in remote/rural areas. This is
a barrier for patients to travel distances to access hospital services. IBMs thus find it difficult to be viable in
locations with smaller catchment populations.



  Glocal Healthcare faced a challenge in defining their optimal catchment to ensure adequate patient
  volumes and yet be easily accessible to their target consumers. Initially, Glocal set up 30-bed hospitals
  at sub-divisional levels covering populations of 30,000. Lower demand and inadequate volumes made
  the firm soon revise this strategy to setting up hospitals in larger towns covering populations of around
  3 million. The expanded catchment area contributed to higher volumes and Glocal doubled the size of
  its hospitals to 100-beds to respond to increasing volumes.




                                                                                                                                            61
     Challenges related to human resources are ubiquitous across firms. The overall scarcity of trained health
     personnel in India is a challenge at the value-chain level. Secondary and tertiary hospitals require general
     physicians, specialist doctors, and nursing staff. Specialists are significantly more expensive, and IBMs often
     find it difficult to afford them. Additionally, a number of these hospitals are located in underserved contexts like
     rural or peri-urban districts with weak infrastructure and difficult working conditions. This makes it even more
     difficult to attract and retain highly-skilled health professionals.


       Almost all IBMs included in the secondary and tertiary care delivery model face challenges related to
       human resources. The biggest challenge faced by GNRC Medical is attracting and retaining specialists,
       in response to which they increased compensation packages and offer incentives like housing and profit-
       sharing. Vaatsalya, on the other hand, used the desire by a specialist to reside in a particular town as a
       critical determinant (besides other factors) to locate their hospitals. Recruiting specialists who want to be
       based in their home-towns due to familial ties ensures low attrition.



     A combination of medical and management skills among core staff, as well as trained hospital
     managers are required. With limited resources allocated for salaries, firms often must choose between
     scarce skills – specialist doctors or trained managers?

     Limited management training and skills among hospital staff is a widespread challenge. Hospital
     managers are a scarce resource, as not too many such courses are offered by management institutes in
     India. The limited numbers of specialized managers that are available are not attracted by opportunities in
     these firms, instead preferring large corporate hospitals. Attracting and retaining highly trained management
     professionals is challenging for IBMs. As a result, critical business decisions like growth and expansion,
     operational efficiencies, resource optimization, and forming partnerships across the value chains are
     often compromised.



       Finding hospital managers and retaining them were challenges faced by GNRC Medical and Vaatsalya,
       especially in their initial years. GNRC mentored its second rung in advanced strategic management
       with the help of a global consulting firm, and has a partnership with Singapore National Hospital to
       offer training in hospital management to GNRC’s core staff. Glocal Healthcare recruited highly skilled
       management professionals and inducted them into the firm through equity ownership.



     Reliance on government schemes, especially insurance and demand-side financing programs to
     serve the BoP population. Some organizations leverage government and social health insurance schemes,
     as most of their target consumers are unable to afford in-patient healthcare. However, while social schemes
     provide assured revenues, the risks are unpredictable policy changes that adversely affect the coverage
     under them. Such factors make it risky for secondary and tertiary care hospitals to be overly dependent on
     social welfare programs.




62
Challenges at the value-chain level

Poverty among target consumers and inadequate insurance coverage has implications for the
firm. The typical patient of the hospitals in this model earn in $2 to $10 per day. In-patient and specialist
services offered by these hospitals are unaffordable for the poor as out-of-pocket expenses. Additionally,
hospitalization involves very high indirect costs, such as patients and families forgoing daily wages, cost of
accommodation and food during the hospital stay, and transportation to reach the hospital.

Demand-side financing programs and health insurance is crucial to address these costs and help BoP
populations to access secondary/tertiary care. While this problem is understood and certain social insurance
schemes have been launched, they cover only 16 percent of the population. Further, the annual cover is very
low (RSBY, the largest social insurance scheme, provides an annual cover of only $500 for a family of five).
This makes it challenging for organizations to create and maintain sustainable demand for their offerings in
the BoP market.

Primary referral networks are weak in the country. This affects secondary and tertiary care, which is
dependent on effective referral linkages with primary care providers. Primary healthcare set ups, serving
the BoP population, often do not have adequate infrastructure and resources to provide quality care to
patients. Moreover, primary care facilities in both private and public settings are not efficiently managed and
do not provide referrals to secondary and tertiary care hospitals appropriately. This leads to overcrowding of
secondary and tertiary care hospitals with patients who only require primary care, resulting in low utilization of
resources and infrastructure for patients needing specialized care.

Hospitals need high investments towards medical equipment. This constitutes one of the largest cost
heads for IBMs. A large part of medical equipment and devices sold in India are imported due to a lack of
indigenous manufacturing. Additionally, owing to limited scale, IBMs cannot get discounted pricing through
bulk purchases.



  Vaatsalya and GNRC Medical have struggled with credible and cheap procurement of high-end medical
  equipment. To address this GNRC Medical started in-house manufacturing of hospital beds, wheel chairs,
  and stretchers, and partnered with large multi-national medical devices companies to source cheaper
  versions of their products.



Regular and reliable maintenance servicing of equipment is difficult. This is due to the relatively remote
locations of hospitals and the limited ability of hospitals to pay extra for maintenance services.

Shortage of trained specialists and hospital managers. These are two most common challenges faced by
IBMs in this model. These were discussed in the earlier section on firm level challenges.




                                                                                                                     63
     Challenges at the public-goods level

     Lack of awareness and poor health seeking behaviors. This is discussed in detail in the previous section
     on primary care and outreach model. There is a high degree of delayed care-seeking behavior among the
     poor. Very often, low-income families do not have awareness or the money to seek primary care. This worsens
     health conditions and results in catastrophic episodes that are difficult to manage. Secondary and tertiary
     hospitals commonly get such cases where prognosis, and indirectly their performance, could be better if care
     was accessed on time. Additionally, post-hospitalization care, especially relapses and prevention of infections
     after surgeries, are more difficult to ensure in poorer patients. In case of such complications, effectiveness and
     credibility of the hospital is questioned.


       GNRC Medical reported patients coming from outside their catchment areas to seek care at very late stages
       of disease progression, when treating the disease sometimes becomes impossible or involves unaffordable
       expenses. NephroPlus sees low-income patients for dialysis at late stages of the disease. Further these
       patients need to practice strict home-based care after dialysis, and are often unable to do so due to lack of
       resources and awareness.



     Poor infrastructure. Bad road networks, erratic power supply, and unreliable telecommunications networks
     are common in India, especially in peri-urban towns and rural areas where IBMs are located. Advanced care
     cannot be provided without uninterrupted electricity. Hospitals also use technology to increase efficiencies with
     a number of them maintaining electronic medical records and procurement data. These systems need internet
     connectivity to function.

     Patients must be able to reach hospitals easily and quickly in case of emergencies. Poor infrastructure poses a
     huge barrier to achieving this on a sustainable basis. Poor infrastructure also leads to a weak ecosystem of
     schools and other industry. This restricts doctors from choosing to work with these IBMs due to limited
     opportunities for their families.

     The industry is unable to consolidate and disseminate information to help newer firms refine their models and
     scale up services.



       Hospitals located in areas with weaker infrastructure, like GNRC Medical in peri-urban Assam have faced
       these challenges in their functioning.



     Challenges at the regulatory and policy level

     Processes to obtain mandated approvals to set up and run a hospital is lengthy and bureaucratic.
     New hospitals need permissions from as many as 14 departments (for example, water board, electricity
     board, fire services, and directorate of drug control). A single window clearance for these processes is
     absent and coordination with multiple departments becomes difficult, especially for resource-constrained and
     entrepreneur-driven IBMs.

     Regulations against by paramedical personnel providing curative/prescriptive care. This has been
     discussed for the previous model and is also a barrier for these hospitals. In a context where the availability of
     medical doctors and highly trained nurses, like general nurse midwives (GNMs), are extremely limited, this is a
     significant barrier. It prohibits training nurses to provide certain forms of care, often the best option available to
     IBMs in resource-constrained settings.

64
Unpredictable nature of government policies and regulations impact IBMs. Policies and programs often
change with change of bureaucrats or political leadership. These sometimes have serious implications for
enterprises. Decisions to accept certain treatment protocols versus others; changes in policies like the RSBY
that contribute to hospitals’ revenues, tax rebates, and approvals for medical/paramedical training courses,
are examples of policies that have far-reaching consequences for this model.


Business model initiatives to address challenges faced by secondary and tertiary care
delivery IBMs

The major business model elements adopted by secondary/tertiary care hospitals are focused on reducing
investments and operating costs to provide services at lower prices, improve accessibility and affordability for
patients, generate higher volumes, and grow/expand operations. These elements can be categorized into:

    a.	   Initiatives to reduce capital investments: Hospitals generally require heavy investment in land, building,
          and equipment, which puts pressure on the viability/sustainability of the business model as well as
          growth/expansion. To achieve scale while reducing investment, IBMs follow asset-light models, which
          allow them to save costs related to real estate and construction (such as land/building leasing instead
          of purchase). These are effective, especially in urban areas where real estate costs are high and capital
          expenditure is often prohibitively high for social enterprises.


  Vaatsalya Healthcare leases buildings instead of owning them, allowing it to reduce capital expenses by
  almost 60 percent. Glocal Healthcare has adopted a limited liability partnership model to acquire land for
  new hospitals, where the land owner is given equity.

  IBMs have expanded this strategy to include leasing and situating services within existing hospitals, or
  leasing medical equipment, thus saving costs. Nephroplus locates its services within existing tertiary
  care hospitals, avoiding building standalone clinics. LifeSpring has long-term lease agreements with
  former schools, apartment buildings, and old warehouses that are converted into hospitals.



    b.	 Initiatives to reduce operating costs: Some IBMs in secondary and tertiary care have followed a
        no-frills model to provide highly standardized, specialized offerings at reduced prices, thus increasing
        affordability for the poor as well as improving margins. The hospitals offer pared-down services that
        meet basic needs of the poor at low prices and still generate positive cash flow and profits through high
        volumes, high-asset utilization, and service specialization. No-frills hospitals minimize non-core capital
        and expenses to provide “bare bones” service and lower unit costs of delivery.


  Vaatsalya’s hospitals do not provide air-conditioners and high-end televisions in patient rooms, furniture
  and interiors are basic, and they do not have additional facilities like cafeterias. Minimizing non-core
  expenditure allows them to lower capital and operating costs. GNRC Medical undertakes various
  measures such as using local construction material that is cheaper; having a horizontal rather than
  a multi-story building, minimizing the need for elevators; maximizing natural light through sky-lights
  thus reducing electricity costs; and designing sufficiently ventilated buildings to reduce the need for
  air-conditioning across the facility. These strategies have helped GNRC to improve cost-efficiencies
  and environmental sustainability. LifeSpring hospitals are strictly no-frills; they cut costs by standardizing
  procedures and trimming expenses. The hospitals have no canteens, and have outsourced pharmacy
  and laboratory services.




                                                                                                                       65
                           Illustrative Case Study – GNRC Medical
       GNRC Medical illustrates key features, strategies, and challenges of secondary and tertiary care hospitals.


                                              GNRC Medical is a tertiary care hospital modeled as an inclusive
                                              business. Guwahati Neurological Research Center (GNRC) was
                                              operationalized in 2014 to reach low-income populations of rural and
                                              semi-urban Assam. GNRC also runs two other commercial multi-specialty
                                              tertiary care hospitals in Guwahati that do not focus on the BoP population.

                                            With a catchment population of ten million, GNRC Medical has a capacity
                                            of 300 beds. of which 100 are already operationalized. The hospital
                                            provides tertiary care services in multiple specialties, offering a range
                                            of services that include outpatient consultations, diagnostics, in-patient
                                            admissions for medical and surgical care, emergency care, blood bank,
     and pharmacy. Services are priced lower than those of other private players, with price differences of more than
     50 percent in some cases; OPD charges are $1 to 2, and the first 24 hours of emergency care is provided free of cost.

     GNRC also runs two mobile medical units in Assam that provide outreach services (including consultations
     and diagnostics) to the local population and referrals to the hospital. They also provide health education, thus
     generating awareness and increasing demand for the hospital’s services. These units are also leveraged to
     understand the health-seeking behaviour of patients, their paying capacity, and challenges faced with existing
     healthcare facilities so as to contextualize GNRC Medical’s specifications (services, bed strength and prices for
     different services) to the catchment population.

     GNRC has employed several measures to reduce costs. The hospital was constructed by workers from the local
     BoP community, which reduced labor costs while simultaneously generating income opportunities for the poor,
     in turn increasing the attractiveness of the hospital for the poor. The hospital’s exterior is cladded with bamboo
     that acts as a natural insulator, reducing the need for air conditioning and associated costs. Other cost-reduction
     measures include optimization of patient flow to increase efficiency of operations and centrally managing
     procurement for all of GNRCs hospitals in Guwahati.

     Attracting medical and paramedical staff is a major challenge for GNRC due to the low availability of personnel in
     Assam and the hospital’s location on the outskirts of the city. GNRC has undertaken various measures to address
     this; a few of these include recruiting young doctors immediately after their post-graduation, offering attractive
     salary structures and benefits, rotating doctors from their other two hospitals to provide advanced care, and
     setting up a nursing institute.

     Recruiting and retaining hospital managers has also been a challenge for GNRC. It has partnered with the
     Singapore National Hospital to offer hospital management training to GNRC’s staff. Another challenge, faced
     by GNRC in its commercial hospitals, was delays in reimbursements from the government under the Central
     Government Health Scheme (CGHS). Due to these delays, and low awareness among its catchment population
     about government schemes, GNRC Medical has not been empanelled under either CGHS or RSBY.

     Lack of reliable and cheap equipment and regular maintenance services of the equipment is difficult to ensure due
     to the relatively remote locations of hospitals; in response, GNRC started in-house manufacturing of non-medical
     equipment, for which it employs local community members.

     GNRC plans to expand the capacity of its current hospital by operationalizing its remaining and adding additional
     beds. Further, it plans to establish ten more BoP-focused, low-cost hospitals in the next 5 years.

66
Model 3: Standalone devices and consumables
Innovations in healthcare and medical products have been exponential over the last decade. This
model includes inclusive businesses that offer frugal (low-cost) innovations in healthcare products and
consumables. These innovations make healthcare affordable for the poor by bringing down cost of care
either directly or indirectly. They make healthcare available and accessible by reaching underserved
populations with high quality offerings that may otherwise be unavailable to them. Innovative low-cost
screening, diagnostics and therapeutic devices, and surgical consumables included in this model have the
potential to revolutionize clinical practice.

Of the organizations surveyed for this study, those representing this model are:

    ®®   Embrace Innovations: This company developed an infant
         warmer to address neonatal hypothermia. Recognizing that
         electricity and skilled medical staff are often not available even
         in areas where traditional incubators are present, Embrace
         Innovations developed an easy-to-use, portable infant warmer
         that requires minimal electricity and is priced significantly
         lower than conventional incubators. Additionally, Embrace
         incubators can be used in resource-poor settings such as rural
         hospitals and homes.

    ®®   AYZH: This company produces and distributes ‘Janma,’ a clean
         birth kit containing simple tools to ensure sanitation and sterility
         during childbirth. AYZH trained 340 rural health workers on the
         six cleans (clean hands, clean perineum, clean delivery
         surface, clean cord cutting and tying instruments, and clean
         cutting surface) and the use of the clean birth kit to reach scale
         in rural areas.

    ®®   Axio Bio Solutions: This company has developed bleeding
         control and wound management products using bio-materials.
         Its AXIOSTAT (an institutional product) is India’s first
         emergency hemostatic dressing, and its Sureklot (a retail
         product) will be sold through business-to-consumer (B2C)
         channels such as pharmacies. The Axio Bio products can be
         used for a variety of applications, ranging from dental to severe
         trauma, at a fraction of the cost of competitor products.




                                                                                                           67
     Figure 21 shows the different challenges that operate at the different levels for this model.


                            Figure 21: Challenges faced by standalone devices and consumables




                        Firm                        Value Chain                   Public Goods                       Government*




        ■ Long product development cycle            ■ To attain viability, low-    ■ Lack of awareness               ■ Ambiguous regulations for
           and lack of opportunities for efficacy     cost products require           among channel                    medical devices industry
           testing in ‘real’ contexts delay           high purchase volumes           partners/buyers about            leading to limited
           commercialization and revenue              – which are difficult in        the availability and             indigenous manufacturing
           generation                                 BoP markets                     benefits of innovative           and thereby higher costs
                                                                                      products
        ■ Need for high investments at the          ■ To achieve volumes                                             ■ Absence of quality
           early-stage; investor interest can be      and scale, public sector     ■ Consumers tend to                 standards certifying
           generated only after developing            procurement is critical;        associate low price with         efficacy/accuracy for new
           proof-of-concept                           linkages with                   poor quality leading to          solutions.
                                                      government are difficult        lower acceptance for
        ■ Young and evolving business
                                                      due to complex                  frugal innovations
           models have not yet developed
                                                      procurement rules.
           robust marketing/distribution                                           ■ Lack of market
           strategies                                                                 information and
                                                                                      incubators/wet-labs
        ■ Need for a combination of technical
                                                                                      required to develop
           and managerial skills puts pressure
                                                                                      innovations that respond
           on the business model
                                                                                      to the needs of
        ■ Competition from existing large                                             buyers/users in the
           players that have much higher                                              system that serve the
           ability to reduce pricing and bundle                                       poor.
           financing solutions.




     * 	 For this study, the outermost layer Government is considered a ‘regulatory environment’ and not a provider/funder of
         healthcare services




     Challenges at the firm level

     Innovative medical devices often have a long product development lifecycle, delaying
     commercialization of the product. The product development cycle typically is 3to 5 years and constitutes
     idea generation, research, design, development, testing, and commercialization. Organizations with
     established operations use revenues from existing products to fund research and product development for
     new innovations. However, new/early-stage IBMs with limited revenue generation capabilities face challenges
     in funding and sustaining long product-development cycles.




68
There is a lack of adequate opportunities to efficacy-test products in the “real” context. Most IBMs in
this model were started in engineering/technology departments of academic institutions. Product innovations
typically begin in laboratories, and need to be contextualized for use in settings like healthcare facilities,
communities, or consumer homes. Random trials are needed to establish efficacy and effectiveness of these
products for market-readiness. However, firms often do not have access to these settings nor adequate
resources to conduct the research, thus delaying commercialization.

Lack of capital at early stage for technology IBMs. Firms offering innovative devices and consumables
need high investments at early stages to conduct research to develop proofs-of-concept, and establish
effectiveness of their products in healthcare settings, while covering operational costs. However, investor
interest, especially from institutions, is generated only after developing proofs-of-concept.


  The Embrace baby warmer was developed by students at Stanford University’s Institute of Design in
  2007. The product was commercially launched in Indian markets in 2012. Funding for clinical trials and
  evidence building was a challenge. Besides the time taken for clinical trials, Embrace also needs to first
  test its products in a pilot phase to identify and rectify any operational issues. Embrace has partnered
  with state governments to pilot its baby warmer designed for home use. Although Axio Bio Solutions
  was launched in 2008, it only got clearance to sell its bleeding control and wound management product in
  2012 and was able to commercially launch in 2013.



IBMs are yet to successfully demonstrate effectiveness of sustainable business models, especially
robust marketing/distribution strategies of their products. This study found that most enterprises
developing low-cost product innovations are at an early-stage, typically between 0 to 5 years. A number of
these firms are still engaged in product development, and have not yet achieved significant commercialization.


  Axio Bio Solutions is in the process of developing marketing and distribution channels for Sureklot, its
  retail product, through pharmacies. The firm is also in talks with auto makers to provide the product in first
  aid kits in vehicles.



The need to combine technical and managerial skills puts pressure on early-stage firms. Most
promoters of firms in this model are software engineers/researchers/scientists. While they have the
exceptional technical knowledge to develop the innovations, they are often faced with challenges in
commercializing the product due to lack of business acumen. Indian IBMs are also constrained by a weak
ecosystem for product innovation and a lack of advisory services for product design and development. This
sometimes leads to sub-optimal designs that can potentially fail international regulatory certifications.




                                                                                                                   69
     A number of IBMs in this model face competition from existing large players. Multinational
     medical device companies have the resources to invest in continuous research and development of
     innovative products. Large commercial businesses can also reduce prices or bundle financing
     solutions—like installment payments, free after-sales service, warranties—that make it easier for
     smaller providers to buy them. These factors increase entry barriers for newer innovators, especially
     smaller firms targeting the poor.


       A hospital chain serving the BoP population – one of Embrace’s target institutional buyers – mentioned
       that the low cost incubator is not attractive to them due to the lower scope of applicability compared to
       mainstream incubators. They also mentioned that credibility of large multi-national companies and their
       maintenance services were factors that deterred them from buying Embrace’s products.



     Challenges at the value-chain level

     To attain viability, firms require high purchase volumes of their low-cost products –difficult in
     BoP markets. Firms in this model operate in BoP markets by offering products that are low-priced
     compared to their mainstream counterparts and conventional solutions. However, investments in
     developing the devices are often as high as those involved in mainstream production, thus requiring
     high purchase volumes to cover costs.

     Target customers for these products are typically small/medium-sized healthcare delivery facilities that
     mostly operate on low margins and do not have high procurement budgets for medical devices and
     consumables. In addition, these markets are fragmented over wide geographical spreads and demand
     fewer numbers of products per facility. Further, these facilities often have complex procurement
     processes, constraining the IBMs further.

     A critical way for this model to achieve such high volumes and scale is through linkages with the
     public health system. However, the rules and processes of public sector procurement are
     complex. The government mandates competitive bids among a minimum of three enterprises to
     award supply contracts. This is difficult to ensure in the case of one-of-a-kind solutions with no
     comparable products.



       Embrace’s low cost incubator and Axio-Bio Solutions’ dressings are both unique innovations.
       Comparable products are not available in the Indian market to participate in competitive procurement
       processes. AYZH has consciously decided not to focus on the public health system since it feels that the
       procurement process is complicated, will be difficult to gain entry into, and will require resources to follow
       up with the government.




70
Challenges at the public-goods Level

Consumers tend to associate low price with poor quality, leading to lower acceptance for frugal
innovations offered by firms in this model. This is further magnified by poor levels of awareness
among channel partners and other retail/institutional buyers (like low-income families, physicians,
healthcare delivery chains, and governments) about the availability and benefits of innovative
products. IBMs that do not have the resources to undertake marketing and concerted brand-building
initiatives are often disadvantaged due to such consumer perceptions. Further, India does not have
quality standards to certify efficacy/accuracy of medical technology solutions,a regulatory
level challenge.



  AYZH has been constrained by low levels of awareness for the need of a safe birth kit for institutional
  deliveries. AYZH has focused on building a formal partnership with Federation of Obstetric and
  Gynaecological Societies of India (FOGSI) to gain acceptability for their product and to raise awareness
  that a clean birth kit is not required just for home births.




IBMs in the innovative devices space have emerged only recently. There has been some support from
different stakeholders in the ecosystem, such as rising investor interest and links with the information
technology industry and emerging technology parks. However, these facilitation efforts have not kept
pace with the high number of innovators requiring their facilitation.

Medical devices focused incubators and wet-laboratory facilities are few and concentrated
in only some parts of the country (as discussed in Chapter 2B). There is also a lack of market
information that can help develop innovations that is relevant and contextual to needs of the
buyers/users in the system that serves the poor. Such facilities and information could address a
number of challenges faced by these innovators, especially during the initial phases.


Challenges at the regulatory and policy level

There have not been many large-scale commercialized product innovations in the medical devices
space in India. Some facilitation from government departments has encouraging product innovations,
but these are few and far between.

Ambiguous regulations for medical devices are a challenge faced by IBMs. The medical
devices industry is not recognized as a separate industry and is governed under pharmaceutical
regulations. Given that the needs of the medical devices space are significantly different from that of
pharmaceuticals/drugs, this ambiguity results in limited focus on product innovation. Regulations and
lack of incentives have also discouraged indigenous manufacturing of medical products. Firms often
have to import critical product components, which increases cost of production.




                                                                                                             71
     The absence of Indian quality standards to certify efficacy/accuracy of new screening and
     diagnostics solutions is another challenge faced by organizations. As a result, firms offering
     innovative solutions are often not able to demonstrate their quality due to lack of certifying agencies,
     and thus lose out on their competitive advantages.


     Business model initiatives to address challenges faced by standalone devices and
     consumables IBMs

     The major business model elements adopted by IBMs with standalone devices and consumables are

         a.	   Create low cost point-of-care products that can reduce the cost of healthcare delivery for
               hospitals/nursing homes: These IBMs focus on reducing overall cost of delivery to patients,
               ensuring high level of quality and increasing convenience and ease of use by healthcare
               delivery personnel.



       Embrace has developed easy-to-use technologies to address neonatal hypothermia in resource-poor
       settings at a fraction of the cost of conventional incubators, potentially lowering the cost of providing
       neonatal care by healthcare facilities. Axio Bio’s AXIOSTAT has the potential to significantly lower the
       cost of providing emergency and critical care in a variety of settings, especially for inclusive businesses
       and no-frills facilities.

       IBMs also try to reach end consumers directly to improve product acceptance and carry the benefits
       from hospital to home, thus improving outcomes and doctor/patient acceptance. Embrace has
       developed a baby warmer for home use based on modifications made to its product intended for use at
       health facilities.



         b.	 Leverage existing distribution channels and resources to market products. Distribution
             poses key obstacles to scale and viability of enterprises attempting to reach the poor. The poor
             are costly to reach and there are few direct channels to them. Creating custom channels and
             systems is often prohibitively expensive. Existing channels or networks created for other
             healthcare providers that give access to BoP population are leveraged by many IBMs. While
             some enterprises use this strategy as an integral part of their model, others leverage existing
             systems/channels to scale up or to increase revenue streams.



       AYZH leverages existing networks of local health workers in their target geographies to distribute their
       Janma kits. The technical knowledge and skills of these health workers, supplemented with AYZH’s
       product training courses, equip them adequately to market and use the safe-birthing kits.




72
                                Illustrative Case Study – Embrace
This report illustrates the key features and strategies used by IBMs producing standalone devices and consumables.


                                                 Embrace Innovations started operations in India in 2011
                                                 to make a measurable impact on neonatal hypothermia. Embrace’s
                                                 product is a low-cost, portable and easy-to-use baby warmer that
                                                 does not require continuous power supply.

                                               The Embrace infant warmer was designed for resource-poor settings
                                               where alternative solutions are costly, and require continuous electricity
                                               and skilled human resources to effectively use the product. Priced under
                                               $300 in India, Embrace’s products are significantly less expensive than
                                               conventional incubators. It requires only about half hour of electricity
                                               to be able to function for 4 to 6 hours, and can be effectively used by
                                               low-skilled health personnel. An additional benefit is the portability
  of the product, which allows mothers to have increased contact with the baby unlike in traditional incubators and
  radiant warmers.

  Embrace is in the process of expanding its product portfolio. While the Embrace warmer is traditionally used in
  health facilities, Embrace has also developed a non-electrical version for home use, which needs only boiled water.
  Embrace is piloting the product with state governments to understand any operational challenges in deploying
  them in rural homes.

  With its baby warmer, Embrace has effectively used technology to substantially improve efficiency in healthcare
  delivery processes, and has also made healthcare more accessible in hard-to-reach and constrained contexts,
  while controlling costs.

  Recognizing that public health facilities lack skilled personnel, Embrace is involved in training health workers
  on how to recognize, treat, and prevent hypothermia. Embrace is also training community health workers and
  mothers/caregivers on how to care for low-birth weight infants. The strategy of training community health workers
  and personnel at the health facility serves the dual purpose of ensuring neonatal hypothermia is recognized and
  addressed and imparting training on correct use of the baby warmer.

  While Embrace’s products have undergone clinical trials and have shown efficacy in “real contexts”, Embrace faces
  a challenge in continued clinical data-collection in real settings. Collecting clinical data after the launch of a product
  helps build a robust body of evidence and leads to wider adoption of the product. As a young organization, this
  process is a challenge for Embrace due to the large requirements of resources and funds.

  Embrace is a young organization in India and has not yet developed robust marketing/distribution strategies. This is
  very closely linked to the fact that organizations like Embrace, which have developed innovative low-cost products
  for BoP markets, require government support and procurement by the public system to achieve volumes and scale.
  However, Embrace continues to be constrained by government processes that primarily address procurement of
  standard existing products and not adoption of new innovative technologies. There is also a lack of awareness
  among potential channel partners/ buyers about the availability and benefits of such products, hospitals and clinics
  catering to the BoP population are unaware of the product and its benefits.

  Despite these challenges, Embrace’s products are used in fourteen states in India in more than 2000 public and
  private facilities and ambulances. The infant warmer is estimated to have been used by around 100,00 babies.

  Embrace is helping over 150,000 infants globally and providing training on care of low-weight babies to
  over 10,000 individuals.



                                                                                                                               73
     Model 4: Networked devices and technologies
     This emerging model offers a wide range of clinical, financial, and information technology solutions that
     enable better decisions and outcomes for both businesses and patients, improve revenue cycles, drive quality
     outcomes, and accelerate image management and workflow. It comprises communication technology-enabled
     integrated diagnostics devices including telemedicine set-ups, mHealth-based remote consultations, healthcare
     information management, clinical decision support, and patient monitoring systems.

     The model brings together low-cost screening and diagnostics devices connected by information technology and
     software systems that store, manage, analyze, and monitor data of patients and caregivers, leading to faster,
     cheaper, convenient diagnosis of patients and provision of point-of-care decision support.

     Process innovations through networked devices and technologies offered by firms under this model make
     management of healthcare more efficient, cost-effective and accessible. Some areas where networked devices
     and technologies are used are:

         ®®   Portable and cheaper screening and diagnostics devices that increase access for patients.

         ®®   Innovative technologies tht build networks of medical personnel, especially in remote areas. These
              networks keep costs low without compromising quality.

         ®®   Process innovations like electronic health records (EHR), health management information systems
              (HMIS), and procurement systems, to become more efficient and cost-effective.


     Of the organizations surveyed for this study, those representing this model are:

         ®®   Swasthya Slate: This company makes an integrated tablet that
              can conduct 33 diagnostic tests and transfer patient data to distant
              physicians/caregivers using mobile technology.

         ®®   Dimagi: This firm provides software solutions that improves data
              management and case management in healthcare delivery.
              Dimagi’s CommCare technology solution is an open-source,
              cloud-based platform accessible through basic cell phones. It
              provides community health workers with services such as patient
              registration and monitoring, decision support, and remote training
              (supported by multimedia). It also helps supervisors manage and
              monitor health worker performance.

         ®®   iKure Techsoft: The company offers remote monitoring of patients
              in rural West Bengal through a software application, Wireless
              Health Incident Monitoring System (WHIMS), installed on tablets
              used by local health workers. The software acts as a decision
              support system for health workers who can diagnose and dispense
              drugs based on online interaction with doctors. It is also available
              at iKure’s rural health centers, where it is used to maintain patient
              medical records.

         ®®   Dhilcare: The company makes a low-cost, portable paperless
              ECG machine integrated with phone-based software, through
              which data can be stored and shared with doctors to facilitate
              reports, diagnosis, and follow-up. It enables a general practitioner
              to diagnose, triage, and provide basic treatment to cardiac
              patients at the point of care with the help of cardiologists.

74
        ®®      OTTET Telemedicine: This firm has set up telemedicine
                centers in government health facilities at the village level
                and trains local community members to run the centers
                and provide tele-health services. The centers are equipped
                with medical equipment, telemedicine software, and video
                conferencing technology. It is connected to super-specialty
                hospitals to provide preventive care, diagnostic services,
                consultations, follow-up, and referrals.



Figure 22 shows the challenges that operate at the different levels for this model.


                      Figure 22: Challenges faced by networked devices and technology enterprises




                          Firm                        Value Chain                      Public Goods                     Government*




    ■        Need for ability to            ■   Dependence on                    ■   Inertia and resistance to   ■   Absence of quality
             continuously analyze data          healthcare                           change in ‘remote care          standards certifying
             collected by the                   providers/partners who               delivering’ behavior by         efficacy/accuracy for new
             technology platforms to            can utilize solutions/take           doctors using mHealth,          solutions.
             provide personalized care          these solutions to                   telemedicine models
                                                consumers
    ■        Long development cycles                                             ■   Low awareness and lack
             for technology solutions       ■   Weak technical skills of             of acceptance of
             delaying                           distribution partners                innovative technology
             commercialization and              impede use of innovative             solutions by patients
             revenue generation                 solutions
                                                                                 ■   Irregular and unreliable
    ■        High investments are           ■   To achieve scale, linkage            telecommunications
             needed for research and            with the public health               networks and electricity
             development of                     system is critical; difficulty       supply impede successful
             technology solutions;              in partnering with                   usage of the solutions
             investor interest can be           government.
                                                                                 ■   Lack of market
             generated only after
                                                                                     information, incubators
             evidence of
                                                                                     and research settings to
             relevance/efficacy
                                                                                     test the efficacy of the
    ■        Young and evolving                                                      innovations.
             business models; have not
             yet developed robust
             distribution networks and
             linkages with other critical
             stakeholders in the health
             ecosystem
    ■        Need for a combination of
             technical and managerial
             skills puts pressure on the
             business model.



* 	 For this study, the outermost layer Government is considered a ‘regulatory environment’ and not a provider/funder of
    healthcare services




                                                                                                                                                 75
     Challenges at the firm level

     Firms need resource capabilities to continuously analyze data collected by the technology platforms
     to provide personalized care. A unique service offering of networked screening devices and technology
     solutions is the use of data from patients to make diagnostic and treatment processes more effective
     and efficient. For the firms to achieve this, analysis of data has to be real-time and continuous so that
     decisions can be based on these analyses. Human resources, financial investments, robust and reliable
     technology platforms, and care pathways/standard treatment guidelines are crucial inputs to this process.
     However, in India, there is scarcity of capital, well-trained personnel are scarce and expensive, and
     technology infrastructure is under-developed. As a result firms in this model are constrained in undertaking
     continuous data analysis and providing consequent services.

     Networked screening and diagnostics devices have long product development cycles similar to
     innovative devices in the previous model. Further, the devices have to be linked with communication
     technology and complex software solutions to transfer and analyze data. Various phases of research to
     develop proof of concept, test efficacy of the solution, and contextualize it to healthcare and community
     settings, are all time consuming. This delays commercialization of the offerings and therefore,
     revenue generation.



       Dhilcare entrepreneurs started developing the 12-lead ECG solution while completing their academic
       degree in the Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IIT-M). However, the product development phase
       and getting the product ready for market has taken time. The organization was constrained due to lack of
       funding. Even after receiving funding, Dhilcare has had to modify its product to meet the specific demands
       of the market.



     Lack of capital at an early stage is a common challenge for this model. Research and development
     are capital-intensive activities, requiring high investments to create innovative devices and technology
     platforms. These investments need to be made at the early stage of the business, a significant challenge for
     new entrepreneurs. Besides high cost of the research and invention, firms incur operational costs of human
     resources and infrastructure. Investor interest, especially from institutions, can be generated only after
     developing proof-of-concept and establishing effectiveness of the solutions.

     Young firms are yet to successfully develop robust distribution networks and links with other critical
     stakeholders in the health ecosystem. This study found that majority of these enterprises developing
     technology solutions are at an early-stage, typically between 0-7 years. Building links with large-scale
     distribution channels and partnering with key stakeholders takes time and experience in the industry.



       The Dhilcare promoters are engineers who developed an innovative product, but were challenged by
       lack of capital at an early stage. They also found it challenging to develop robust networks for sale,
       distribution, and servicing of their product increasing cost of the product significantly.




76
Need to combine technical and managerial skills puts pressure on these early-stage firms.
Similar to the previous model, most promoters in this model are software engineers and scientists.
While they have exceptional capabilities and technical knowledge to develop innovations, they are
often faced with challenges in linking with health systems and formulating business strategies. They
also often find it challenging to recruit management and healthcare professionals at relatively lower
compensation packages.


Challenges at the value-chain level

Challenges in developing partnerships with delivery players and distributors. The networked
technology devices and systems are predominantly B2B (business-to-business) solutions used by
healthcare delivery players and personnel to improve patient care. These are innovative solutions with
newer operating models and are highly dependent on acceptance by and conviction of delivery players
who take them to patients. Firms are exploring partnerships with delivery players and distributors. These
partnerships are still evolving without proven operating models in resource-poor contexts like India.

Channel partners sometimes do not have the technical skills to understand and use innovative
solutions. Most of these technology solutions and process innovations are very new additions to the
healthcare sector.Existing human resources in distribution channels do not have the skills or comfort
levels to operate the devices. There are instances where technology solutions have been bought by
businesses but have not been used.



  While many consider technology as a solution to a wide range of issues, they are not able to use the
  technology effectively. Dimagi has recognized this challenge and provides training and capacity building
  to not just the health workers who are the end users of its CommCare but also the project managers at
  the partner organizations to help them understand the technology better.



Complex rules and processes for public sector partnerships and procurement. One way for this
model to achieve high volumes and scale is through link and partnerships with the government. The
public health system offers unmatched opportunities for firms to implement their solutions. However,
partnering with government becomes difficult as the rules and processes for public sector partnerships
and procurement are complex.


Challenges at the public-goods level

Inertia and resistance to change in ‘remote-care delivering’ behavior by doctors using mHealth/
telemedicine models. Doctors are most comfortable with the conventional approach to treating patients.
Remote/virtual consultations are not readily accepted. Besides being a habit, the quality, efficacy, and
effectiveness of the offerings are other concerns for doctors, as they are expected to base treatment
decisions on data made available by technology solutions.




                                                                                                             77
     Patients and end-users also hesitate to accept certain technology solutions, mainly due to poor
     understanding of the innovations and general low awareness about their benefits. In the absence of
     health awareness and education, low-income patients often use proxies to assess the quality of healthcare,
     such as interactions with doctor, physical examinations, prescriptions, and injections. These proxies of quality
     are not applicable to virtual interfaces and diagnosis through devices that are common offerings of this model.

     Weak infrastructure, especially telecommunication networks are a major challenge for IBMs in this
     model. The technology solutions offered by this model depend completely on regular, reliable, and high
     bandwidth telecommunications networks and electricity supply for their functioning. However, in underserved
     regions of India, this infrastructure is often weak and impedes successful use where they are most needed.

     Lack of sufficient facilitation efforts (such as incubators, laboratory facilities, and market information)
     within the ecosystem. This affects the ability of these models to effectively address these challenges. This is
     similar to challenges faced by IBMs in the previous model.


     Challenges at the regulatory and policy level

     Absence of quality standards. As mentioned earlier, innovations offered by this model are very new, are
     constantly evolving, and wide-ranging in their applications. Due to this, regulatory and policy processes
     have not kept pace. One of the challenges emerging from this is the absence of quality standards to certify
     the efficacy/accuracy of new solutions, which affects the ability of these models to demonstrate quality of
     their products.


     Business model initiatives to address challenges faced by networked devices and
     technology IBMs

     Since IBMs in this space are new and have low market share, they focus on increasing acceptance of their
     solutions among healthcare providers through various initiatives:

         a.	   Conduct pilot programs to demonstrate utility, efficacy, and robustness of their solutions to
               public and private healthcare providers: Organizations undertake multiple pilot projects or proof-of-concept
               studies at their own expense to demonstrate proof of functionality, efficacy, and accuracy of their solutions.



       Swasthya Slate has field-tested its product in 80 locations and screened 75,000 thousand people.
       The field testing helped identify operational issues and demonstrated utility, efficacy, and robustness
       of the product.




78
 b.	   Form strategic partnerships with healthcare delivery players: IBMs often form strategic partnerships
       with healthcare delivery organizations/stakeholders to increase acceptance and expand the
       distribution chain.


Dimagi has partnered with healthcare delivery players and NGOs working directly with community health
workers. It provides its CommCare solution to IntraHealth International, Catholic Relief Services, and to
the Bihar Child Support Programme under DFID’s Bihar Technical Assistance Programme to support the
government’s maternal and child health program.



 c.	   Expand scope of their solutions and provide health personnel training, monitoring, and
       assistance in healthcare delivery: The scope of some products was expanded to provide analytics
       services, program management, etc., in addition to one-time sale of products or software. This helps
       the already constrained public and private healthcare delivery organizations to adopt newer solutions.



Swasthya Slate has expanded functionality of its product. The device can now conduct 33 tests. iKure
Techsoft initially developed a technology solution to remotely monitor patients in rural West Bengal and
set up rural health centers to provide affordable primary care at the last mile.




 d.	 Using existing distribution channels and resources to reach a larger base of customers/users.



Dimagi is used by Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) in India, who fall under the purview of the
Government’s National Rural Health Mission. Leveraging the extensive ASHA network has helped Dimagi
reach a large number of beneficiaries.



 e.	   Reduce cost of manufacturing by indigenous production: Lower costs enable IBMs to sell at lower
       prices to healthcare organizations serving the BoP population. Indigenous production is cheaper than
       importing, and offers the added benefit of employment generation in manufacturing.



Swasthya Slate’s and Dhilcare’s diagnostic devices are produced in India and are cheaper than other
similar diagnostic devices, which are usually imported.




                                                                                                                79
                              Illustrative Case Study – Swasthya Slate
     This report illustrates the key features and strategies used by IBMs producing innovative devices and consumables.


                                           Swasthya Slate is a portable device developed by the Public Health
                                           Foundation of India (PHFI) to provide diagnostic services to BoP/low-income
                                           populations at their doorsteps. The device addresses challenges of inadequate
                                           access and quality of care in rural underserved regions.

                                           The device can conduct 33 diagnostic tests, providing integrated care to patients
                                           requiring multiple tests. Used by frontline health workers in rural areas, the device
                                           is connected via Bluetooth to an Android-enabled tablet containing multiple mobile
                                           applications (apps). The applications allow patient registration, store patient medical
                                           history, select and conduct diagnostic tests, provide and monitor antenatal, intra-
                                           natal and postnatal care, immunizations, cardio-vascular screening, and nutrition.
                                           The data from the applications is uploaded onto a cloud server for access by patients
                                           and doctors, which is used to monitor and ensure effectiveness of operations and
                                           provide a basis for subsequent government actions.

                                            The solution acts as a decision-support tool that enables frontline health workers to
                                            deliver data-driven recommendations and medical advice to patients. Emergency/
                                            complex cases are consulted remotely or physically referred to doctors, thus limiting
     the need to visit healthcare facilities for screening/diagnosis and reducing burden on the public health system. The
     functionality of the tablet also extends to providing health communications to patients, aimed at improving health-seeking
     behavior, and training to community workers, aimed at improving quality and effectiveness of care.

     By using the government’s existing network of frontline health workers (ASHAs) to distribute the solution, Swasthya
     Slate has effectively leveraged existing distribution networks and the public health system. This has benefitted both the
     organization, by expanding its reach without investing in its own distribution network, and frontline health workers, by
     reducing work that needs to be done manually, thus allowing effective use of their time. Four frontline health workers
     have been involved in product design, effectively contextualizing the device to challenges and learnings of the public
     health system.

     Since the vendor/supplier market in the medical devices space is highly fragmented, Swasthya Slate has faced
     challenges in identifying the right vendors/suppliers for certain components/products for the device. Additionally, since
     the tablet requires an internet connection to upload data to the cloud server, real-time and effective usage of the device
     is highly dependent on telecommunication network in the area.

     The current core team, including the inventor, has strong technical/product development skills. However, as the
     organization now lays down its plan for growth and scale-up, it faces a gap in terms of lack of business/commercial skills
     like marketing and operations. It plans to recruit staff for these functions.

     The device was commercially deployed from on March 2014, before which it was field tested in more than 80 locations
     worldwide, screening more than 75,000 people. The device was piloted in six districts in Jammu and Kashmir, through
     funding support from Norway India Partnership Initiative (NIPI). The aim is to screen and diagnose 250,000 patients each
     year by deploying 3,250 units over the funding period of three years.

     The firm also plans to expand its coverage to a total of ten states in India in the next five years. To achieve this, it plans
     to work with multiple state governments, target common service centers and NGOs as potential customers, and sell
     directly to end-users (B2C channel).



80
CHAPTER   5
Moving into Action
– Enabling Success,
Overcoming
Challenges
     Previous chapters detail the healthcare contexts and inclusive business landscapes in India. This chapter
     addresses some of the ecosystem challenges faced by IBMs.



     HOW CAN ECOSYSTEM ENABLERS HELP IBMs?
     Discussions in preceding chapters show that the ecosystem within which IBMs operate have significant
     influence on their success and growth.

     The following sections discuss some actions/initiatives that key stakeholders in the ecosystem can take to
     encourage new IBMs and facilitate the existing ones reach desired impact and scale. Stakeholders who can
     enable the ecosystem are classified into four broad categories: (i) impact investors (ii) donors, foundations,
     and development agencies, (iii) government, and (iv) networks, incubators, and accelerators.


     Impact investors

     India has a large impact investing market in terms of number and size of investments. Impact investing
     offers opportunities to creatively fund projects that otherwise may go unfunded. It also helps to scale up
     organizations with viable business models that meet pressing healthcare challenges, which are often not
     attractive to commercial investors.

         ®®   Offer innovative financial instruments. Often traditional instruments are not sufficient to address
              needs of IBMs and their promoters at different life-stages of the enterprise. Patient capital and
              subsidized debt with longer payment durations are preferred by idea-stage IBMs in the 0-1 year
              group. However, most investors are unwilling to provide such instruments or even invest in IBMs
              that have not shown “proof of concept”. Currently IBMs in this group largely depend on promoter
              capital and support from angel investors or high net-worth individuals. IBMs that are slightly
              older (1-3 years) may be more open to equity or mezzanine instruments. This study shows that
              commercially successful models in the 4-10 year group prefer not to dilute equity further, especially
              after one or two rounds of funding, and debt may be the preferred instrument.

              Impact funds need to offer innovative financial instruments suited to capital needs of firms at different
              life-stages and to business models in BoP markets. Traditionally, investors limit offerings to equity
              funding. However, there is a scope to structure a mix of instruments like subsidized loans, sweat
              equity, patient capital, convertible debt, and equity investments with relaxed expected returns. Impact
              investors can play crucial roles in facilitating growth trajectories of IBMs from idea to operations and
              address critical funding gaps by providing pioneer funding and seed capital, especially in under-
              capitalized areas. Another opportunity for impact investors is to offer bridge financing to IBMs that
              predominantly rely on public funding, which, as mentioned earlier, takes a long time to materialize.

         ®®   Invest in idea/early-stage innovations. A common challenge for firms across different models is
              availability of limited capital in early stages. This affects technology solutions IBMs disproportionately
              as they have long and expensive gestation periods of research for their products. Funds are often
              not available from institutional investors during this stage. Impact investors must focus on early-stage
              IBMs to help them reach proof-of-concept and operationalize the idea. Without support, a significant
              number of IBMs fail in translation of idea to practice.

         ®®   Form investor networks and circles. Impact investors can form networks and circles to set up
              syndicated funds, pool resources, co-invest in synergistic opportunities, and spread risk. Investor




82
         networks like Toniic and Ennovent Circle are effective aggregators of funds, skill-sets, and
         lobbying to drive key sectoral trends. This can add value by building strong ecosystems for
         inclusive businesses.

    ®®   Advisory services by investors. IBMs said having impact investors play active roles through
         advisory services and mentorship were significant value-additions. Limited management skills
         are a common challenge for healthcare IBMs. This is an area where impact investors can play
         an important role and contribute their business and financial modelling experience. Strategic
         advisory services and mentorship of investees increases chances of success for these IBMs
         and also increases potential for higher returns for the investors.

    ®®   Trading platforms and results measurement. As healthcare IBMs continue to grow, the
         ecosystem to support them will need to keep pace. With a rise in the number of interested
         investors and deals, IBM-focused trading platforms are becoming relevant, as are impact
         assessment standards, measurement tools, and financial advisors to support such transactions.
         Impact investors and development finance institutions can be at the forefront of such initiatives.


Donors, foundations, and development agencies

Philanthropic funders direct their financial resources to stakeholders to address key scaling barriers.
Foundations and donor agencies are a natural fit for IBMs, given their focus on key health sector
challenges affecting the poor.

    ®®   Donors can play important roles in channeling funds and technical support to IBMs. Areas
         that need interventions the most—such as the poorest strata of the BoP and remote areas that
         lack accessibility and basic infrastructure—are not financially attractive for investors. As a result,
         IBMs often shift focus from the most under-served aspects of healthcare to more profitable areas.
         Donor agencies and foundations can play an important role in bridging this funding gap. These
         agencies can also play a complementary role to investment funds in promoting areas such as
         research, developing proof of concepts/pilot tests, and supporting diseases/healthcare areas
         that are unviable for commercial investors. Support from donors in the form of grants or awards,
         like the Development Marketplace, the Ashoka Fellowships, and the Gates’ Foundation Grand
         Challenge, has proved extremely valuable for IBMs.

    ®®   Certain challenges that pertain to the larger ecosystem of an IBM can be addressed
         effectively by development agencies and donors. Health awareness initiatives, improving
         health-seeking behaviors, and defining quality standards of healthcare are invaluable to
         organizations who operate in BoP markets. For example, standard treatment protocols, IMNCI
         guidelines or community health manuals developed by the World Health Organization are
         useful to organizations working for the poor. Such resources need extremely high investments,
         and cannot be developed by the firms themselves, or by other stakeholders in the ecosystem.
         Donor agencies need to continue these initiatives.

    ®®   Donor agencies and development partners need to continue playing an active role in
         advocacy for critical reforms to create more facilitative ecosystems. Donor agencies
         are also important stakeholders in lobbying for policy changes with the national government.
         Influential donor agencies can help promote universal healthcare, prioritize unmet needs
         and underserved diseases, provide demand-side financing, encourage research into social
         enterprise/inclusive businesses and develop results measurement frameworks.




                                                                                                                  83
     Governments

     The government has an important role to play in addressing the problems of BoP populations through various
     programs and social schemes for healthcare. As discussed earlier, lower segments of the BoP in rural areas
     are served only through public health systems.

     Additionally, given the small scales on which IBMs operate, they are unable to address the ecosystem
     challenges, such as shortage of medical personnel and lack of infrastructure and are impacted significantly by
     the low paying capacity and poor awareness among consumers it aims to serve.

         ®®   The government can become the preferred purchaser for IBM’s products and services.
              The public health system is huge and some IBMs in reported reaching scale by leveraging it. The
              government can become a preferred purchaser of innovative products and services provided by IBMs.
              This can provide the required volumes and revenues for IBMs to be sustainable, while offering them
              unmatched scale and reach in areas that would otherwise be unfeasible.

         ®®   Governments can relax procurement rules for IBMs offering unique solutions. Governments
              have standard procedures and procurement systems, which are often designed for mainstream
              organizations, rather than innovative IBMs. For instance, innovative devices and technology firms
              in India face the challenge of not meeting mandated minimum participants for competitive bidding.
              Governments can relax procurement rules for IBMs and make them more flexible to suit firms offering
              one-of-a-kind solutions.

         ®®   Incentivize the private sector to serve BoP markets. The government can formulate policies to
              incentivize involvement of the private sector in healthcare for the poor. Tax benefits for organizations
              located in remote and underserved areas, offering services to the poorest populations, and
              addressing priority diseases can go a long way.

         ®®   Reduce bureaucratic delays and simplify procedures/approvals. This can help IBMs operate
              more efficiently. IBMs, especially new entrants in the healthcare sector, also cited their inability to
              navigate and comprehend policies/regulations. Specially appointed teams in government departments
              can guide new businesses.

         ®®   The government can set up or use independent accreditation agencies. A challenge for IBMs
              offering innovative low-cost devices/solutions, is the lack of certification and accreditation to establish
              quality. To address this, government can set up its own accreditation agency or outsource to
              independent agencies.

         ®®   Set up venture funds to encourage IBMs/allocate part of existing funds towards healthcare
              delivery. An innovative way by which government can incentivize IBMs is by setting up venture capital
              funds that provide easier and cheaper access to capital or earmark existing funds specifically for
              healthcare delivery.Funds like the India Innovation Fund and the India Inclusive Innovation Fund have
              aggregated government and public sector investors to support early-stage innovations in life-sciences
              and medical technologies. Such funds can be extended to include innovations in healthcare delivery
              IBMs, especially primary care models focusing on the poor. Expected financial returns for these funds
              from inclusive businesses can be lower than that required by commercial investors.

         ®®   Demand-side financing. Given the extremely high poverty rates in India, illnesses are
              often catastrophic in nature, pushing households below poverty lines and placing them in
              debt. Governments need to supplement healthcare delivery through demand-side financing
              mechanisms. In India, the current Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna’s program design and
              implementation must be revised for greater coverage, higher financial protection, and inclusion
              of areas like OPD and diagnostics.




84
    ®®   Generate health awareness. Due to large information asymmetries and low levels of health
         awareness, health-seeking behavior among the poor in India is low. This affects demand for
         preventive/promotive care such as immunization and contraception. These are public goods, and
         are the mandate of the government to improve general health status of the population. The cost
         of educating consumers on the benefits of products with strong push characteristics, such as
         preventive care, is often greater than can be justified by potential profits alone. Additionally, limited
         scale and geographical reach of IBMs prevent them from undertaking such initiatives. Government
         can play a significant role in health awareness programs and increase literacy levels to improve
         health-seeking behavior.

    ®®   Increase availability of human resources for health. India faces significant shortages of trained
         personnel, directly affecting the capacity of organizations to offer services. Governments can play a
         role by increasing the number of medical and nursing schools, in certifying and accrediting existing
         private institutions, encouraging innovative courses and curricula (such as shorter courses).

         There is also a shortage of specialists and super-specialists in the country. As epidemiological trends
         change, the need for certain specialists becomes more predominant. For example, with increasing
         burden of non-communicable diseases in India, specialists like cardiologists and endocrinologists
         become critical. Governments need to undertake systematic need-gap assessments for better
         planning of medical education. Medical colleges need to increase post-graduate seats for specific
         specializations, as well as introduce new courses to train doctors in emerging needs.

    ®®   Government can facilitate and explore reforms for para-skilling of human resources to reduce
         the demand-supply gap. Para-skilling is an effective tool to improve utilization of lower-skilled
         resources. Government can implement regulations allowing greater para-skilling. For instance, the
         Indian government has approved Ayurvedic, Unani, and Siddha doctors to practice elements of basic
         care after undergoing necessary training. This kind of measures can help primary care IBMs address
         some of their human resource challenges.

    ®®   Improve infrastructure. Poor infrastructure affects almost all IBMs. The government is the most
         important stakeholder in addressing these infrastructural challenges. Investments into roads and
         railways, transportation, and communication networks can go a long way in attracting IBMs to areas
         that are currently underserved, as well as help IBMs design reliable value chains. Investments
         in infrastructure also impacts availability and retention of human resources in organizations, as
         personnel prefer areas that are better connected and offer a better quality of life.


Networks, incubators, and accelerators

    ®®   Facilitating ecosystem growth. Networks and associations can play an important role in
         undertaking initiatives that are facilitative for the industry as a whole, initiatives that may not be
         attractive or possible for individual organizations. Networks can help address key scaling barriers
         through collective action that will get the attention of government policymakers. They can also help
         promote best practices and disseminate industry knowhow, the absences of which challenge IBMs.

         Networks can also play critical roles in building partnerships between different categories of
         healthcare IBMs. For example, secondary/tertiary-care hospitals can partner with IBMs offering
         devices and technology solutions. While the former require low-cost technologies for their
         affordable services, the latter require delivery players to distribute their products and take them
         to the end consumers.

    ®®   Provide mentorship and strategic advisory services. Incubators or accelerators help early-
         stage impact enterprises by providing mentorship, incubation, and technical assistance. Incubators




                                                                                                                     85
              also provide seed capital or growth equity to help enterprises become self-sustaining. In addition,
              they provide valuable strategic advisory support that IBMs working in BoP markets may not be
              able to access or afford. Stakeholders such as academic institutions, research organizations,
              and other facilitators should extend critical support to the growth and functioning of IBMs through
              capacity-building initiatives, research, and by generating evidence of the impact of interventions.

              Initiatives like Ennovent Circle build capacities of early-stage IBMs, provide strategic support, and link
              them to investor networks. Such initiatives are valuable, especially for new entrepreneurs. Incubation
              centers at the IKP Knowledge Park (that combines investments with laboratory facilities for technology
              innovators) and at academic institutions like IIT-Madras, Stanford University, and MIT have contributed
              to the emergence of a number of IBMs, especially in healthcare technologies. Such initiatives need to
              be more mainstreamed.

     Industry facilitators act to resolve barriers at both firm levels and in the wider ecosystem, to the benefit of many
     firms, not just one. Such enablers are needed because firms often cannot effectively resolve key systemic
     barriers on their own. To be truly effective, industry facilitators must respond not only to scaling barriers in a
     given situation, but also to specific constraints that prevent firms from resolving these barriers.



     HOW CAN IBMs LEVERAGE FACILTATION?
     IBMs sometimes lack the capabilities to leverage facilitation and resources present in their ecosystems. The
     action points listed in the preceding section for the enablers may not be enough to bring about desired impact
     and scale. Active roles of the IBMs/organizations are equally important. They must recognize, leverage, and
     translate such support to suit their needs. This section discusses how IBMs can leverage industry facilitation.

         ®®   Develop a complete understanding of the ecosystem. IBMs should develop an understanding of the
              ecosystem and identify stakeholders who may play an enabling role or pose barriers to its functioning.
              Organizations must realize that healthcare is a complex area with inter-related and multifactorial
              determinants. An in-depth understanding of the ecosystem is crucial to offer impactful solutions.

         ®®   Engage with ecosystem enablers. Enablers or industry facilitators in the healthcare space may
              not be in the immediate environment of the IBMs. Organizations need to be proactive and seek
              engagement with relevant enablers to help achieve common objectives.

         ®®   Participate in networks. IBMs can connect with enablers like funders, mentors/advisors, and other
              organizations working towards similar or synergistic goals through various networks. Often, impact
              through advocacy is achieved through networks, and not by individual IBMs.

         ®®   Build strategic partnerships to strengthen value-chains to address both demand and supply
              side challenges. Partnering with governments can provide unmatched scale for most IBMs.
              Partnerships with other IBMs across healthcare areas or across the care-spectrum can strengthen
              supply chains and open new avenues to reach the poor. For instance, technology IBMs need to partner
              with delivery/distribution providers to market innovative products; and delivery IBMs partner with those
              in the technology space to integrate process innovations and increase efficiencies. Partnerships for
              health awareness/demand generation in poor communities, shared channels for distribution, and
              research can significantly strengthen an IBM’s value-chain and positioning.

     This report has focused on the context in which inclusive business models have emerged in India. The
     complexities of the healthcare sector in the country impact these organizations, posing challenges to their
     operations, sustainability, and scale. While governments, impact investors, donors, and other key stakeholders
     need to play crucial roles in catalyzing the growth of these initiatives, the IBMs, in turn, need to leverage this
     support and facilitation strategically.




86
aNNEXURES
                                                             ANNEXURES
                                    ANNEXURE I: APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY FOR THE STUDY
     The Landscape Analysis involved a mixed-method approach, with detailed literature review of publications, analysis
     of secondary data, and collection and analysis of primary data through in-depth-interviews, case studies and
     observation methods.

     The data from all sources were triangulated, authenticated analyzed to arrive at the findings. The following figure presents
     approach and methodology for the landscape analysis.


                                                 Approach and methodology for landscape analysis

                        1                                    2                                     3
                             Mapping IBMs                    Selection for primary research                    Analysis
     Key activities




                         Mapping of healthcare                  Selection of promising             Conducting landscape analysis
                           models in India                    IBMs for primary research             of healthcare IBMs in India


                                                             Selection of 24 IBMs from the
                      Identification of healthcare IBMs                                                 Status of healthcare delivery
     Focus areas




                                                                        long list

                      Profiling IBMs across hospitals            Indepth primary research &            Models of IBMs, geographical
                         & outreach models and                   deep-dive of selected IBMs             distribution, disease focus
                           medical technologies

                                                                 Sectoral understanding from       Persisting challenges & initiatives
                                                                  key stakeholders & SMEs            to address them by the IBMs


                                                           In-house Deloitte expertise and tools
     Methods




                                                        Detailed secondary research and desk review


                                                                      Primary research                      Data triangulation


                             Long list of IBMs                      Selection of 24 IBMs                    Landscape analysis
     Output




                                                            Stakeholder perceptions about the
                                                                     IBM ecosystem



     Secondary Analysis: A long list of 240 IBMs was compiled from extensive secondary research. This formed the universe
     of the study. The team reviewed existing rigorous and credible public data sources including published reports, data-bases,
     and websites to create a “universe” of relevant healthcare programs and initiatives.

     Data for each of these IBMs was extracted on 17 parameters. The data focused on their objectives and interventions,
     geographical location and spread of interventions, financial/funding information, mode of BoP engagement, etc. Each IBM
     entry was validated through at least two sources – the primary source of information (such as an IBM database) and the
     website of the IBM. In most cases, three sources were used to close data gaps and validate information.

     The IBMs were grouped into the two healthcare classification categories hospitals and outreach models and
     medical technologies.




88
Analyses of life-stage of the entire list of IBMs (in terms of number of years of operation), and their legal status – for-profit
or not-for-profit – was undertaken. Sources of funding for different IBMs were also analyzed.

Additionally, secondary analysis of IBMs was undertaken based on health issue/disease focus and on intervention
models. The purpose of this analysis was to identify most popularly intervened diseases/health issues, and those under-
represented. The secondary analysis of intervention models was undertaken to identify most commonly adopted models in
affordable healthcare.

Primary Research: Twenty-four organizations were selected for primary research and deep-dive analysis. Data collection
methods for primary research included in-depth interviews with stakeholders from the 24 selected IBMs and with subject
matter experts from the sector. Two sets of interview guides were developed for the two groups of stakeholders.



  Examples of sources used to compile the universe:
  Centre for Health Market Innovations (www.healthmarketinnovations.org)
  Strengthening Health Outcomes through the Private Sector (SHOPS) (www.shopsproject.org)
  Sankalp (www.sankalpforum.com)
  World Bank Development Marketplace International Centre for Social Franchising (www.sf4health.org)
  Ashoka (www.ashoka.org and www.changemakers.com)
  Bangladesh Social Enterprise Project Centre for Innovation, Incubation and Entrepreneurship
  Access Health International.



Document reviews of relevant material such as evaluation studies, MIS data, annual reports, and news articles about the
IBMs were undertaken to supplement the primary data.


                        ANNEXURE II: LIST OF IBMs INCLUDED IN PRIMARY RESEARCH

    Sl.No.                                              Name of the Organizations
       1.        Arogya Parivar
       2.        Axio Bio
       3.        AYZH
       4.        Dhilcare
       5.        Dimagi
       6.        E Health Point
       7.        Embrace Innovations
       8.        ERC Eye Care Center
       9.        Glocal Healthcare
      10.        GNRC Medireach
       11.       iKure Techsoft
      12.        Innovators in Health: uNotify
       13.       NephroPlus
      14.        OTTET Telemedicine
       15.       Sevamob
      16.        Swasth India
       17.       Swasthya Slate
      18.        Vaatsalya Healthcare
       19.       Welcare Health Systems
      20.        Ziqitza – Dial 1298 for Ambulance




                                                                                                                                    89
                                  ANNEXURE III: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED

     A.	         Stakeholders met from selected IBMs

      Sl.No.       Name of IBM                             Stakeholders interviewed                               Location
                                        	 Sweta Mangal (Co-founder and CEO)
      1.         Ziqitza                                                                                      Mumbai
                                        	 Vasim Qureshi (Manager – Quality)
                                        	 Ankur Pegu (Co-founder)
      2.         Swasth India                                                                                 Mumbai
                                        	 Sundeep Kapila (Co-founder)
      3.         Arogya Parivar         	 Meghdoot Deherkar (Country Head – Operations)                      Mumbai
                                        	 Sandeep Gudibanda (Co-founder and Director, Business
      4.         Nephroplus                                                                                   Hyderabad
                                           Development)
      5.         Sevamob                	 Shelley Saxena (Founder and CEO)                                   Delhi
                                        	 Dr. Bill Theis (Founder)
      6.         Innovators in Health                                                                         Delhi
                                        	 Manish Kumar (Trustee and Program Manager)

                                        	 Sabahat Azim (Co-founder and Chief Executive Officer)
                                        	 Paresh Singal (Chief Planning Officer)
      7.         Glocal Healthcare                                                                            Kolkata
                                        	 Shraddha Paliwal (Senior Manager – Strategic Initiatives)
                                        	 IT and Training Team

                                        	 Sujoy Santra (Founder and CEO)
      8.         iKure Techsoft                                                                               Kolkata
                                        	 Vidhi Sharma (Business Development Manager)
                                        	 Dr. Parveez Ubed (Founder and CEO)
      9.         ERC Eye Care                                                                                 Sivasagar
                                        	 Munmi Goswami (Operations Head)
      10.        GNRC                   	 Dr. Numal Borah (Founder and CEO)                                  Guwahati
      11.        Dimagi                 	 Stella Luk (Country Director – India)                              Delhi
      12         E Health Point         	 Pradeep Kumar (Head – Business Development and Finance)            Delhi
      13.        Swasthya Slate         	 Dr. Kanav Kahol (Co-founder)                                       Delhi
      14.        OTTET                  	 Sunil Bhagat (Vice President – Technical)                          Bhubaneshwar
      15.        Welcare India          	 Dr. Tamilasaran Senthil (Founder and CEO)                          Chennai
      16.        Dhilcare               	 Satish Kannan (Co-Founder)                                         Chennai
      17.        Vaatsalya              	 Dr. Ashwin Naik (Co-founder and CEO)                               Bangalore
      18.        ayzh                   	 Zubaida Bai (Founder and Chief Executive)                          Chennai
      19.        Embrace Innovations    	 Raghu Dharmaraju (Vice-president)                                  Bangalore
      20.        Axio Bio Solutions     	 Leo Mavely, Managing Director                                      Delhi



     B.	         Subject Matter Experts Met

       Sl.No.      Organization                                       Name                                        Location
            1    Insitor Management     Karan Gupta, India Representative                                     Delhi
            2    Ennovent               Digbijoy Shukla, Director                                             Delhi
            3    Aavishkaar             Ajay Maniar, Principal                                                Mumbai
                                        Prasad Ede (COO and CFO)                                              Hyderabad
            4    IKP
                                        Vikraman (Grant Manager)                                               
             5   mHealth Ventures       Dr. Ajay Nair, Managing Director                                      Mumbai
             6   ICTPH                  Zeena Johar                                                           Chennai
             7   UNITUS Seed Fund       Radha Kizhanattam, Senior Investment Manager                          Bangalore
             8   Manipal Hospitals      Rajen Padukone, MD and CEO,                                           Bangalore
             9   BMGF                   Devendra Khandait, Senior Programme Officer, Strategic Partnerships   Delhi
            10   MoHFW, GoI             Manoj Jhalani, Joint Secretary                                        Delhi
            11   DFID                   Meenakshi Nath                                                        Delhi


90
       About IFC
       IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on
       the private sector in developing countries. Established in 1956, IFC is owned by 184 member countries, a group
       that collectively determines our policies. Working with private enterprises in more than 100 countries, we use our
       capital, expertise, and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity. IFC leverages
       the power of the private sector to create jobs and tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. IFC’s
       vision is that people should have the opportunity to escape poverty and improve their lives.




       About WISH foundation
       Wadhwani Initiative for Sustainable Healthcare or WISH Foundation envisioned by IGATE Chairman and
       Co-Founder Sunil Wadhwani is working towards scaling up healthcare innovations to build an equitable healthcare
       system making quality primary healthcare accessible to underserved population in priority states of India.
       The Foundation plays a facilitative role in healthcare ecosystem to ensure need based, high potential innovations
       and enterprises are identified, supported and scaled up within service delivery system to establish a sustainable
       healthcare innovation ecosystem.
       The Foundation leads its activities under SCALE, a strategic mechanism designed in partnership with state
       governments that demonstrate and scale up promising healthcare innovations revitalizing delivery of primary &
       preventive healthcare in priority states of India. SCALE builds sustainable market and solutions at the last mile for
       the Bottom of the Pyramid. By 2020, SCALE Programs aim to reach 10 million underserved people with quality
       healthcare services in partnership with state governments of priority states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and
       Odisha and scale up in other high focus states.




International Finance Corporation                                     Wadhwani Initiative for Sustainable Healthcare (WISH)
Maruti Suzuki Building                                                5C Hansalaya Building,
3rd Floor, 1 Nelson Mandela Road,                                     15 Barakhamba Road,
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi – 110070, India                                New Delhi 110001, India
T: (91-11) 4111-1000, F: (91-11) 4111-1001                            T: +91-11-43151600-19, F: (91-11) 4315-1620
W: ifc.org                                                            W: wishfoundationindia.org
