    W o m e n                     E n t r e p r e n e u r s                a n d       A c c e s s           t o     F i n a n c e
                      P r o g r a m                  P r o f i l e s   f r o m   A r o u n d         t h e     W o r l d

                                                                            Challenges

I
    FC, the private sector arm of the World Bank Group, is
    committed to reducing poverty and improving lives in                    Although a growing number of policies and programs are aris-
    developing countries through investment and technical                   ing to address the needs of the growing number of women
assistance. The Gender-Entrepreneurship-Markets (GEM)                       business owners and their enterprises worldwide, access to
unit is a cross-cutting initiative to mainstream gender                     finance is still the single biggest obstacle facing women entre-
throughout IFC operations, helping to better leverage the                   preneurs. Why isn’t this growing market better served?
untapped potential of women in emerging markets. The
Kauffman Foundation, with more than 12 years of field                       Under-Representation in the Formal Sector—Due to
experience, is the largest American foundation to focus on                  legal, regulatory, and sociocultural barriers
entrepreneurship.                                                           Limited Market Data—Making it difficult for banks in
                                                                            frontier and emerging markets to assess market needs and
Both IFC and Kauffman are committed to supporting the                       size, due to inadequate quantitative data about the women’s
development of women-owned enterprises and facilitating                     market or the micro, small, and medium enterprise
their access to tools for economic growth. In a partnership                 (MSME) segment
effort the organizations commissioned research on creative                  Perceived Credit Risk—Few banks are familiar with credit
and effective programs, providing access to financing for                   bureaus, limited credit history, and constraints on access to
women business owners through commercial banks and                          collateral
microfinance initiatives around the world.                                  Technical Expertise—Few banks are familiar with the
This document summarizes initial findings and interesting                   obstacles facing women-owned businesses and how to meet
examples from both studies, funded by Kauffman on U.S.                      their specific needs
programs (available at www.kauffman.org) and by IFC
GEM on programs outside the U.S. (study in progress).
                                                                             In Kenya, 48 percent of business owners are
                                                                               women, yet they have only 7 percent of
                                                                            formal credit and own just 1 percent of land.
The Business Case—Why Should Financial
Institutions Target the Women’s Market?
Women are starting and growing businesses at a remarkable
rate. These firms represent up to 38 percent of all registered
small businesses worldwide. In Canada, women hold own-
ership in 47 percent of small enterprises and accounted for
70 percent of new business start-ups in 2004.1 In the U.S.,
women-owned businesses are growing at twice the rate of all
firms, generating $1 trillion in sales, and employing more
than 7 million workers.2 In China, women own one-third of
small businesses, of which 17 percent have more than 1,000
employees.

1
    Statistics Canada 2005, http://www.statcan.ca/start.html                Kenya: Mary Mwangi, owner of Double M, a 200-employee commuter
2
    U.S. Census Bureau. See www.censUS.gov.csd/sbo                                             bus company in Nairobi.
2   Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World




      Benefits
      But there are many benefits for financial institutions of   Increased Brand Value
      financing women-owned businesses. These include:            Engagement with Communities and Policymakers, and
      Access to a Large, Untapped, Underserved Market             Increased Social Impact—Women’s access to finance facilitates
      High Repayment Rates—Women’s microfinance payback           greater spending on family welfare, nutrition, and girls’ educa-
      rates exceed 95 percent.                                    tion.
      Market Differentiation—This is especially important in
      the competitive MSME segment

                    70 percent of the world’s poor living on less than $1 a day are women.

                                         Wells Fargo Bank (United States)
                                                Women’s Business Services Program
                                                                  A pioneer in targeting women business owners as an
                                                                  underserved market, Wells Fargo continues with ambi-
                                                                  tious lending goals and outreach efforts. The bank serves
                                                                  women-owned businesses with loans, lines of credit—
                                                                  including unsecured credit lines of up to $100,000—and
                                                                  other financial services.
                                                                  Wells Fargo Women’s Business Services program, launched
                                                                  in 1995, also provides research, financial guides, work-
                                                                  shops, seminars, and community group partnerships, and
                                                                  an annual “Trailblazer” award to recognize the achieve-
                                                                  ments of women business owners.
                                                                  The program’s first 10 years saw more than 700,000 loans
                                                                  (exceeding $25 billion) to women-owned small businesses,
                                                                  far exceeding original targets. Wells Fargo is one of the few
                                                                  large financial institutions in the U.S. to announce a
                                                                  women-focused lending goal and to partner effectively with
              Women-owned businesses employ more than 7 million   women’s organizations.
                           workers in the U.S.
                   Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World                    3




                                    Access Bank, Plc (Nigeria)
                                       Gender Empowerment Program
                                                        Nigeria’s Access Bank operates the first program of its kind
                                                        in Africa—a partnership between IFC and a commercial
                                                        financial institution that emphasizes access to finance for
                                                        women entrepreneurs. Access Bank:
                                                             I Is listed on the Nigerian Stock Exchange
                                                             I Has more than 80 branches and service outlets
                                                             I Is a member of the Global Banking Alliance for
                                                                  women
                                                             I Is Nigeria’s seventh-largest bank (up from no. 65
                                                                  in 2002)
                                                             I Has recently received a $15 million line of cred-
                                                                  it with IFC for on-lending to women-owned
                                                                  businesses, supported by IFC GEM technical
                                                                  assistance
                                                        Recognizing a business opportunity, Access Bank has
                                                        launched a promising new initiative to differentiate itself
                                                        by focusing on women-owned businesses. In addition to
                                                        lending to women entrepreneurs directly, Access has
                                                        recently made its first disbursement to a microfinance
                                                        institution. It provided a N20 million (US$157,000)
                                                        facility under its Gender Empowerment Program to the
                                                        Catholic Institute for Democracy, Justice and Peace (CID-
                                                        JAP) in Enugu State to finance microenterprises via the
                                                        women cooperatives with whom CIDJAP works.

                                                          “Successfully reaching the women’s market
                                                              in Nigeria will be key in achieving
Access Bank: Targeting the women's market in Nigeria.             our retail and SME goals.”
                                                                      —Aigboje Aig-Imoukhuede,
                                                                     Managing Director, Access Bank
4   Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World




      Global Banking Alliance
      The Global Banking Alliance (GBA) for Women is a world-             and share best practices. The following members demon-
      wide consortium of best practice banks serving the women’s          strate that lending to women is good business—with prac-
      market (www.gbaforwomen.org). Currently chaired by Royal            tices that can be adapted and emulated in other countries.
      Bank of Canada, GBA encourages member banks to identify


                 Bank of Scotland has quadrupled the number of its women sole trader clients.

                                         Bank of Scotland (United Kingdom)
                                                                          In 2003, Bank of Scotland (BoS) created its award-win-
                                                                          ning Women in Business program to sensitize frontline
                                                                          staff to differences between male and female business own-
                                                                          ers, and to better communicate financial products to
                                                                          women through increasing comfort levels and reducing
                                                                          the fear of approaching banks.
                                                                          As one of the few initiatives of its kind, BoS:
                                                                               I Provides regular educational outreach
                                                                               I Publishes a bi-annual Big Fish magazine to
                                                                                  share female role model successes and business
                                                                                  tips (72 percent of readers say they recom-
                                                                                  mend BoS to others)
                                                                               I Sponsors organizations and initiatives that
                                                                                  improve products and services for women in
                                                                                  business

          Bank of Scotland: Honoring achiements of women entreprenuers.
                      Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World                      5



                         Westpac Banking Corporation (Australia)
I see becoming the bank of choice for women as a long-term
strategy, integral to our core business.
                   –Dr. David Morgan, Managing Director,
                               Westpac Banking Corporation
In the late 1990s, Westpac underwent a cultural shift to
develop into the bank of choice for women—an untapped
business segment requiring improved service delivery. A
national Women in Business unit was established with
managers in every state. Westpac also created Women’s
Investment Advisory Service (WIAS)—financial advisers
specializing in investment planning, education, risk man-
agement, and business services for women. Besides improv-
ing customer service, staff morale, community outreach,
and brand equity, the program positively impacts Westpac’s
                                                             Westpac’s Women in Business unit supports community service.
bottom line.
In 2006 more than 70 percent of Westpac’s employees, 42 percent of management, and 33 percent of executive
leadership are women.


Three years from launch, the program grew to A$504m (US$382 million) in new business.

                                      RBC Royal Bank (Canada)
In 1994, RBC Royal Bank, Canada’s largest lender to small businesses, resolved to become the bank of choice for
women. Business banking staff was trained in gender-sensitive service delivery and an online virtual Network for
Women entrepreneurs was created.
RBC has more than 100 women’s market champions across Canada among its staff—trained to offer appropriate finan-
cial and nonfinancial support, including consulting services and educational events.


      RBC’s focus on women entrepreneurs improved client satisfaction 30 percent and
               increased market share (23 percent vs. 18 percent SME overall).
6   Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World




      Key Findings: Common Program
      Characteristics
      Although the IFC and Kauffman studies do not provide an              Common elements of the successful programs profiled:
      exhaustive inventory of best practice programs, the initiatives
      analyzed and profiled highlight common themes and chal-              Scale—Achieve scale either by growing or by developing a
      lenges: scale, scope, sustainability, and effectiveness. Hundreds    network model in which they work with affiliates and other
      of programs provide services to small businesses, and perhaps        programs.
      dozens primarily serve women for access to capital.                  Scope—Provide a wide range of services which enable best
                                                                           practice programs to address multiple needs, frequently
      Interviews with experts in the field and analysis of best practice
                                                                           with an institutionalized focus on the market across the
      programs suggest that successful organizations are fairly large,
                                                                           organization.
      provide a wide range of services, and have strong linkages to the
                                                                           Leadership—Have effective and committed leaders—both
      financial community. At the national level, successful programs
                                                                           CEO and business line leader—who can manage internally
      targeting a specific population have achieved scale by partner-
                                                                           and develop strong external relationships with the community.
      ing with local organizations to deliver direct services.
                                                                           Metrics—Collect gender-disaggregated data, conduct their
                                                                           own internal research, measure outcomes, and in some cases
                                                                           design tailored credit risk models.
                                                                           Service Delivery—Gender-sensitive service delivery and
                                                                           staff training.
                                                                           This ground-breaking effort is not meant to be an exhaustive
                                                                           cataloging of “best of breed” programs or initiatives, although
                                                                           the programs were analyzed and vetted for their effectiveness
                                                                           in outreach and outcomes. Rather, it highlights a diverse
                                                                           range of approaches to providing capital and other forms of
                                                                           financial assistance to women seeking to start or grow their
                                                                           enterprises and suggests approaches and methods that appear
                                                                           to increase the likelihood of greater program success.
                                                                           We hope this effort will:
                                                                               I Promote dialogue and discussion among those
                                                                                 interested in fostering the growth of women-owned
                                                                                 enterprises
                                                                               I Encourage further investigation of the initiatives
                                                                                 uncovered
                                                                               I Enhance the sharing of program information and
         Bangladesh: Financing from BRAC (see p. 10) helps local women
                                                                                 outcomes
                             build their businesses.
                                                                               I Encourage additional, more intensive research into
                                                                                 this underexplored area.
                            Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World                           7



Profiles in Innovation
Innovative products and services are critical to best practice         The following brief profiles share what’s working—and
financing programs for women-led businesses to respond to              what can work elsewhere.
market need. They often include connection to nonfinancial
services (financial literacy, business skills training, networking).



                                      Banco Santander Santiago (Chile)
    In a region where the majority of financial institutions
    have limited focus on women, Banco Santander stands
    out due to its outreach to women in both their microfi-
    nance and SME finance businesses. It is:
            I The largest bank in Chile ($28 billion in
               assets)
            I Owned by one of world’s largest bank holding
               companies (Banco Santander Central Hispano
               of Spain)
            I Listed on the New York Stock Exchange
            I A full-service financial institution

    Santander has also mainstreamed gender considerations. It
    operates a microfinance affiliate (Banefe) for whom
    women make up 54 percent of borrowers and 60 percent
    of loan officers, as well as an SME lending program, 23              Chile: Women are active in mining and other key industries.
    percent of whose borrowers are women. It also provides
    women’s training programs in partnership with local NGOs.
    The bank’s vision promotes a culture of female empowerment:
           I Has 45 percent female workforce (10 points higher than nationwide rate)
           I Targets women for management and professional positions
           I Sponsors an annual Female Microentrepreneur Award to showcase both female role models and credit
               opportunities


     In many developing countries, financial institutions that are most successful in reaching
    female entrepreneurs have designed a product suite to cater to the needs of women who
           cannot own physical assets or must share ownership with their husbands.
8   Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World




                                               Fondacion Zakoura (Morocco)
                                                                          A Moroccan NGO, Fondacion Zakoura. leads the Middle
                                                                          East-North Africa region in supporting women’s econom-
                                                                          ic empowerment through financial services—aiming for
                                                                          social change by building women’s self-confidence and
                                                                          access to information. It:
                                                                                I Is Morocco’s third-largest microfinance institution
                                                                                    —one of the few with a strong focus on
                                                                                    women, and commercially sustainable
                                                                                I Uses donor funding for nonfinancial services
                                                                                    conventional banks don’t offer (water, health
                                                                                    care, literacy programs)
                                                                                I Has illiterate and poor women as the majority
                                                                                    of clients
                                                                          Zakoura’s proportions of female personnel:
                                                                              I Regional directors—60 percent
                                                                              I Office directors—55 percent
                                                                              I Loan officers—60 percent

                                                                          Since 2002, Zakoura has reached about 52,000 people per
                                                                          year with its nonfinancial services.


                                                                             An integrated package of financial and
                                                                            nonfinancial services empowers women
                                                                           in an Islamic society. Zakoura was the first
                                                                          Moroccan microfinance institution to create
                                                                          housing, water, and electricity loan products.


           Zakoura: Supporting Morocco’s women entepreneurs with loans,
                           training, and other products.
                      Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World                             9



                           Sero Lease and Finance Ltd. (Tanzania)
In Tanzania custom law largely excludes women from Tanzania: Women Have Difficulty Accessing Credit
owning land, and in a predominantly collateral based
banking system that excludes them from business loans,
too. Sero Lease and Finance Ltd. (Selfina) is is a women's
leasing and finance company that went into microleasing
in 1997 to address this problem, enabling women to
acquire equipment for immediate use with a down pay-
ment and financial lease.
         I Targets SMEs —currently has 3,000 clients
         I Zero default rate and 99 percent payback
            rate
         I Average loan size $500
         I Operates at an annual profit and is poised
            for growth
Selfina’s objectives include:
          I Increasing the volume of lease transactions—
             currently $17 million, meeting only a fraction
             of the demand in a growing economy
          I Providing equipment to businesswomen—
             increasing their efficiency and modernizing
             their businesses or facilities
          I Promoting leasing—to support private enter-
             prise growth and foster a more favorable envi-
             ronment for foreign and domestic investment
          I Expanding into agricultural equipment leasing



                                                              Despite difficulty accessing commercial finance, Tanzania's Odilia
                                                              Martin has made the cleaning company she started eight years ago
                                                                into a winner, with 260 employees today and a client list that
                                                              includes Coca-Cola. But it took eight years. Had local banks been
                                                                   willing to lend to her, she could have moved much faster.


       Thousands of women have benefited from the services of Selfina since the start
       of its operations. Some global estimates indicate that one fulltime job is created
                          for each $10,000 of lease financing received.
10   Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World




                                                         BRAC (Bangladesh)
                                                                     One of the world’s largest NGOs, Bangladesh’s BRAC:
                                                                         I Began in 1972 as a relief organization
                                                                             (Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee)
                                                                         I Now has a unique relationship between its
                                                                             nonprofit BRAC and for-profit BRAC Bank
                                                                         I Provides linkages among its many programs



                                                                         Multifaceted programs support BRAC’s
                                                                         mission of economic development and
                                                                          empowerment of Bangladesh’s poor
                                                                             women through microfinance.
               BRAC: Integrated program to raise living standards
                          of women in Bangladesh.


          BRAC and Women‘s Empowerment
          Established in 2001, BRAC’s Women’s Economic Development Program (WEDP) helps women build financial
          independence through access to finance. It targets female entrepreneurs who operate their own businesses with-
          out male partners (since in Bangladesh males often Use female relatives to access finance) and offers business
          loans to women with legally registered businesses or trade licenses (loans require a guarantor other than the appli-
          cant’s husband). Key facts:
                 I Depends largely on word-of-mouth advertising and referrals
                 I 9,500 active clients
                 I Outstanding portfolio: $5.4 million.
                 I Terms: 100 days to 24 months
                 I Loan size: $735–7,352
                 I Provides technical assistance to BRAC Bank’s newly formed Women’s Entrepreneurship Cell
                 I 100 percent female staff—can visit the clients in their homes (greatest challenge is hiring and
                    training qualified female staff )

         BRAC’s internal Gender Quality Action Learning Program takes comprehensive a approach to empowering women:
                I More than 6,000 field staff trained in gender issues
                I Building capacity of individual field staff
                I Driving long-term institutional change
                    Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World                           11



                                   Count Me In (United States)
Founded in 1999, the nonprofit program Count Me In
(www.countmein.org) is a pioneer in online lending—
providing small loans to women, including those who don’t
fit the traditional credit profile.
          I Supported by private investors, corpora-
              tions, firms, foundations, government pro-
              grams
          I Offers online resources—training courses,
              questions and answers, business education
              library
          I Provides loans of $500–10,000 at 8–15 per-
                                                               Count Me In: Championing the cause of women’s economic
              cent for 6–84 months                            independence by providing access to business loans, consulting
          I Extends credit to women just entering the                           services, and education.
              workforce, if they’ve taken business courses
              or have a home-based business
Count Me In provides access to networks that expand clients’ contacts, markets, skills, and confidence. Its “step up”
program allows a client to apply for subsequent, larger loans after repaying her first loan.


 Make Mine a $Million
 Count Me In’s new program, Make Mine a $Million, targets high-growth businesses trying to reach $1 million
 in sales. Each year it awards to 40 women-led businesses (on a competitive basis):
        I Up to $45,000
        I One year of business mentoring
        I Marketing tools to help grow their businesses to a million dollars and beyond
12   Women Entrepreneurs and Access to Finance Program Profiles from Around the World




                                             Trapezia (United Kingdom)
                                                              Women-owned businesses attract less than 5 percent of
                                                              venture capital funds worldwide. Following the innovative
                                                              US Springboard 2000 program, the Trapezia Fund will be
                                                              the first dedicated to the venture capital requirements of
                                                              women-centered businesses in the U.K. and Europe.
                                                              Trapezia is a private investment fund that is part of
                                                              Stargate Capital Management Ltd.
                                                                    I A venture capital and business angel for
                                                                        women
                                                                    I Offers opportunity to invest in women-
                                                                        focused businesses over 3–5 years
                                                                    I Investment advisory panel of seasoned entre-
                                                                        preneurs and professionals, including a repre-
                                                                        sentative from the Women in Business (WIB)
                                                                        unit of Bank of Scotland
                                                              The fund seeks $53.7 million and requires a minimum
                                                              investment of $18,000—demonstrating to investors
                                                              that Trapezia is committed to women’s businesses as a
                                                              lucrative sector.
                                                              Although still raising money, Trapezia already has an inno-
                                                              vative model to foster, mentor, and nurture businesses by
                                                              providing financial capital, access to intellectual capital,
                Trapezia: UK-based women's investment fund.   and introductions to business networks and markets.


       Trapezia is a promising initiative with aspects that could be replicated in developing countries.
