IMPLEMENTATION
COMPLETION
MEMORANDUM (ICM)
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) Multi-Donor Trust Fund


December 14, 2016
                                       Table of contents


A. BASIC TRUST FUND INFORMATION......................................................................2


B. TRUST FUND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND DESIGN ………………….......3


C. OUTCOME………………………………………………………………………….………8


D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME …..…………………………………………...20


E. PERFORMANCE………………………………………………………………………….23


F. LESSONS LEARNED/ RECOMMENDATIONS……………….………………………25


G. ICM PROCESSING AND COMMENTS ….……………………………………………26


H. ANNEX 1 – REGIONAL EITI-MDTF GRANT DISBURSEMENTS…………………..27


I. ANNEX 2 – GLOBAL KNOWLEDGE EITI-MDTF GRANT DISBURSEMENTS…….32




                                                   1
    A. BASIC TRUST FUND INFORMATION 1

TF Name: Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF)

TF Number: TF053509

Task Team Leader Name/TF Managing Unit: Paulo de Sa GEEDR at Trust Fund Closing Date

TF Amount (as committed by donors): USD58,302,662 were committed by donors for the MDTF. In
addition the United States committed USD13,476,000 for the complementary USAID SDTF

Recipient of TF funds (Bank/Recipient, if Recipient state name of recipient government and
implementing agency): Hybrid

Type of TF (Free-standing/ programmatic/ new TF for an ongoing program): Programmatic

Single/Multi Donor: Multi Donor

Donor(s) Name(s): Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, the EU, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, the
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Switzerland, and UK2

TF Program Source Code: EITI

Purpose of TF (Co-financing/Investment financing/ Debt Service/ Advisory Activities- Bank/Advisory
Activities-Recipient, etc.): Advisory Activities-Bank; Advisory Activities-Recipient

TF Approval/IBTF Clearance Date: November 23, 2005

TF Effectiveness Date: August 25, 20043

TF Final Closing Date: December 31, 2015

TF Final End Disbursement Date: June 30, 2016

Date of ICM Submission to TFO: December 15, 2016

Cost and Financing Table: - see Table 1 overleaf


1
  Data provided by World Bank EITI MDTF Secretariat. This EITI ICM was prepared in parallel with the ICM for
the Extractive Industries Technical Assistance Facility (EI TAF) MDTF which was initiated in 2009. The two
MDTFs each had their own Program Manager but in 2012 the two Program Manager positions were eliminated by
World Bank management and the two MDTFs were subsequently overseen by the (then) SEGOM Sector Manager
and were managed by the same World Bank Secretariat. The two MDTFs have been succeeded by the Extractives
Global Programmatic Support (EGPS) program.
2
  In addition the United States supported a complementary USAID SDTF
3
  Effectiveness is before Approval of second IBTF


                                                      2
                                  Table 1: EITI MDTF Cost and Financing Table

    Donor                                                   Contribution        Contribution
                                                               (USD)                (%)
    MDTF Donors
    Australia                                                15,508,100              27%
    Canada                                                   12,520,045              21%
    United Kingdom                                           10,848,558              19%
    Spain                                                    4,924,860                8%
    Germany                                                  2,993,870                5%
    France                                                   1,810,628                3%
    Norway                                                   1,727,749                3%
    The Netherlands                                          1,500,000                3%
    Switzerland                                              1,499,987                3%
    European Commission                                      1,496,487                3%
    Belgium                                                  1,395,144                2%
    Finland                                                  1,061,780                2%
    Japan                                                     557,350                 1%
    Denmark                                                   458,085                 1%
    Total MDTF 4                                             58,302,662              100%

    Other income and Receipts                                1,743,282
    Total Receipts                                           60,045,944

    Administration Fee                                       2,915,132
    Disbursements                                            47,183,005

    Undisbursed                                               9,947,807



    B. TRUST FUND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND DESIGN

      1. Introduction

According to the Initiating Brief for a Trust Fund (IBTF), the objective of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) is to support the establishment of EITI
countries through programs of cooperation between governments, the private sector and civil society,
supported by the international community, to include activities in support of the six EITI criteria (agreed
at the London Conference on EITI in March 2005) which participating countries need to meet or, if
possible, exceed in order to be considered to be successfully implementing EITI. The six EITI criteria are
as follows:

      1. Regular publication of all material oil, gas and mining payments by companies to governments
         (“payments”) and all material revenues received by governments from oil, gas and mining

4
    In addition the United States contributed USD13,476,000 through the USAID SDTF

                                                        3
         companies (“revenues”) to a wide audience in a publicly accessible, comprehensive and
         comprehensible manner.
    2.   Where such audits do not already exist, payments and revenues are the subject of a credible,
         independent audit, applying international auditing standards.
    3.   Payments and revenues are reconciled by a credible, independent administrator, applying
         international auditing standards and with publication of the administrator’s opinion regarding
         that reconciliation including discrepancies, should any be identified.
    4.   This approach is extended to all companies including state-owned enterprises.
    5.   Civil society is actively engaged as a participant in the design, monitoring and evaluation of this
         process and contributes towards public debate.
    6.   A public, financially sustainable Work Plan for all the above is developed by the host government,
         with assistance from the international financial institutions where required, including measurable
         targets, a timetable for implementation, and an assessment of potential capacity constraints.

No revision has been made to the original development objective of this Trust Fund. In 2009, when the
United States decided to join the EITI-MDTF, they were unable to make a contribution to the EITA MDTF
for legislative reasons. To address these issues, the World Bank and USAID established a parallel single-
donor trust fund (USAID SDTF) following which the EITI Implementation Support Facility (the Facility) was
established, which included the existing MDTF plus the new USAID SDTF.

The Facility is usefully summarized as follows: “The Facility is intended to provide implementation support
to the EITI, an association established under the laws of the Kingdom of Norway, through country, regional
and global activities consistent with the principles articulated in the Statement of Principles and Agreed
Actions adopted at the first plenary conference in London in June 2003 and the criteria articulated in the
Statement of Outcomes adopted at the second plenary conference in London in March 2005 (the "EITI
Principles and Criteria") by the partnership that has now become the EITI. The Bank, acts as financial and
program administrator for the Facility (the "Administrator"), which consists of multiple trust funds
established by the Administrator in its sole discretion that are expected to be operationally equivalent
(collectively, the "Facility Trust Funds" and each, a "Facility Trust Fund"). The funds from the Facility Trust
Funds (the "Contribution Funds") will be used to develop, broaden and increase transparency over
payments and revenues in the extractive sectors in countries needing these resources” 5

The MDTF and USAID SDTF funds were co-managed by the same World Bank Secretariat and ran together
seamlessly until the MDTF closed on December 31, 2015. The SDTF was extended for an additional two
years for a Closing Date of December 31, 2017 to allow for disbursements to be completed.

The MDTF published detailed Annual Reports for 2013-20156 which were submitted to the donors. These
reports are publically available and provide year by year (for 2013-2015) details of the results achieved,
support for civil society organizations (CSOs), and support for Country and Global Work Programs and
country by country updates. These three Annual Reports do not distinguish between MDTF and SDTF
grants and disbursements – both are characterized as MDTF grants and disbursements. Combining the
two together reflects their complementarity and co-management. Since this combined coverage in the

5
  Source: Trust Fund Administration Agreement between the Kingdom of Denmark, and the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and the International Development Association concerning the Multi-Donor Trust
Fund for EITI Implementation Support (TF053509) dated October 3, 2011.
6
  Links to EITI-MDTF Annual Reports 2013, 2014, and 2015.


                                                      4
Annual Reports was acceptable to the donors, unless otherwise noted (such as in Table 1: Cost and
Financing), this ICM continues the same practice and considers both the grants and disbursements from
the contributions of the original MDTF donors and the grants and disbursements from the United States
contributions as overall MDTF grants and contributions.

It is important to note, as will be discussed in some detail below, that the EITI has evolved considerably
since the Six Principles for Participating Countries (noted above) were established at the 2005 London
Conference, from a somewhat fledgling international initiative that focused solely on reporting of data
regarding Extractive Industries (EI) revenue flows to a mature, widely respected international process that
now requires participating countries to prepare and provide an in depth overview of their extractive
industries, according to the EITI Standard which was introduced at the Sixth EITI Global Conference in May
2013 and is shown in the Chart 1 below.

                                       Chart 1: The EITI 2013 Standard


                     Licenses     Monitoring
                     &                                     distribution




                                                                          Transfers to




                                                                                         infrastructure




The 2013 EITI Standard requires countries to report on their extractive industries’ legal framework and
fiscal regime; the extractive industries’ contribution to their economy; production data; state participation
in the extractive industries; revenue allocations and the sustainability of revenues, license registers and
license allocations. As extended EITY coverage to the whole of the EI Value Chain and thus started to cover
the linkages from resource mineral identification and extraction to economic growth and poverty
reduction. The 2013 Standard was subsequently modified at the February 2016 EITI Lima Conference –
which took place outside of the EITI MDTF life-time but, as with earlier Global Conferences, shapes the
next steps and future direction of EITI.

The introduction of the Standard has added very substantially to the present reporting requirements. It
has resulted in a substantial shift away from original “compliance” with EITI revenue transparency
requirements under the 2011 EITI Rules to “validation” regarding the amount of progress being made

                                                     5
towards achieving the new 2016 EITI Standard. In considering the EITI MDTF objectives, it is worth noting
that the MDTF objective emphasized supporting EITI’s program activities which then became a somewhat
moving target as they have evolved over time. The successor Extractives Global Programmatic Support
(EGPS) program has expanded beyond what might be considered to be a somewhat narrow focus on EITI
implementation activities, and has broadened out to provide overall “support to transparency reforms of
the extractive sector and revenues”.

       2. Original (and Revised) Trust Fund Activities/Components

Paragraph 35 of the IBTF noted that the objective of the EITI is to increase transparency over payments
and revenues in the extractives sector in countries heavily dependent on these resources and (paragraph
37) that the focus will be on voluntary cooperation from governments7.

Paragraph 39 of the ITBF included the following three main types of activities

       1a. Establishment of EITI: Recipient activities including:
            Production and publication of reports on payments and revenues
            Audit of EITI data (including state-owned companies) where such audits do not exist,
               including collection of EI tax payment data from companies and revenue data from
               governments by a credible, independent administrator applying international auditing
               standards; advisory services on auditing standards
            Reconciliation of audited data & publication of administrator's opinion regarding
               reconciliation including discrepancies; advisory services on reconciliation
            Support for government preparation of public, financially sustainable EITI work plan and
               activities as specified in the work plan including training; local, regional & international
               workshops/seminars, including stakeholder travel; data publication; etc.; support for
               international advisers & local consultants to provide additional capacity to governments in
               implementing EITI & ensure civil society engagement
            Capacity building for EITI stakeholders & funding operating costs of EITI country secretariats

       1b. Establishment of EITI: World Bank activities including:
            Support to ensure that civil society is actively engaged in the design, monitoring and
               evaluation of the EITI process
            Workshops/seminars including stakeholder travel
            Consultants to assist World Bank and other EITI agencies in EITI implementation
            Above recipient activities upon recipient request

       2. Global EITI Information and Coordination including international workshops, presentation of EITI
       at international events global coordination of EITI activities.

The IBTF (paragraph 40) further noted that the establishment of EITI activity is intended to be recipient-
executed, except in exceptional circumstances and in accordance with World Bank rules for such
exceptions.




7
    This was the objective as of 2005.

                                                      6
     3. Outcome Indicators

The IBTF listed the following six key performance indicators:
     #1 Successful Establishment of EITI in countries: Number of countries that have implemented
        transparency and published revenues.
     #2 Publication of Policy Recommendations for Extractive Industries Transparency: Number of
        reports published.
     # 3 Production of Practical Guidelines and Templates for Reporting: Number of reports
        published.
     # 4 International Conference on EITI: Number of conferences held and numbers and types of
        stakeholders attending.
     #5 Expansion of EITI: Number of resource-rich countries from which commitment to EITI has
        been received/demonstrated
     #6 EITI in CASs and Country Dialogue: Number of resource-rich Bank client countries for which
        EITI is incorporated into the CAS and the country dialogue. (Note: resource-rich defined as those
        countries in which the EI sector accounts for, or is expected soon to account for, more than 50
        percent of government revenues.)

     4. Other Significant Changes in Trust Fund Design

The initial contributions to the EITI-MDTF were GBP 2,326,000 from the United Kingdom (USD 4,278,095
equivalent) in August 2004 and NOK 1,500,000 from Norway (USD 239,601 equivalent) in April 2005, for
a total initial donor contribution of USD 4,517,696.80. The initial financing plan also included USD
1,430,000 World Bank Budget funding plus USD 600,000 in Development Grant Facility (DGF) support. In
addition, an initial contribution of USD5,976,000 was received in 2009 from the United States for the
previously noted USAID SDTF.

Subsequently additional funds were received from the various donors (including the United States) for a
Grand Total of USD 71,778,642 at time of closing of the MDTF. In addition, the final Financing Plan also
includes USD 7,701,000 World Bank and IFC Budget funding plus USD 1,104,000 in DGF funding (as of end
FY14).

The original MDTF Fund Closing Date was September 26, 2007 and the end disbursement date was January
28, 2008. Subsequent extensions were agreed with donors and internally, due to continued relevance and
interest in continuing the activities to support the EITI, and the final MDTF Closing Date was December
31, 2015, and final MDTF End Disbursement Date was June 30, 2016. 8


    C. OUTCOME

     1. Relevance of TF Objectives, Design and Implementation

The MDTF’s objectives, design and implementation are considered highly relevant to current
global/regional/country priorities and to the Bank’s sector strategy


8
 As noted previously the USAID SDTF Closing date is December 31, 2017 and end disbursement date June 30,
2018.

                                                     7
Minerals, that is non-fuel minerals (such as ores, concentrates and metals) and fuel minerals (such as oil,
gas and coal), and gemstones have the potential to reshape economies and generate substantial economic
growth and wealth. It has long been recognized that countries with substantial mineral income relative
to the size of the economy can be subject to “the paradox of plenty” or “the resource curse” whereby
many such countries have weaker institutions, poorer economic management, higher levels of corruption
and lower levels of economic performance and poverty reduction than comparable countries with low
levels of income from non-fuel and fuel mineral resources relative to the size of the economy.

The EITI is a significant major international initiative which, in its original design, aimed at bringing to light,
auditing and providing strong public access to and public debate around:
     Payments reported to governments by extractive industries companies,
     Receipts of extractive industries revenues reported by governments,
     Reconciliation of any differences between the audited payments and receipts.

As such, the EITI is very relevant to the World Bank’s strategy for extractives countries since it helps bring
about greater domestic and international accountability about the collection of extractive industry
revenues as well as reduced revenue leakages and corruption. The importance of EITI to World Bank
extractives activities across a wide range of countries was documented in a 2011 IEG Evaluation Report
(which is further referenced later in this report) which reported “50 WBG country teams have provided
budgetary support to the promotion of EITI, in face of a large number of other projects, programs and
initiatives competing for their attention”.

There are presently 47 IDA/IBRD eligible (non-OECD) EITI Compliant and Candidate implementing
countries and 4 OECD EITI implementing countries. The continuing importance of EITI to the World Bank’s
extractives work program is reflected by references to EITI in World Bank country strategy documents
(CAS, CPS, CPF, etc.) for 43 of the 47 IDA/IBRD EITI implementing countries. For donors, it is evidenced by
the establishment and support for the recently (2015) established successor Extractives Global
Programmatic support (EGPS) MDTF, which includes continuing support for EITI as the first Component.
EGPS combines the activities of both the EITI MDTF and the Extractive Industries Technical Advisory
Facility (EI TAF) MDTF, following the closure of both MDTFs at the end of 2015, and expands the scope to
allow support across the entire extractive industries value chain.

        2. Achievement of TF Development Objective

Overview - The MDTF’s development objectives are considered to have been largely met. There has also
been good progress in meeting the development objectives as formally agreed.9

        a) Support to Countries

The EITI Website (as of mid- 2016) lists 51 countries of which 31 are Compliant Countries which are
confirmed to have met all EITI requirements to be compliant and 20 are Candidate Countries which are
implementing EITI but not yet compliant.10 As shown in table 2, the MDTF has provided support to 30 of
the 31 compliant countries – the only Compliant County not receiving MDTF support is Norway. The MDTF

9
  Additional indicators were agreed in 2014/2015 which are referred to below in Section c) i) paragraph Other
Country-level Results. The additional indicators were never formally adopted and were used for annual report
purposes only.
10
   The EITI website (June 30 2016) also lists 5 “Other Countries”

                                                        8
has provided support to 17 of the 20 Candidate Countries – the three countries not receiving MDTF
support were Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States. The MDTF has also provided support
to 1 of the 5 countries listed by EITI as Other Countries (Equatorial Guinea which was delisted for not
meeting its validation deadline). A total of 175 grants11 were made to the 52 countries on the EITI website
supported by the MDTF, with an average grant size of nearly USD190,000 and total average grants of
about USD640,000 per country. In addition, to the 5 countries listed on the EITI website, the MDTF also
provided one grant each to six other countries – Angola, Bulgaria, Burundi, Lao PDR, Suriname and
Uganda. The average grant for these six countries was less than USD75,000. The CSO support identified
in Table 2 includes both direct support from the MDTF (the Civil Society Direct Support Program) and
support channeled to local level CSOs through organizations such as Publish What You Pay (PWYP) and
Natural Resources Governance Institute (NRGI) as outlined later in this report.

                Table 2: EITI MDTF: Support by Country and Purpose (as of June 30, 2016)12

                                                                                                    Post-
                                            EITI              EITI                              Compliance
     Country                            Preparation      Implementation       CSO Support       EITI Support

                 EITI Status: Compliant Country confirmed to have met all EITI Requirements
     Albania                                 √                √                                       √
     Burkina Faso                            √                √                 √
     Cameroon                                √                √                 √
     Central African Republic                √                √
     Chad                                    √                √                                       √
     Congo, Republic of                      √                √
     Cote d'Ivoire                           √                √
     Democratic Republic of Congo            √                √                 √
     Ghana                                   √                √                 √                     √
     Guatemala                               √                √                 √
     Guinea                                  √                √
     Indonesia                               √                √                 √
     Iraq                                    √                √
     Kazakhstan                              √                √                 √
     Kyrgyz Rep.                             √                √                 √                     √
     Liberia                                 √                √                 √                     √

                EITI Status: Compliant Country confirmed to have met all EITI Requirements
     Mali                                   √                √                                        √
     Mauritania                             √                √                                        √
     Mongolia                               √                √                 √                      √
     Mozambique                             √                √                 √                      √

11 Detailed information of the 181 country by country grants is available in the 2015 EITI MDTF Annual Report and
will not be repeated in the ICM. The 181 grants include 9 grants for which there were no disbursements
12
   Status as defined on EITI Website as of June30, 2016.

                                                        9
                                                                                                     Post-
                                                 EITI                 EITI                       Compliance
     Country                                 Preparation         Implementation   CSO Support    EITI Support
     Niger                                        √                    √               √               √
     Nigeria                                      √                    √                               √
     Peru                                         √                    √              √                √
     Sierra Leone                                 √                    √
     Tanzania                                     √                    √              √
     Togo                                         √                    √
     Timor-Leste                                  √                    √
     Trinidad & Tobago                            √                    √              √
     Yemen *                                      √                    √              √
     Zambia                                       √                    √              √                √

                    EITI Status: Candidate Country implementing EITI not yet Compliant
     Afghanistan                             √                √                √
     Azerbaijan                              √                                 √
     Colombia                                √                √                √
     Dominican Republic                      √                √
     Ethiopia                                √                √                √
     Madagascar                              √                √
     Honduras                                √                √
     Malawi                                  √
     Myanmar                                 √                √
     Papua New Guinea                        √
     Philippines                             √                √                √
     Sao Tome & Principe                     √                √
     Senegal                                 √                √
     Seychelles                              √                √
     Solomon Islands                         √                √                √
     Tajikistan                              √                √
     Tanzania                                √                √                √
     Ukraine                                 √                √                √
                                         EITI Status: Other Country
     Equatorial Guinea**                     √
* Compliant but temporarily suspended due to political instability
** Delisted in 2010

The following examples of Country Results are provided in the 2015 Annual Report and are repeated
here13 to illustrate the type of results that the MDTF has supported:


13
  There are a number of places in the ICM where material is summarized or quoted directly from the MDTF Annual
Reports. While some of what are considered the more important material is identified, because much of the material

                                                              10
     Albania- Enacted legislation in 2015 requiring all hydrocarbon contract holders, as well as national
      and local government institutions, to report revenues and payments based on the EITI Standard
     Ethiopia – The EITI MSG empowered other CSOs with outreach to create an informal CSO network
      to improve the flow of extractives information at the community level
     Mongolia – An electronic EITI data reporting system was implemented in 2015 which is being used
      by 987 companies with data available to the public
     Mozambique – The latest EITI Report includes company by company payments, production and
      in-kind royalties information and first steps towards disclosing beneficial ownership information.
     Nigeria – In 2015 the Government announced its commitment to introduce sector reforms using
      the governance and administrative reforms recommended in earlier NEITI Reports as a guide
     Philippines – The first EITI Report goes beyond Standard requirements and discloses 39 contracts
      with extractives companies and 37 Memoranda of Understanding with Indigenous Peoples
     Senegal – Moody’s Credit Rating Agency noted Senegal’s EITI Candidacy as a reason for upgrading
      the Country’s credit rating in 2014
     Ukraine – A draft law on extractive sector transparency and accountability was prepared with
      significant input from civil society and other stakeholders

Two noteworthy examples of MDTF support in the 2015 MDTF Report are, first, Indonesia, which has one
of the largest extractives sector in Asia-Pacific, and achieved EITI compliance in 2014 after a several year
process during which the MDTF provided over USD2 million in training, technical assistance and financial
support; and second, Myanmar which started its EITI preparation in 2012 decided to apply and was
accepted as meeting the requirements to be an EITI Candidate Country in 2014. In addition, even though
Burundi is not yet a Candidate Country, the USD112,000 grant it received helped fund an EITI Scoping
Study which has informed the country’s broader extractive industries reform program and has helped
advance sector reforms

The EITI International Secretariat also maintains an informative website (www.eiti.org) with extensive
details on the 51 EITI implementing countries (as of June 2016). These two sources provide a rich source
of material on the MDTF and EITI activities in recent years and are drawn on for this report.

Evaluation Reports. Three comprehensive evaluations of the MDTF were previously undertaken: in 2009
by Michael Jordan, in 2011 by the World Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), and in 2015 by
ScanTeam (of Norway). These were evaluations (not completion reports) which charted the progress of
the MDTF through its initial set up (Jordan); early progress through to validation of the first five EITI
Compliant Countries (out of 22 Candidate countries – page xv, para 10a) (IEG), and introducing the EITI
standard and beyond (ScanTeam).

    c) Meeting Development Objective

The MDTF has essentially met its overall objective of supporting the establishment of EITI in resource-
rich developing countries through programs of cooperation between governments, the private sector
and civil society, supported by the International community.

Further details are given in the following sections.

is largely an account of MDTF activities and results, the ICM does not always specifically identify text or material
taken from the Annual Reports.

                                                         11
        i)   Meeting the Six 2005 Criteria

The MDTF has also largely accomplished the country-related activities as proposed in the IBTF - Activity
1a Establishment of EITI

Meeting the Six 2005 Criteria. The MDTF has also been largely successful in supporting EITI to meet the 6
EITI criteria that were agreed at the London Conference on EITI in March 2005, in that the 30 EITI
Compliant Countries supported by the MDTF all meet the following requirements:
     Regular publication of all material oil, gas and mining payments by companies to governments
         (“payments”) and all material revenues received by governments from oil, gas and mining
         companies (“revenues”) to a wide audience in a publicly accessible, comprehensive and
         comprehensible manner.
     Payments and revenues are the subject of a credible, independent audit, applying international
         auditing standards.
     Payments and revenues are reconciled by a credible, independent administrator, applying
         international auditing standards and with publication of the administrator’s opinion regarding
         that reconciliation including discrepancies, should any be identified.
     This approach is extended to all companies including state-owned enterprises.
     Civil society is actively engaged as a participant in the design, monitoring and evaluation of this
         process and contributes towards public debate.
     A public, financially sustainable Work Plan for all the above was developed by the host
         government, including measurable targets, a timetable for implementation, and an assessment
         of potential capacity constraints.

Other Country-level Results/Indicators. The 2014 Annual Report included an Aggregated Data Results
Framework for the first time and covered 19 countries supported by the MDTF. Annex 4 in the 2015
MDTF Annual Report expands the coverage to the 25 grants active during the reporting period. The
results are very positive and are as follows
     23 countries provided 196 CSO communication and training activities targeted at CSOs, media
         and/or parliamentarians
     2804 CSOs were engaged in EITI through coalitions
     10 countries have designed or implemented an M&E system
     17 countries have an approved communications Strategy
     17 countries have communications strategies which ensure the reports are presented in
         formats accessible to different users
     7 countries have communications channels which target women
     The discrepancy gap between receipts and payments average 1.5% for 14 countries – data is not
         available for the other 11 countries)
     18 countries published EITI reports in 2015
     15 countries successfully reconciled their EITI reports in 2015

The 2015 Annual Report includes CSO Direct Support Indicators for six other countries – thus providing
indicators for 31 countries.

With regard to the Multi-Stakeholder Groups (MSGs), the 2015 Report also reports that for a sample of
25 MSGs:


                                                   12
       10 out of 25 have developed and use Monitoring & Evaluation systems
       18 out of 25 have developed and adopted communications strategies
       7 out of 25 use specific tools to target women with their communications strategies
       CSOs have roughly one third of the seats on MSGs

This report does not attempt a country by country assessment of the political circumstances of the many
MDTF-supported countries. Rather, it is sufficient to say that notwithstanding the political challenges and
uncertainties in many of the countries listed in Table 2 over the past decade, significant progress has been
made regarding transparency of and public discourse regarding extractives revenues in the MDTF
supported countries.

The MDTF has also largely accomplished the World Bank-related activities as proposed in the IBTF
Activity 1 b Establishment of EITI World Bank activities and IBTF Activity 2 Global EITI Information and
Coordination

Table 3 presents the final disbursement numbers for World Bank-executed EITI activities at the end June
2016.

         Table 3: Disbursements for World Bank-executed EITI Global Work Program (in USD)
                                        As of June 30, 2016

 Category                                                     Disbursed
 Civil Society Activities                                     4,244,760
 EITI Global/Regional Events                                  695,132
 Global Advocacy and Pipeline Development                     3,925,110
 Global Knowledge and Learning                                1,016,557
 Program Management and Administration                        3,207,050
 Grand Total                                                  13,088,610

             ii)   Civil Society Support

One of the hallmarks of EITI, which has had a profound effect in many countries, is the emphasis on civil
society engagement and the MDTF, together with the World Bank, IFC and Development Grant Funding
(DGF), have provided a very substantial program of support to Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) to ensure
that civil society is actively engaged in the design, monitoring and evaluation of the EITI process. The
support was implemented through two main mechanisms: (1) a 2011-2015 World Bank supported Civil
Society Direct Support Program (CSDSP) that aimed at strengthening CSO participation in the MSGs and
their contribution to EITI; and (2) contracts for and capacity building efforts led by Publish What You Pay
(PWYP) and by the Natural Resource Governance Institute (NRGI). In addition, the early CSO work was
strongly supported by the 2009 World Bank publication Engagement with Civil Society.

The progress made in CSO support and development is very noteworthy. In many countries CSOs are
poorly organized and given little information or attention by Government. The EITI, with the support from
the MDTF, has achieved two major accomplishments. First, getting so many governments to make
progress towards accepting and engaging with civil society groups as a matter of good international
practice. Second, is getting CSOs, which come in a wide variety of forms and focus, to be willing to
organize themselves and act together – including in combination with private sector representatives, in

                                                    13
EITI Multi-stakeholder Groups (MSGs). It has not all been smooth sailing since it is reported that in a few
countries relatively large payments were made to CSO participants in the MSGs which resulted in some
individuals “capturing” the MSG positions – but even so the accomplishments of EITI and the MDTF in
advancing dialogue between governments and CSOs can be considered somewhat ground breaking –
hence this ICM goes into some detail in this regard.

CSO Direct Support Program (CSDSP) was established by the Bank in 2011 and provided USD1.29 million
as of end FY15 in support for CSO activities in 15 EITI implementing countries including training on the full
EITI process; customized training on the EI Value Chain; creating EITI awareness tools; and bringing
together various EI groups regarding EI governance issues. The 2014 MDTF Annual Report page 35 states
that an independent assessment of the results of the CSDSP, which was prepared in September 201414,
concluded that “CSO participants have acquired raised awareness and knowledge on EITI at national,
regional and local levels”. The report also stated that the effectiveness of CSO engagement in the EITI
process and use of EITI information has been increased but more work remains to be done for CSOs to
acquire the skills needed for implementation.

PWYP (USD0.2 million disbursements end FY15) worked with national CSO coalitions with a focus on
coalition building; strategy development and coordinated advocacy; EITI engagement; and outreach to
sub-national CSOs. For example, PWYP has carried out coalition-building in six francophone African
countries with USD0.79 million support from the MDTF including three national events and one “hub”
event with participants from 25 countries. In 2015, PWYP also helped produce “Protecting the
Cornerstone” (which addresses organizing EITI MSGs), and a Civil Society Protocol Checklist and has also
established an EITI Program Coordinator related to positions on the EITI Board which are to be filled by
civil society representatives.

NRGI (USD1.25 million disbursements end FY15) has undertaken regional training activities, carried out
outreach to prospective EITI countries and provided support to CSOs to help ensure that EITI reporting is
policy relevant, comprehensive and user friendly and provides data that informs extractives policy
debates and reform. NRGI has produced an on-line guide to the EITI standard and accompanying
handbook and provided essential CSO support with USD1.25 million in MDTF funds working in 11 EITI
implementing countries and in addition has provided regional “hub” training events in Anglophone Africa,
Eurasia, Asia-Pacific and Latin America for CSOs from many different countries.15 CSO attendees at these
events are reported to have used new skills to analyze reports and impact policy debates in their countries.

Overall, the CSO work and trainings are considered to have considerably benefited the knowledge base of
CSOs. The ScanTeam Report reported “Greatest praise has been for the good and clear courses and the
course materials; the broader view/context that is provided regarding the sector and the issues; the
support to strengthening the voice and quality of civil society; the broad concept of civil society where they
try to include media, unions, parliamentarians, faith-based organizations, tradition leaders and not just
classic CSOs/NGOs. The most common concern was that the training tended to be too short; there was too
much material; often not enough contextualisation and adjustments to local needs and understanding of



14
   Engagement with Civil Society – An EITI Implementation Case Study World Bank Extractive Industries for
Development Series # 12 November 2009
15
   NRGI’s first contract covered Afghanistan, Burkina, Liberia, Mozambique, Peru and Yemen. NRGI’s second
contract covered Colombia, Philippines, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, DRC, Ghana, Niger,
Tanzania, and Zambia.

                                                     14
the starting point for many of the local actors; and not enough time to share experiences and adapt the
material to own needs and concerns.“

A September 2014 CSO assessment16 found that the initial objectives to increase CSO knowledge and
awareness of EITI principles and process was achieved in all of the countries in the Program. However,
an important lesson learned is that the interventions tended to achieve more substantial CSO capacity
building for those countries where a thorough needs assessment of CSO capacity gaps was conducted
with capacity building activities then designed according to local needs and realities with a priority focus
on CSO networking, partnerships and coalitions and that the most successful capacity building and EITI
dialogue took place where all key groups (government entities, CSOs and extractive companies) were
included in the CSO capacity building activities.
Implementing

The assessment provided other important lessons learned including (i) Strengthening the capacity of civil
society is a long-term process, and more sustainable results would be achieved by continuous and
targeted interventions in a particular country on specific capacity issues (including follow-up capacity
building trainings) rather than one-time trainings or workshops on overall EITI implementation issues; (ii)
Effective participation of CSOs in the EITI process increased when all MSG members participated in the
design and implementation of EITI-MDTF CSO capacity building programs; and (iii) Aligning EITI-MDTF CSO
capacity building objectives with the Country’s MDTF EITI objectives and World Bank interventions is key
to ensure the sustainability of country CSO capacity building programs. It then provided a proposed 12-
Step approach to preparing and implementing CSO capacity building activities.

Just before the end disbursement date of the MDTF, a CSO Support Strategy was prepared based on
lessons learned from the above-mentioned CSO support mechanisms. The Strategy was discussed with
Stakeholders and approved by EGPS donors. The Strategy will be taken forward under EGPS Pillar 1.

              iii) Global Advocacy and Global Knowledge/Learning

Some of the more important MDTF Global Knowledge and Advocacy products include (in order of time)
which include some policy recommendations for extractive industries transparency and practical
guidelines and templates for reporting:

          Implementing EITI: Applying Early Lessons from the Field (November 2008)
          Toward Strengthened EITI Reporting (August 2009)
          EITI at Work (DVD October 2010)
          Voices of Transparency (March 2011)
          Implementing EITI at the Subnational Level (October 2011)
          Revision/Update of Implementing EITI: Applying Early Lessons from the Field (2013)
          Implementing EITI for Impact (2014 )

The 2008 Implementing EITI: Applying Early Lessons from the Field (November 2008) was especially
important to the early growth of EITI in that it provided a practical primer for countries with chapters on
Starting an EITI program; Stakeholders and Governance Structures; Determining the Scope of an EITI
Program; Developing an EITI Work Program; the different Roles of Government, Companies and Civil


16
     Interim Assessment of the EITI-MDTF CSO Direct Support Program, M. Catelli, 2014

                                                       15
Society in EITI; Producing an EITI Report; Communicating EITI; and Results , Monitoring and Evaluation of
EITI Programs.

            iv) Global/Regional Events

The available data are that the MDTF has provided USD0.41 million in support of regional workshops. In
2015 the MDTF supported nine training and knowledge activities with 236 participants, including training
on the EITI Standard. An on line EITI Community of Practice (CoP) was launched in 2014 in response to
demand from MSG members for continuous county-to country dialogue. Seven CoP webinars were held
in FY 2015 and as of 2016 the CoP has over 200 members from 38 counties. In FY15 the MDTF also
supported 9 national and regional training events.

            v) Other

The MDTF has also helped fund extensive use of consultants to assist World Bank and other EITI agencies
in EITI implementation including consultants in Washington, DC, consultants in WB country offices, and
consultants in EITI implementing countries. The 2015 MDTF Annual Report noted that in FY15 there were
45 staff and consultants providing who provided part of their time (not full time) to EITI activities in 47
countries as compared with 17 staff and consultants servicing 16 countries in FY06, the first year of MDTF
implementation.

        d) Performance Indicators

#1 Number of resource-rich countries from which commitment to EITI has been received/demonstrated.
38 of the 51 EITI implementing countries are resource-rich countries using the list of Resource-Rich
Countries as identified in the August 12, 2012 IMF Paper Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-
Rich Developing Countries17. The MDTF has provided the vast majority of the financial support that has
resulted in the auditing and reconciliation of 290 years of EITI data for the 51 EITI Implementing Countries
including support for government preparation of public, financially sustainable EITI work plan and
activities as specified in the work plan; support for international advisers and local consultants, capacity
building for EITI stakeholders and funding operating costs of EITI country secretariats.

#2 Publication of Policy Recommendations for Extractive Industries Transparency: Number of reports
published and # 3 Production of Practical Guidelines and Templates for Reporting: Number of reports
published: 5 Reports were identified by the Bank Task Team (see section on Global Advocacy and Global
Knowledge/Learning) but almost certainly more than 5 such reports were produced. However, it was not
possible to identify all the reports because in 2016 records were not readily available in the Bank’s grant
reporting and monitoring (GRM) system (which is internal to World Bank and only partially available to
the donors) for the various Policy Recommendations, Practical Guidelines and Reporting Templates that
were prepared and published over the 11 year time period since the MDTF was initiated in 2005. In fact
the 2013, 2014 and 2015 Annual Reports have much more useful, reliable and clearly presented
information than the GRM system.


17
   World Bank data does not provide a readily available grouping of “resource-rich” countries in which the EI sector
accounts for, or is expected soon to account for, more than 50 percent of government revenues.



                                                        16
Trying to obtain past information was also made more difficult by the fact that there have been many
changes in the World Bank staff administering the grants over such a long period – but records were not
put in place to provide longevity of information. In addition, obtaining accurate financial data for the ICM
proved difficult. Based on the experience of this MDTF, the utility of the GRM system could certainly be
examined. The management of the EITI MDTF was made all the more difficult by the Word Bank
management decision to eliminate the EITI Program Manager position in 2012 which significantly reduced
oversight of Task Team Leaders working on EITI issues. The EGPS has subsequently addressed the issue
of Program Management by including a requirement for there to be an EGPS Program Manager as part of
the underlying legal agreement.

#4 EITI International Conferences: Seven EITI Global Conferences have been held from 2009-2016 - 2003
London; 2005 London; 2007 Oslo; 2009 Doha; 2011 Paris; 2013 Sydney; 2016 Lima. The EITI Global
Conference is the members meeting, at which Board members and Chair are elected and major policy
changes may be agreed. The MDTF provided financial support for all seven EITI Global Conferences.

#5 Expansion of EITI: As of June 2016 EITI had 23 “Outreach” countries. In 2016, facing some emerging
financial and capacity constraints of the EITI, the Outreach and Candidacy Committee of the EITI Board
recommended a conservative approach to expanding the list of EITI implementing countries along the
following criteria:
 Criterion 1 - Potential impact of the EITI. This criterion focuses on a country’s susceptibility to the
     resource curse and the potential for the EITI to mitigate against this paradox and improve natural
     resource governance for poverty reduction and development.
 Criterion 2- Strategic importance for the EITI. This criterion puts an emphasis on a country’s potential
     to encourage the implementation of the EITI regionally and/or internationally and to support the EITI’s
     credibility generally as an open and participative multi-stakeholder platform.
 Criterion 3 - Regional diversity. This criterion focuses on increasing EITI regional diversity? The EITI is
     currently implemented by 25 countries in Africa, 13 countries in Asia, four countries in Europe, two
     countries in the Middle East, one country in North America and six countries in Latin America and the
     Caribbean
 Criterion 4 - Likelihood of effective implementation. This criterion focuses on a target country’s
     government’s commitment to the EITI and the extent of local ownership including an enabling
     environment for company and civil society engagement.
 Criterion 5 – Comparative advantage of EITI partners. This criterion focuses on leveraging outreach
     opportunities and streamlining country specific interventions in target countries where EITI partners
     are already active.

#6 EITI in CASs and Country Dialogue: As previously noted, EITI has been well referenced in WB country
strategy documents. EITI was referenced in the WB country strategy documents for 43 countries at the
time of drafting the ICM in July 2016 of which 31 are resource-rich countries.

        e) Efficiency

There have been some concerns and complaints, especially in the early years of the MDTF, about the
relatively long time needed by the World Bank Secretariat to establish trust funds and get money flowing
to countries using recipient-executed grants. For recipient-executed grants there are four main steps –
each of which can be time consuming. First, time is needed for an in-depth assessment of the financial
management and procurement capacity of the responsible ministry or agency that will manage and
disburse the grant funds in order to be sure that adequate capacity is in place so that funds will be used

                                                     17
as designated and not misused. Second, once this fiduciary capacity assessment is completed, time may
also be needed for necessary institutional strengthening measures to be implemented in order for the
grant to be approved. Third, there are often delays in obtaining approvals from Finance Ministries and
Central Banks for opening designated accounts. The designated accounts are then operated by sector
ministries since recipient-executed grant agreements are signed by Finance Ministries but are
implemented in most countries, in the case of EITI, by Ministries of Mines or Petroleum. Fourth, time is
also needed for these sector ministries, which generally had little or no prior experience implementing
World Bank projects or grants, to get the accounts working and procurement completed.

However, once the capacity was established with the initial grant, the process was generally reported to
be much faster for those countries that received a follow-on grant, since they had already gained the
experience and knowledge needed, and their capacity was already in place. While these steps were often
bottlenecks in first round of EITI grants, the process showed substantial improvement in the next phases.
For example the speed of procurement of EITI reconciler dropped to 3 months average across most of EITI
countries (as can be evidenced by data presented in annual reports).

According to the 2011 IEG Report, the 2009 (Jordan) evaluation reviewed the MDTF’s disbursement rates
and found that they had been substantially lower than planned. However, the IEG review revisited these
and found that:
       a. At the global level, total disbursements from MDTF-EITI have fluctuated between 20 and 57
       percent of available funds, which was in line with the experience of other WBG operations.
       b. At the country level, the disbursement rates from recipient-executed grants (REGs) were much
       lower, in the range of 11–23 percent, which IEG largely attributed to the limited capacity of
       country agencies to understand and comply with WBG‘s complex documentary and procedural
       requirements

The IEG Report stated that “Given the absence of monitoring data on the expected benefits from the
program, this IEG review was not in a position to undertake a quantitative assessment of the overall
efficiency of the program. On the other hand, IEG‘s interviews with a diverse range of stakeholders found
that most shared a sense that the initiative was worthwhile without any suggestion that efforts or funds
are being wasted. This perception is supported by the growing number of candidate countries and EITI
supporters in all stakeholder constituencies and the growth in donor contributions.”

The ScanTeam Report commented that “MDTF is the core funding partner…… MDTF funds are clearly
directed to EITI core tasks and as such the funds are used effectively. …. The high transaction costs for
approving and disbursing funds means the MDTF financing is seen as not very efficient”.

Looking ahead the ScanTeam Report further comments “While other funding sources exist, the Extractives
Global Programmatic Support (EGPS) is likely to remain the key EITI funding vehicle as it has the best
developed donor support, widest geographic coverage and good fiduciary management. Since the Bank
has a world-wide system of country offices and a strong head office capacity, it can manage the EGPS as
a unified and fairly centralised system.” The positive views of EITI stakeholder constituencies continue
today, as evidenced by continued donor support and contributions to EGPS, and reflows of balances from
EITI and EI-TAF MDTFs to EGPS.




                                                   18
         f) Economic and Financial Returns

Given the nature of the support provided by the MDTF, information is not available to undertake any
comprehensive quantitative analysis of economic and financial returns. While country by country
information is not available, indications are that the audit and reconciliation activities supported by MDTF
have resulted in increased revenue collections for implementing countries, the most prominent example
being Nigeria increased revenue collections by a reported USD2.4 billion.

         g) Development Impacts

The MDTF, through the EITI, has achieved a range of significant development impacts.

There can be no question that with MDTF support, the EITI has had significant development impacts in
terms of establishing transparency as a global norm – which was not the case a decade ago. It could be
said that it has taken a somewhat revolutionary idea and made it global practice. EITI has held
governments to account for the disclosure of revenue information and under the EITI Standard seeks to
do so for disclosure of a much wider range of information along the extractives value chain, including
contract disclosure.

EITI also demonstrates, as a replicable good practice, that voluntary initiatives can attract both developing
(non-OECD) country and industrialized (OECD) country participants. EITI now includes the participation
not only of developing countries but also four industrialized countries, namely Norway, the USA, the UK
and Germany. The case can also be made that the EITI transparency impact has had a somewhat domino
effect in terms of trends in countries such as the USA, Canada and Australia to strengthen reporting
requirements. Another very important development impact and replicable good practice is that EITI, with
direct support from the MDTF, has supported a large number of countries to establish and sustain
successful Multi-Stakeholder Groups (MSGs), where for the first time, the three stakeholders
(government, industry and civil society) are meeting and discussing issues important to the country and
the sector. It is also noteworthy that ten MSGs now employ monitoring and evaluation systems.

It should also be recognized that private sector companies, as well as governments, are coming to accept
that information disclosure is now good international practice. The February 2015 IFC Extractive
Industries Sustain Report states that “EITI is now supported by 90 of the World’s largest oil, gas and mining
companies and by institutional investors with more than USD19 trillion of funds under management” and
includes an article by Tullow Oil on the business and development case for transparency. The case can be
made that the move towards publishing payments to government has also been a factor in a greater
willingness of extractives companies to be more forthcoming about planned and actual impacts of their
operations on local communities.18

The auditing of payments and receipts has led to a general strengthening of Revenue Authorities and
Ministries of Finance with regard to the assessment, audit and collection of EI sector government
revenues. The publication of EI payments and receipts has also increased knowledge for key stakeholders


18
  In this regard it is worth also noting the important contribution to the global transparency movement of the January
2012 IFC Access to Information Policy which states “There is a presumption in favor of disclosure with respect to
[project-level information regarding investments and advisory services supported by IFC] … absent a compelling
reason not to disclose such information”.


                                                         19
such as parliamentarians, local communities and civil society groups and has led to an evolving public
dialogue regarding extractive industries in many countries where such a dialogue did not exist a decade
ago.

        h) Overall TF Outcome 19

The Overall MDTF Outcome is rated as Satisfactory based on the following:

       The MDTF’s objectives, design and implementation are considered highly relevant to current
        global/regional/country priorities and to the Bank’s sector strategy.
       The MDTF has essentially met its overall objective of supporting the establishment of EITI
        countries through programs of cooperation between governments, the private sector and civil
        society, supported by the international community.
       There has also been good progress in meeting the MDTF outcome indicators.
       The MDTF has been largely successful in supporting EITI to meet the six EITI criteria that were
        agreed at the London Conference on EITI in March 2005.
       The MDTF has also largely accomplished the activities as proposed in the IBTF.
       The Aggregated Data Results Framework presented in the 2014 and 2015 MDTF Annual Reports
        presents very positive results for many countries
       The MDTF, through the EITI, has achieved a range of significant development impacts not only
        regarding EI revenue transparency and accountability, but also general strengthening of Revenue
        Authorities and Ministries of Finance, increased knowledge and capacity building for key
        stakeholders, in particular civil society, and establishing and sustaining successful multi-
        stakeholder groups in countries.


 D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME

        1. Follow-On Results and/or Investment Activities

There are no identified examples of EITI activities leading to other WB or IFC follow-up projects or
programs. That said, it was not expected that there would be so.

        2. Replicability

Other multi-stakeholder initiatives have been established in other sectors, such as the Construction Sector
Transparency Initiative (CoST) and the Medicines Transparency Alliance (MeTA). The experience with the
EITI MDTF indicates that MDTFs could play a very useful role for other sectors. If and when warranted,
this would require setting up a new MDTF for the concerned sector since the EITI MDTF donors were not
in a position to consider any expansion of the EITI MDTF to other sectors because they were bound by
their authorities and the MDTF legally binding agreements to focus exclusively on extractives.




                                                    20
        3. Overall Risk to Development Outcome

Based on its original aim of publishing and reconciling extractive industries payments to government
with government receipts from extractives industries, EITI is now established as a highly respected,
international “revenue transparency” brand. There is considered a Low (L) risk that implementing or
compliant countries will discontinue auditing and publishing extractive industries payments and
receipts, notwithstanding possible social, political and commitment uncertainties at the country level.
However, it will only be possible to tell several years from now the extent to which EITI is able to achieve
a broader development impact as it moves on from “compliance” in reporting and reconciling payments
and receipts to “validation” (or not as the case may be) regarding the broader reform efforts of the 2016
EITI Standard. The EITI-MDTF was prepared and implemented under the 2011 EITI Rules. The EITI
Standard was introduced in 2013, and applied for the first time in 2014. Two reports were issued under
the 2013 Standard, and no countries have yet been validated under the 2013 Standard. The 2016
Standard was approved after the closure of the EITI-MDTF, and will therefore be relevant for EGPS going
forward.

The implementation of EITI took on increasing importance from 2006 to 2012 when there was a significant
run up in world hydrocarbon and non-fuel minerals prices during the extractives “super cycle” (see Table
4) which ended in 2012 for minerals and in 2014 for hydrocarbons.

           Table 4 – Selected World Hydrocarbon and Minerals Prices – 2012, 2012 and 2016

                                                    Annual            Annual Average July 2016
                                                    Average 2002      2012
 Crude Oil Average Spot (USD/bbl)                   28.2              105            44.1
 Natural Gas European (USD/mmbtu)                   3.9               11.5           4.5
 Australian export Coal (USD/mt)                    26.3              96.4           63.1
 Gold (USD/toz)                                     279               1670           1337
 Copper (USD/mt)                                    1813              7962           4865
 Iron Ore (USD/dmt)                                 29                128            57

Data Source: World Bank Commodities Price Data
2002 and 2012: http://www.worldbank.org/prospects/commodities
2016: http://www.worldbank.org/prospects/commodities - World Bank Pink-Sheet-August-2016.pdf

Countries that are currently Compliant Countries achieved this status under the 2011 EITI Rules. EITI has
now entered unchartered territory with the introduction of the EITI Standard in 2013 (updated in 2016)
and its “validation” requirements, as compared with the previous EITI “compliance” criteria. The EITI
website (July 2016) notes that “As countries undertake Validation in the coming months, it would be
surprising if many achieved compliance with every requirement. Therefore they will not become compliant
with the Standard, even if they until now had been compliant with the EITI Rules.”

The above statement underscores the fundamental nature of the changes that are taking place. These
are changes which the EGPS will need to take into account as it moves ahead. The EITI website further
states “comparing Validation under the 2016 EITI Standard with the 2011 EITI Rules is like comparing a
multi-disciplinary sport like the triathlon with the 100 meter sprint. Thirty-one countries have achieved
compliance with the EITI Rules, but no country has yet achieved compliance with the EITI Standard….. That


                                                    21
does not mean that countries have failed Validation. Validations under the 2016 Standard will include an
assessment of the detailed requirements at four levels: satisfactory progress, meaningful progress,
inadequate progress and no progress. It is therefore no longer fair to consider the EITI as a binary system:
compliant or not. ”

The new EITI requirements require the publication of a combination of information part of which is readily
available and part of which is not readily available. The readily available information consists of
extractives legal framework, production data and license allocations information. Collection and
publication costs for this type of readily available information should be manageable.

The required information which is not readily available and which will need to be collected and assembled
for each country for the first time includes information requirements on beneficial ownership and
contracts, which will involve governments obtaining information from other parties and seeking the
release of information that may be subject to confidentiality agreements. The level of effort and costs
involved in obtaining this second type of information is presently unknown and may prove to be very
substantial for countries with large extractive industries. This could result in significant demands on the
EGPS. The beneficial ownership requirements for a country like the United States would seem daunting.
For developing countries with large and small extractives industries, obtaining beneficial ownership
information may be exceedingly difficult to obtain if investors refuse to provide it.

The EITI web site addresses the issue of the shift from voluntary participation to commitment obligation
as follows: “EITI is often lazily referred to as a voluntary initiative. It’s true that countries voluntarily seek
admission as an EITI candidate. But ….. once a country has committed to the EITI, it’s no longer “voluntary”.
The obligation to deliver is quite substantial”

EITI has established a validation schedule for validations of the first fifteen countries in 2016. This will
give some actual data on the validation process including whether or not the first fifteen can be completed
in 2016 and, if so, at what cost. The costs of countries achieving compliance with the original EITI revenue
transparency requirements have been substantial as evidenced by the amount of funding that has flowed
through the MDTF. As the new EITI “validations” take place, the implications for meeting the new EITI
Standards will start to become clearer regarding the cost and level of effort involved for different
countries.

As the costs become clearer, countries will need to assess if they will invest the time and effort needed to
meet the EITI Standard - which may take several years – and which may be further complicated if EITI
introduces additional requirements to the EITI Standard in the future. Donors will then also need to assess
the extent to which the EGPS has sufficient funding to support those countries that undertake the
information collection needed to meet the EITI Standard and, if not, donors will have to consider and
determine their willingness to mobilize the needed additional funding for EGPS. It will also be important
for EITI to address the concerns of its civil society members regarding EITI governance since the EITI Brief
Secretariat Report dated March 3, 2016 notes that the PWYP coalition boycotted the February 23, 2016
EITI Members Meeting and that subsequently the EITI Board Chair met with EITI civil society board
members and PWYP representatives to address their concerns regarding EITI governance and to work
more closely together.




                                                       22
 E. PERFORMANCE

     1. Bank

The Bank performance is overall rated as Satisfactory.

        World Bank Secretariat Work

The World Bank Secretariat (including Program Management, Donor Relations and Communications) is
considered to have worked well in terms of trust fund administration and donor relations and in guiding
the EITI MDTF as it has responded to the expanding EITI activities over time and the different needs of
different countries. The WB Team made significant efforts to plan and support the MDTF Management
Committee meetings20. The ScanTeam report noted “The MDTF decision making body, the Management
Committee, meets as a follow-on to EITI Board meetings, thus ensuring up-to-date policy guidance from
the EITI for MDTF allocation decisions”. However, there was significant turnover in donor representatives
and not all donors were represented at all MDTF Management Committee meetings. The WB Team has
also performed well in terms of mobilizing the substantial additional funding from donors needed for the
MDTF to meet the EITI needs. As noted previously the WB Team has been criticized for the relatively long
times needed for new grants to become effective, but this has largely reflected the due diligence of Bank
procedures rather than timeliness of the WB Team’s work.

However, the WB Team’s performance did fall short in terms of having a clearly defined Results
Framework and regular monitoring of results. The lack of a Results Framework is related to the MDTF
being designed without a clear theory of change which then created issues with its monitoring and
reporting of results. Based on feedback from donors and partners, EITI MDTF Program Secretariat
designed a Results Framework that was adopted only in 2014, towards the end of the MDTF. This Results
Framework, while also lacking in baselines and clear targets, was a step in the right direction and was used
in the 2014 and 2015 MDTF Annual Reports. The EGPS took good note of this deficiency and has
developed both a program level framework and a menu of indicators to be used in country level projects.

        World Bank-executed Work/ Task Team Leaders

The Bank executed about 68% of the work under the Trust Fund (Table 5). As can be seen in Table 5,
about 40% (USD12.96 million) of the Bank-executed activities were for Global Work Programs activities.
These included building the programmatic infrastructure to support the successful application of EITI in
over fifty implementing countries; providing CSO support in a number of countries; and global and policy
development including the Global/Regional Events and the Global Advocacy and Knowledge Products
noted previously.




20
  The MDTF Management Committee has been succeeded by the EGPS Steering Committee and initiatives are
underway to strengthen the interaction between EGPS Steering Committee and the EITI Board.


                                                    23
                                   Table 5: Disbursement of MDTF Funds
                                                   (USD)

 Programs and Activities                  Country-executed       World Bank-executed          Total
 Country Work Programs                    14,773,531             19,320,864                   34,094,395
 Global Work Programs                     126,251                12,962,359                   13,088,610
 Grand Total Disbursements                14,899,782             32,283,223                   47,183,005

The other 60% were for Country Work Programs. This reflects a number of needs. First, was to provide
support for countries to consider EITI and, subsequently, for countries to prepare to join EITI (as
demonstrated in Table 2). Second, was for Bank-execution of very small initial grants which did not
warrant establishing country capacity and for implementing grants in certain smaller countries where it
proved difficult to put in place the necessary fiduciary capacity for recipient-executed grants. Third, and
reportedly by far the largest part of the country support, was for World Bank extractives specialist and
Task Team Leaders to be active on the ground supporting EITI implementation in many countries alongside
their other work activities in those countries.21

The ScanTeam report noted that “Technical support was at the heart of EITI implementation” and that the
World Bank has unrivalled technical resources that provided clear guidance on the MDTF and the close
follow-up. For both the EITI work and the companion EI TAF work, the overall the quality and
responsiveness of the World Bank Task Team Leaders was viewed as timely and of high technical quality.
Overall the effectiveness, focus and relevance of the technical support was seen as good by the ScanTeam.
However, the ScanTeam also noted a concern that the World Bank technical specialists often had many
other responsibilities in their EITI countries that resulted in the EITI work not always being well integrated
with other activities and being “often too little and too ad hoc by being tailored to the specific requests
rather than as part of a longer-term approach to building lasting capacity on the ground”.

On the cost side, the ScanTeam reported positively that there were significant economies of scale in terms
of combined mission travel and staff time to supervise EITI-MDTF grant. Nevertheless, the total World
Bank-executed expenditures of USD19 million on country work programs would seem potentially
excessive relative to the USD14.8 million of country-executed country work programs – but there is no
way to make an in depth evaluation. EGPS has benefited from the lessons learned from both EITI and EI
TAF implementation and from the higher level of capacity of sector ministries that are already
implementing EITI and/or EI TAF grants. In this regard it is worth noting that so far 21 EGPS activities have
been approved of which 13 are recipient-executed (1 global, 12 country-related) and 8 are Bank-executed
including 6 for global knowledge products and 2 for very specific knowledge products to be provided to
country clients per their requests.

        2. Recipient (for Recipient-executed Trust Funds only)

37 countries (according to 2015 report) undertook recipient-executed activities. While start-up may have
been slow in some recipient-executed TFs, 70% of the recipient-executed TFs are rated as Satisfactory (S)
or Highly Satisfactory (HS) with the remainder being rated Moderately Satisfactory., except for one which
was rated Unsatisfactory. Details can be seen in the GRM ratings.


21
  The 2015 Annual Report provides a listing of country work program grants and indicates which were recipient-
executed and which were Bank-executed.

                                                       24
 F. LESSONS LEARNED / RECOMMENDATIONS

Following are the lessons learned:

At the program level,
    - limited fiduciary capacity of potential government recipients can result in more support being
        Bank-executed than originally anticipated;
    - in the case of the relatively small grants as delivered by EITI (and also EI TAF), Bank fiduciary
        requirements combined with country capacity constraints can result in delays in the timely
        provision of support. Recognizing this as a systemic issue, the World Bank introduced new Small
        Grants Processing Guidelines in September 2014 which are helping to improve response times
        under the EGPS, with some projects approved in about three months from initiation to signing,
        such as Albania, Senegal, Ukraine, EITI International Secretariat grant;
    - grants can be processed more quickly and implementation made more cost-effective by making
        grants with longer durations and by combining different components under the same financing
        agreement - which reduces the number of new approvals needed during the project, which can
        slow project implementation;
    - reporting requirements need to be well defined from the outset and should include the
        aggregation of standardized key indicators for individual grants/projects (taken from system-
        based Implementation Status Reports) which will then provide results for the overall Program -
        otherwise there can be challenges in communicating results and “telling the story” of overall
        program accomplishments to donors and other stakeholders – as happened with both the EITI
        MDTF and the EI TAF MDTF;
    -   the MDTF was very successful in attracting donor support and the number of donors doubled
        from 2008 to 2012; but working so many (fourteen donors) posed a challenge for efficiently
        coordinating activities and processing trust fund amendments when needed. EGPS will have a
        higher ceiling for participation in the Steering Committee and will build in technical working
        groups to facilitate efficient management and coordination;
    - while the EGPS is expected to be the main source of funding for EITI implementing countries, the
        extent of funding support needed from the EGPS remains to be seen since it will depend in large
        part on the extent to which (a) presently implementing countries will work towards achieving the
        EITI Standard since it is not what they originally signed up for; and (b) new countries will sign up
        for EITI given what is needed to meet the Standard;
    - publically available Annual Reports for donors may provide information that is more useful,
        reliable and clearly presented information than information in the Bank’s GRM system;
    - the GRM system provides a huge amount of data but it is not always well organized and the GRMs
        could usefully be improved to ensure that high level records that cover the whole life of the MDTF
        are readily available for a reviewer and also to ensure that key financial data is readily available
        and accurate

At the country level,
    - transparency improvements can be accomplished notwithstanding the diverse political
        circumstances of different countries
    - CSO strengthening is best achieved when an in depth understanding of the CSOs has been
        developed with capacity building activities then designed according to local needs and realities
        with a priority focus on CSO networking, partnerships and coalitions with all key groups included
        in the CSO capacity building activities.

                                                    25
    -   more sustainable results can be achieved by continuous and targeted interventions in a particular
        country on specific capacity issues (including follow-up capacity building trainings) rather than
        one-time trainings or workshops on overall EITI implementation issues;
    -   effective participation of CSOs in the EITI process increases when all MSG members (government
        entities, CSOs and extractive companies) participate in the design and implementation of EITI-
        MDTF CSO capacity building programs; and
    -   aligning EITI-MDTF CSO capacity building objectives with the Country’s MDTF EITI objectives and
        World Bank interventions is key to ensure the sustainability of country CSO capacity building
        programs.

At the global level, the World Bank has several decades of working with oil, gas and mining (extractives)
countries. Improving extractives governance and supporting countries to achieve improved development
outcomes requires extractives professionals with strong on the ground experience, working on extractives
programs that are part of overall country development programs typically supported by substantial
lending. While the EITI Standard is a large step forward for EITI that can contribute to this process, what
EITI can offer to overall extractives sector reform and development is relatively modest compared to the
international development capacities and capabilities of the World Bank Group and the monetary and
fiscal capabilities of the IMF.

However, if EITI seeks to improve development outcomes, it is very well positioned to emphasize the
importance of including women and giving them much greater voice and agency in EITI activities which
would bring greater attention to and could help moderate the extractives gender bias whereby the bulk
of extractives benefits (of employment and income) go to men whereas the bulk of harmful social and
environmental impacts fall on women and the families that they care for. For example, in 2015 only 19%
of the MSG participants were women. EITI could develop gender-related policies and set priority goals.
In this regard, EITI could develop measures to improve the % of women’s participation across MSGs and
also women’s participation in EITI management and Board activities.

 G. ICM PROCESSING AND COMMENTS

1. Preparation
TTL at Approval: Charles McPherson
TTL at Closing: Paulo de Sa
Comment from Practice Manager: Christopher Sheldon
Prepared by (if other than TTL): John Strongman
Date Submitted to Approving Manager: December 14, 2016

2. Approval
Practice Manager: Christopher Sheldon
Date Approved by Manager: December 14, 2016
Manager’s Comment:

3. DFI Evaluation of ICM Quality
DFI Reviewer: Eka Zarmen Putra
DFI Rating on the Quality of ICM (Satisfactory or Unsatisfactory):
Comment and Justification for Rating Given by DFI:



                                                    26
    Annex 1 – Regional EITI-MDTF Grant Disbursements

Africa                                                                                       Sum of
                                    TF Name                       Execution     FY       Disbursements
                                                                              Delivery        (USD)
Angola            Angola Petroleum Info Center & Workshops        Bank            2010              4,265
                  Angola-Extractive Industries Transparency
                  Initiative                                      Bank           2010            140,046
                  Burkina Faso - Support to EITI
Burkina Faso      Implementation                                  Recipient      2013            223,514
                  Burkina Faso Phase II: EITI                     Bank           2016            117,081
                  Burkina Faso: EITI Implementation               Bank           2013            168,622
Burundi           Burundi EITI Support                            Bank           2015             77,524
Cameroon          Cameroon Phase II: EITI Implementation          Bank           2014             79,931
                  Cameroon: EITI Implementation                   Bank           2010             79,902
                  Support to the Extractive Industries
                  Transparency Initiative in Cameroon             Recipient      2008             99,124
Central African   CAR PC-1                                        Bank           2015              2,430
Republic          CAR: EITI Implementation                        Bank           2013             84,670
                  CAR – Support to Extractive Industries
                  Transparency Initiative                         Recipient      2013            291,485
Chad              Chad-Extractive Ind. Trans. Initiative          Bank           2016            594,046
                  DR of Congo – Extractive Industries
Congo             Transparency
Democratic        Initiative                                      Bank           2012            545,490
Republic of       DRC Phase II: EITI Implementation               Bank           2016             77,881
                  Democratic Republic of Congo - Support to
                  the Extractive Industries Transparency
                  Initiative                                      Recipient      2012            494,872
                  DRC - EITI Phase II                             Recipient      2016            768,793
                  DRC – Extractive Industries Transparency
                  Initiative                                      Bank           2010            105,906
Congo,            Republic of Congo: EITI Grant                   Recipient      2014            118,196
Republic of       Republic of Congo EITI                          Bank           2015             92,700
                  Cote d’Ivoire – Support to Implementation of
Cote d'Ivoire     Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative   Recipient      2012            130,356
                  Cote d'Ivoire EITI Phase II                     Bank           2015             36,622
                  Cote d'Ivoire: EITI Implementation              Bank           2012            117,390
Equatorial        Equatorial Guinea – Extractive Industries
Guinea            Transparency Initiative                         Bank           2013            511,883
Ethiopia          Ethiopia: EITI Implementation                   Bank           2010              5,964
                  Ghana – Support to the Extractive Industries
Ghana             Transparency Initiative                         Recipient      2010            218,492
                  Ghana EITI Post-Compliance II                   Recipient      2016            399,034
                  Ghana EITI Post-Compliance II (SPN)             Bank           2016             21,923
                  Ghana EITI-Post Compliance I                    Bank           2014            155,164



                                                       27
Africa                                                                                       Sum of
                                TF Name                        Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
                                                                                              (USD)
             Ghana Post-Compliance I: Support to EITI
Ghana        Implementation                                    Recipient         2014            390,709
             Ghana: EITI Implementation                        Bank              2010            141,899
Guinea       Guinea Phase II: EITI Implementation              Bank              2016             43,004
             Guinea: EITI Implementation                       Bank              2013            519,125
             Support to the Extractive Industries
             Transparency Initiative in Guinea                 Recipient         2013            419,229
Liberia      Liberia - Post Compliance I                       Bank              2016            119,004
             Liberia - Support to the Extractive Industries
             Transparency Initiative                           Recipient         2009            399,094
             Liberia EITI Phase II - Transparency Initiative   Recipient         2011            165,432
             Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency        Recipient         2016            193,096
             Liberia Phase II - EITI Implementation            Bank              2010              3,031
             Liberia: EITI Implementation                      Bank              2009            286,535
Madagascar   DROPPED Madagascar: EITI Phase II                 Bank              2015             12,978
             Madagascar – Support to the Extractive            Recipient         2013            343,816
             Industries Transparency Initiative
             Madagascar - EITI Implementation                  Bank              2013            233,103
Malawi       Malawi: EITI Implementation Support               Bank              2016             39,014
Mali         Mali Post Compliance I: EITI                      Bank              2015             15,360
             Mali Post Compliance I: EITI Implementation       Recipient         2016            176,972
             Mali Post Compliance I: EITI SPN                  Bank              2016             46,103
             Mali: EITI Implementation                         Bank              2013             78,327
             Mali: Support to EITI Implementation              Recipient         2013            158,590
Mauritania   Mauritania Post Compliance I                      Bank              2015            333,596
             Mauritania: EITI Implementation                   Bank              2010             60,326
             Mauritania: Implementation of the                 Recipient         2014            268,203
             Extractive Industries Transparencies
             Initiative
             Support to the Extractive Industries              Recipient         2008            148,438
             Transparency Initiative in Mauritania
Mozambique   Mozambique EITI Implementation                    Bank              2013            292,278
             Mozambique Phase II: EITI Implementation          Recipient         2013            350,000
             Mozambique Phase II: EITI Implementation          Bank              2014             46,761
             Mozambique Phase III: EITI Implementation         Recipient         2016            638,027
             Project
             Mozambique Post Compliance I                      Bank              2016             94,507
             Mozambique: Support to EITI                       Recipient         2012            360,694
Niger        CSO - Niger                                       Bank              2013             93,434
             Niger – Support to the Extractive Industries      Recipient         2012            239,946
             Transparency Initiative
             Niger EITI-Post Compliance I                      Bank              2015             27,980
             Niger: EITI Implementation                        Bank              2013            158,745



                                                      28
Africa                                                                                      Sum of
                                TF Name                       Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
                                                                                             (USD)
Niger         Second Multi-Donor Trust Fund for the           Recipient         2013             200,000
              Implementation of the Extractive Industries
              Transparencies Initiative
Nigeria       Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative   Recipient         2008           1,664,891
              Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative   Recipient         2012             761,371
              Nigeria Phase II




East Asia                                                                                   Sum of
                                TF Name                       Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
& Pacific                                                                                    (USD)
Indonesia     Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative   Recipient         2016             962,488
              in Indonesia-Phase 2
              Indonesia Phase II: EITI Implementation         Bank              2016             155,868
              Indonesia: EITI Implementation                  Bank              2014             742,563
              Support for the Implementation of the           Recipient         2014           1,043,531
              Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
              (EITI) in Indonesia
Mongolia      EITI Post Compliance II                         Bank              2015                 73
              Mongolia – Support to the Extractive            Recipient         2010            304,062
              Industries Transparency Initiative
              Mongolia EITI Post Compliance II                Recipient         2016            236,068
              Mongolia Phase II - Support to Extractive       Recipient         2012            275,000
              Industries Transparency Initiative
              Mongolia Phase II: EITI Implementation          Bank              2013             29,213
              Mongolia Post-Compliance I: EITI                Recipient         2014            246,178
              Implementation
              Mongolia: EITI Compliance Phase I               Bank              2015            113,796
              Mongolia-EITI                                   Bank              2010             41,539
Myanmar       Myanmar EITI Implementation Grant               Bank              2016            297,174
              Myanmar EITI Implementation Grant               Recipient         2016            236,422
              Myanmar EITI Implementation Grant SPN           Bank              2016            278,377
Papua New     Papua New Guinea: EITI Implementation           Bank              2015            667,287
Guinea        PNG Program Operations_TF090446                 Bank              2012             11,246
              PNG Program Operations_TF090446                 Bank              2013             17,842
              Support to CSOs in Papua New Guinea             Bank              2016            128,665
Philippines   EITI Implementation of the Extractive           Recipient         2016            788,002
              Industries Transparency Initiative Project
              Philippines: EITI Implementation                Bank              2016            507,335
Solomon       Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative   Recipient         2016            280,971
Islands       in Solomon Islands
              Solomon Islands Program Ops_TF090446            Bank              2013             29,087
              Solomon Islands: EITI Implementation            Bank              2016            447,116


                                                     29
East Asia                                                                                      Sum of
                                   TF Name                       Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
& Pacific                                                                                       (USD)
Timor-Leste      Timor-Leste – Support to Extractive             Recipient         2012             185,771
                 Industries Transparency Initiative
                 Timor-Leste: Post Compliance I                  Bank              2013             17,845
                 Timor-Leste-Extractives Industries              Bank              2012             58,889
                 Transparency Initiative
Indonesia        Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative   Recipient         2016            962,488
                 in Indonesia-Phase 2
                 Indonesia Phase II: EITI Implementation         Bank              2016             155,868
                 Indonesia: EITI Implementation                  Bank              2014             742,563
                 Support for the Implementation of the           Recipient         2014           1,043,531
                 Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
                 (EITI) in Indonesia




Europe &                                                                                       Sum of
                                   TF Name                       Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
Central                                                                                         (USD)
Asia
Azerbaijan      Azerbaijan EITI Civil Society Support            Bank              2016             37,174
                Azerbaijan: EITI                                 Bank              2007             14,646
Bulgaria        Bulgaria: EITI Implementation                    Bank              2010             17,568
Kazakhstan      CSO - Kazakhstan                                 Bank              2014             95,465
                Kazakhstan - Extractive Industries
                Transparency Initiative                          Bank              2016            747,167
Kyrgyz Republic CSO - Kyrgyz Republic                            Bank              2014             98,585
                Kyrgyz Republic - Extractive Industries
                Transparency Initiative                          Bank              2012            234,365
                Kyrgyz Republic - Support to Extractive
                Industries Transparency Initiative               Recipient         2011            263,741
                Kyrgyz Republic Post-Compliance I: Support
                to EITI Implementation                           Recipient         2014            198,553
                Kyrgyz Republic: EITI Compliance Phase I         Bank              2014            116,998
                Kyrgyz Republic: EITI PC-2                       Bank              2016            119,757
                Kyrgyz Republic: EITI PC-2                       Recipient         2016            243,781




                                                        30
Latin                                                                                       Sum of
                                TF Name                       Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
America                                                                                      (USD)
&
Caribbean
Colombia      Colombia: EITI Implementation                   Bank              2016            449,061
Honduras      Honduras EITI Implementation                    Bank              2016            212,580
                                                              Recipient         2016            278,220
Peru          Peru - Post Compliance I                        Bank              2016            429,663
              Peru – Support to the Extractive Industries
              Transparency Initiative                         Recipient         2011            337,496
              Peru Support to the Implementation of the
              Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
              Project                                         Recipient         2016            364,902
              Peru- Extractive Industries Transparency
              Initiative                                      Bank              2011            106,742
Trinidad &    Trinidad & Tobago- Extractive Industries
Tobago        Transparency Initiative                         Bank              2007                470




Middle                                                                                      Sum of
                                TF Name                       Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
East &                                                                                       (USD)
North
Africa
West Bank &
Gaza          GZ: Elec Sector Performance Improvement         Bank              2015              8,488
Yemen         Yemen: EITI Implementation                      Bank              2015            149,821
Yemen,        Yemen – Support to the Extractive
Republic of   Industries Transparency Initiative              Recipient         2014            338,633




South                                                                                       Sum of
                                TF Name                       Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
Asia                                                                                         (USD)
Afghanistan   Afghanistan: EITI Implementation                Bank              2010               9,247




                                                     31
 Annex 2 – Global Knowledge EITI-MDTF Grant Disbursements

Knowledge                                                                                   Sum of
                                  TF Name                     Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
                                                                                             (USD)
Africa            LKD EITI Regional Workshop (Togo)           Bank              2012               73,561
                  (LKD)EITI/CEMAC Region Seminar              Bank              2011               28,920
                  Capacity Building Workshops for CSOs
                  (RWI)                                       Bank              2013              71,473
                  Capacity Building in West/Central Africa    Bank              2009              22,930
                  EITI Training Program for Local NGOs of
                  WA                                          Bank              2006             124,371
Asia              China Mining Governance                     Bank              2016              88,461
East Asia and     Implementing EITI in Asia                   Bank              2010                 580
Pacific Islands   Workshop for EITI Practitioners in EAP      Bank              2012              76,914
Latin America     Effective Government in LCR                 Bank              2013              68,396
Middle East and   EITI - PWYP MENA Workshop                   Bank              2013              42,140
North Africa      EITI MNA Workshop                           Bank              2015               6,154
World             (LKD) Learning Event on EITI Strategy       Bank              2013              11,063
                  (LKD) Voices of EITI Stakeholders           Bank              2011              26,891
                  5th Global EITI Conference - Paris          Bank              2011              90,848
                  6th Global EITI Conference                  Bank              2015              83,313
                  Advancing the EITI in Mining Sector         Bank              2009               5,300
                  Communications Training                     Bank              2013              13,309
                  Communications Training                     Bank              2014              36,520
                  CSO Engagement in EITI                      Bank              2012             521,701
                  CSO Engagement in EITI-Phase II             Bank              2016              62,892
                  DGF Independent Evaluation EITI             Bank              2010              89,254
                  EITI @ Work DVD                             Bank              2011               3,803
                  EITI 2015 Training Program                  Bank              2016             306,000
                  EITI ASM Workshop and Master Class          Bank              2015              32,382
                  EITI Communications-TF054664                Bank              2016             298,842
                  EITI Community of Practice                  Bank              2016              86,466
                  EITI CSO Administration-TF054664            Bank              2016             116,400
                  EITI CSO Project Design Stage-TF054664      Bank              2014              56,518
                  EITI General Operations & Strategy          Bank              2015              71,487
                  EITI General Operations & Strategy          Bank              2016             187,424
                  EITI Global Sector Events-TF054664          Bank              2015             226,879
                  EITI Implementation at Sub-national Level   Bank              2011              44,135
                  EITI Implementation at Sub-national Level   Bank              2012              75,660
                  EITI Lessons Learned and Best Practices     Bank              2009              56,488
                  EITI Monitoring & Evaluation -TF054664      Bank              2015              77,300
                  EITI Program Administration-TF054664        Bank              2016           1,513,506
                  EITI Program Management-TF054664            Bank              2016             771,705
                  EITI Secretariat Coordination               Bank              2016             158,053
                  EITI Seminar for Donors (Bangkok)           Bank              2008               7,072
                  EITI STA Benefits TF                        Bank              2016              60,861
                  EITI TF completion report                   Bank              2016              50,105

                                                      32
Knowledge                                                                            Sum of
                            TF Name                    Execution   FY Delivery   Disbursements
                                                                                      (USD)
World       EITI Training and Outreach-TF054664        Bank              2016             189,386
            EITI Web-Based Platform-TF054664           Bank              2013                5,566
            EITI-Audit and Reconciliation Workshop     Bank              2009               26,955
            GLO: Extractive Industries Transparency
            Initiative                                 Bank              2016           3,784,191
            Implementing EITI for Impact               Bank              2013              92,970
            LKD: Implementing EITI-Best Practice       Bank              2008             112,400
            National Coordinators' Meeting-May 2009    Bank              2010              63,972
            National Coordinators' Meetings            Bank              2015             146,092
            NRGI support to EITI implementation        Bank              2016           1,498,262
            PWYP Support (EITI MDTF)                   Bank              2015                   0
            Support to EITI Events                     Bank              2011              50,000
            Support to PWYP                            Bank              2016             500,200
            Support to Revenue Watch Institute (RWI)   Bank              2015           1,461,896
            Support-Training for Francophone AFR-
            TF054664                                   Bank              2013               6,867
            Towards Strengthened EITI Reporting        Bank              2010              10,355
            Transparency Initiative Validation Data
            Support                                    Recipient         2016             126,251




                                              33
