 PRINCIPLES ON
IDENTIFICATION
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT:
   TOWARD THE DIGITAL AGE
2




ENDORSING ORGANIZATIONS
                                       PRINCIPLES ON
African Development Bank

Asian Development Bank (ADB)
                                       IDENTIFICATION
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
(BMGF)
                                       FOR SUSTAINABLE
Center for Global Development (CGD)

Digital Impact Alliance (DIAL)
                                       DEVELOPMENT:
ID4Africa
                                       TOWARD THE DIGITAL AGE
International Organization for
Migration (IOM)

Mastercard

Omidyar Network

Open Identity Exchange UK/Europe

Organization of American States

OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR)

Plan International

Secure Identity Alliance (SIA)

The GSMA

UNHCR, The UN Refugee Agency

United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF)

United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)

United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa (ECA)

World Bank Group



Facilitated by: World Bank Group and
Center for Global Development
                      PRINCIPLES
                   1.	 E
                        nsuring universal coverage for individuals from birth
INCLUSION:             to death, free from discrimination.
    UNIVERSAL
  COVERAGE AND     2.	 R
                        emoving barriers to access and usage and disparities
   ACCESSIBILITY
                       in the availability of information and technology.



                   3.	
                      Establishing a robust—unique, secure, and accurate—identity.

                   4.	
                      Creating a platform that is interoperable and responsive
  DESIGN:             to the needs of various users.
 ROBUST, SECURE,
 RESPONSIVE, AND   5.	 U
                        sing open standards and ensuring vendor and technology
   SUSTAINABLE         neutrality.

                   6.	
                      Protecting user privacy and control through system design.

                   7.	
                      Planning for financial and operational sustainability
                      without compromising accessibility.



                   8.	 S
                        afeguarding data privacy, security, and user rights through
GOVERNANCE:            a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework.
 BUILDING TRUST
 BY PROTECTING     9.	
                      Establishing clear institutional mandates and accountability.
  PRIVACY AND
  USER RIGHTS      10.	
                       Enforcing legal and trust frameworks though independent
                       oversight and adjudication of grievances.
2




    PURPOSE
    We believe that every person has the right to participate fully in their
    society and economy. Without proof of identity, people may be denied
    access to rights and services—they may be unable to open a bank account,
    attend school, collect benefits such as social security, seek legal protection,
    or otherwise engage in modern society. No one should face the indignity of
    exclusion, nor be denied the opportunity to realize their full potential,
    exercise their rights, or to share in progress. No one should be left behind.

    The organizations endorsing these shared Principles recognize the potential of
    strengthened identification systems to support development and the achievement
    of the Sustainable Development Goals.1 We believe that creating inclusive, secure,
    and trustworthy identification systems can empower individuals and enhance their
    access to rights, services, and the formal economy. It can also strengthen the
    capacity of governments, the private sector, NGOs, and development partners to
    administer programs and deliver services transparently, efficiently, and effectively.
    The development benefits of improving identification systems may increase
    substantially with the adoption of digital technology, and many countries are
    already moving in this direction. However, at the same time that building
    identification systems—particularly digital ones—creates opportunities to further
    development goals, it may also create a number of challenges and risks.




      Identity is a set of attributes that uniquely describes an individual or entity. The provision of identifica-
    1	
      tion—“proof of identity”—is embodied in SDG Target 16.9, which requires the provision of “legal identity
      for all, including birth registration.” In addition, identification is a key enabler of numerous other Targets,
      including 1.3 (implementing social protection systems ), 1.4 (ensuring that the poor and vulnerable have
      control over land, property, and financial assets), 5a (giving poor women equal access to economic resources,
      including finance), 5b (enhancing the use of technology, including ICT to promote women’s empowerment),
      10.7 (safe and responsible migration and mobility), 10c (reducing the cost of remittance transfer), 12c
      (phasing out harmful fuel subsidies), 16a (strengthening the capacity to fight terrorism and crime), 16.5
      (reducing corruption), and many others.
This Declaration therefore identifies a set of common Principles fundamental to
maximizing the benefits of identification systems for sustainable development
while mitigating many of the risks. These Principles are intended to apply to the
broad concept of “legal identification” systems: those that register and identify
individuals to provide government-recognized credentials (e.g., identifying
numbers, cards, digital certificates, etc.) that can be used as proof of identity.2
Under this inclusive definition, legal identification need not be linked with
nationality or citizenship.3

Many countries have made significant strides in providing legal identification;
however, much work remains to be done. The goal of these Principles is thus to
foster cooperation around the implementation of identification systems according
to a shared set of values and standards. These Principles build upon existing
international norms, and we recognize that they will need to evolve over time to
incorporate a broader range of stakeholder perspectives, as well as new
technologies and lessons from implementation.

We hope that the Principles will be endorsed by a progressively wider range of
stakeholders—including governments, intergovernmental organizations, private
firms, local and international NGOs, and development partners. By using these
Principles to shape a common approach to identification, stakeholders will be
better able to align and guide their support, facilitate discussion at a country,
regional and/or global level, and work together to foster robust and inclusive
identification systems that further sustainable development outcomes.




  Currently, most legal identification is provided by or on behalf of governments. In the future, other models
2	
  may be possible, but governments should retain the ultimate accountability for legal identification.
  Some legal identification systems, such as the national ID programs of Peru, Pakistan and many other coun-
3	
  tries, are linked to national status, while others are not. India’s Aadhaar system, for example, has de-linked the
  concept of nationality from identification in order to establish the uniqueness of the country’s 1.2 billion res-
  idents and create a platform for secure authentication by third parties for service delivery. See Gelb & Clark
  (2013). As set out in the Principles, basic legal identification should in any event be provided to all persons
  resident on the territory.




                                                                 Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                                                                                     Toward the Digital Age   3
4




    BACKGROUND
    Some 1.5 billion people in the developing world lack proof of legal identity.4 This
    “identification gap” is a serious obstacle to participation in political, economic and
    social life. Without a secure and trustworthy way to prove their identity, a person
    may be unable to exercise the range of human rights set out in international laws
    and conventions. A lack of identification also makes it difficult to open a bank
    account, vote, obtain formal employment, access education or healthcare, receive
    a social transfer, buy a SIM card, or seek legal redress. Furthermore, states with weak
    identification systems have difficulty with government administration, planning, and
    service delivery, including collecting taxes, targeting social programs, responding
    to emergencies, disasters and epidemics, managing their borders, and providing
    security.5

    Achieving inclusive development, therefore, requires a sustained effort to address
    the world’s identification gap. Target 16.9 of the Sustainable Development Goals
    (SDGs) aims to achieve “legal identity for all, including birth registration” by 2030.
    To this end, governments in many countries—along with international organizations,
    donors and private-sector partners—have begun serious efforts to strengthen legal
    identification systems, including civil registries, national IDs, and population databas-
    es, as well as voter registries, social transfer databases, travel documents and others.

    In many cases, these reforms include transitioning from paper-based identification
    systems to digital ones; a shift that offers new opportunities and challenges. Digital
    technologies, such as cloud computing, biometrics, mobile networks and devices,
    and smartcards, can increase the security, accuracy, and convenience of identifying
    and authenticating individuals. As public and private service providers increasingly
    transition into the digital realm, the ability to prove who you are will be essential for
    participation in the digital environment.




      Estimates by the World Bank ID4D Dataset, as of February 2016. This dataset will be updated annually.
    4	
      Gelb, A. & Clark, J. 2013. “Identification for Development: The Biometrics Revolution,” Center for Global
    5	
      Development Working Paper 315; World Bank. 2016. Identification for Development Strategic Framework.
As a result, digital identification systems can create huge savings for citizens,
governments, and businesses by reducing transaction costs, increasing
efficiency, and driving innovation in service delivery, particularly to the poorest and
most disadvantaged groups in society. Many developing countries have already
used such systems to improve governance, boost financial inclusion, reduce gender
inequalities by empowering women and girls, and increase access to health services
and social safety nets for the poor. They also offer huge potential to address the
identity gaps experienced by tens of millions of migrants and refugees. New
technological advances—coupled with the application of these Principles—can offer
the countries the opportunity to leapfrog traditional approaches by establishing
digital identity ecosystems. Nevertheless, these Principles apply to both digital and
paper-based systems.

With these opportunities, however, come important challenges and risks. Efforts
to improve legal identification systems—whether digital or paper-based—may face
political challenges, including the ability to sustain a long-term commitment to
identification projects across numerous stakeholders and to overcome resistance
from parties that benefit from weak identification systems. Ensuring that all
individuals are included in the system can be a huge challenge, particularly for
remote and rural residents, the forcibly displaced, stateless persons, and other
marginalized groups. Furthermore, in the absence of strong data protection laws,
regulatory frameworks, and practices, identification systems may reduce trust and
undermine individual rights to privacy and consent regarding the use of their
personal information. In some cases, they may put vulnerable groups at serious risk
of harm. These risks are heightened in an era of digital identification and big data. In
some contexts, the proliferation of new technologies has created concerns regarding
sustainability, particularly when there is vendor lock-in or when technology choices
are not well suited to the use-case or country capacity.




                                                  Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                                                                      Toward the Digital Age   5
6




    Addressing these challenges is critical for ensuring that legal identification systems
    are effective and available to all end-users—the individuals who must prove their
    identity to access rights and services. This requires a coordinated, sustained effort
    by key stakeholders involved in the provision and use of these systems, including:

       Individuals. Individuals are end-users of identification systems, as they require
    •	 
      proof of identity to access rights and services. They are at the center of
      identification systems and have the right to know and exercise appropriate control
      over how their data is collected, used, stored, and shared.

      Governments. Government agencies are typically the primary providers of legal
    •	
      identification systems. This includes, but is not limited to, civil registers, including
      birth, death, and marriage registration, population registers, national IDs,
      passports, voter registers and cards, etc. Government agencies are also users of
      identification systems for program administration, such as social protection
      programs, tax collection, and providing driving licenses.

       Private sector. Private companies are the main developers, innovators, and
    •	 
      suppliers of identification system infrastructure. In addition, many private
      companies rely on legal identification systems to identify their customers (e.g. to
      open bank accounts, register SIM cards, or create credit reporting systems).
      Governments have also partnered with private companies to deliver forms of
      identification—such as mobile identity and digital certificates—that expand the
      reach and utility of legal identification systems to underserved populations.

      International organizations and NGOs. By providing protection, legal assistance,
    •	
      and other services, international organizations, civil society and community
      organizations are important partners for generating demand for identification
      and assisting people in accessing the identification they need to fully engage in
      economic, political, and social life.

      Development partners. Development agencies, other donors, and humanitarian
    •	
      actors provide support for legal identification systems in the form of funding
      and technical assistance, and may also be involved in establishing identification
      systems to administer programs.


    A shared vision across the range of stakeholders, aligned through this set of
    common Principles, will help foster robust and inclusive identification systems
    that enable economic opportunities and sustainable development outcomes.
Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                    Toward the Digital Age   7
8




    PRINCIPLES
    INCLUSION: UNIVERSAL COVERAGE AND ACCESSIBILITY
    Identification systems should strive for continuous universal coverage
    from birth to death, free from discrimination and accessible to all
    individuals.



    	         nsuring universal coverage for individuals from birth to death,
             E
        1.   free from discrimination.

    	          Universality. Countries should fulfill their obligations to provide legal
             •	
               identification to all residents—not just citizens—from birth to death, as
               set out in international law and conventions and their own legislative
               frameworks.6 This includes the commitment to universal birth registration
               for those born on national territory, which is an essential part of identity
               management.7

    	          Non-discrimination. Legal, procedural, and social barriers to enroll in and
             •	
               use identification systems should be identified and mitigated, with special
               attention to poor people and groups who may be at risk of exclusion for
               cultural, political or other reasons (such as women, children, rural
               populations, ethnic minorities, linguistic and religious groups, migrants,
               the forcibly displaced, and stateless persons). Furthermore, identification
               systems and identity data should not be used as a tool for discrimination
               or infringe on individual or collective rights.




               States have the sovereign right to determine eligibility for citizenship in accordance with
             6	
               international law. While proof of citizenship will be limited to citizens, States should provide legal
               identification to all persons resident on their territory, including birth registration. They should also
               provide proof of citizenship to all persons entitled to it without discrimination of any kind.
               For example, Article 7 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) states: “The child shall be
             7	
               registered immediately after birth and shall have the right from birth to a name, the right to acquire
               a nationality and, as far as possible, the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents.” The
               CRC has been ratified by every member state of the UN except for the United States, which has
               signed but not ratified the treaty. In practice, however, virtually all births in the US are registered.
Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                    Toward the Digital Age   9
10




     	
     2. Removing    barriers to access and usage and disparities in the
        availability of information and technology.

     	       Direct and indirect costs. Cost should not be a barrier to access identifica-
          •	 
             tion services. Civil registration and first birth and death certificates should
             be free of charge to the individual, as should the initial issue of a legal
             identity credential that is mandatory. If fees are charged for certain
             additional services (such as reissuance of lost credentials), rates should
             be reasonable, proportional to costs incurred, and transparent to the
             public. The indirect costs of obtaining identification—including fees for
             supporting documents, travel costs, and cumbersome administrative
             procedures—should also be minimized.

     	       Information and technology disparities. Stakeholders must work to ensure
          •	 
             user literacy regarding legal identification systems in order to foster a
             culture of understanding and trust, and to reduce information asymmetries
             that might prevent individuals from accessing identification-related
             services or benefits. With the rise of digital systems, no one should be
             denied identification services or associated services because they lack ICT
             connectivity or technical knowledge. Stakeholders should work together
             to ensure both online and offline infrastructure can be extended to provide
             “last-mile” access and connectivity, particularly for those in rural areas.8




             One implication is that off-line, as well as on-line, identification needs to be possible.
           8	
Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                    Toward the Digital Age   11
12




     DESIGN: ROBUST, SECURE, RESPONSIVE, AND SUSTAINABLE
     Identification systems should be robust, context-appropriate, and
     interoperable. While they should respond to user demand and
     long-term needs, they should collect and use only the information
     necessary for the system’s explicit purpose. Open standards and
     vendor neutrality help to ensure financial and operational efficiency
     and sustainability.



            Establishing a robust—unique, secure, and accurate—identity.
            
     	 3.
     	        Robustness. Accurate, up-to-date information is essential for the
            •	
              trustworthiness of any identification database and credentials used for
              authentication. Identification systems should provide a statistically unique9
              and verifiable identity for the course of an individual’s life, from birth to
              death, with safeguards against tampering (alteration or other unauthorized
              changes to data or credentials), identity theft and other errors occurring
              throughout the identity lifecycle.


             reating a platform that is interoperable and responsive to
            C
     	 4.   the needs of various users.

     	        Responsiveness. Identification providers should work to ensure that identifi-
            •	
              cation and authentication services are flexible, scalable, and meet the needs
              and concerns of end-users (individuals). They should also meet the needs
              of public agencies and private companies that use—or could use—this
              identity as a foundation for other services or operations.

     	         Interoperability. Interoperability increases efficiency and allows multiple
            •	 
              stakeholders to leverage the benefits of the identification system, both
              within a country and across borders. Domestically, this includes the ability
              of different databases or registries (e.g., national ID and civil registration
              systems) to communicate with each other and/or exchange information in
              a timely and low-cost manner, subject to appropriate privacy and security
              safeguards.10




            9	Statistically unique means that the probability that any individual can have multiple identities
               within the same system (i.e., duplicate identities) is very low—no system is completely fool-proof.
               This should be distinguished from the possibility that a person may have multiple mechanisms to
               authenticate their identity, as in a federated system.
               Cross-border interoperability can facilitate migration and trade, but controls should be put in place
            10	
               to protect the security of vulnerable groups, such as refugees, whose personal data must often be
               shielded from their home country.
	 Using open standards and ensuring vendor and technology
5. neutrality.
	      Open standards. Open design principles enable market-based competition
     •	
       and innovation.11 They are essential for greater efficiency and improved
       functionality of identification systems, both within country and also across
       borders.

	      Vendor and technology neutrality. Robust ICT procurement guidelines must
     •	
       be in place to facilitate competition and innovation and prevent possible
       technology and vendor “lock-in,” which can increase costs and reduce
       flexibility to accommodate changes over time. Technology neutrality and
       diversity should be fostered to increase flexibility and avoid system design
       that is not fit for purpose or suitable to meet policy and development
       objectives.




        For example, ISO/IEC has developed standards covering many aspects of identification systems.
     11	
        For more, see World Bank. 2016. “Technical Standards for Digital Identity Systems: Formulating
        a Strategic Approach.”
        The Fair Information Practices (FIPs) are a set of internationally-recognized principles for
     12	
        protecting personal information, including collection limitation, purpose specification, data
        quality, security, accountability, and openness.
        Such risk impact assessments should be carried out by the responsible entity that creates,
     13	
        collects, shares or uses data for authentication and identification purposes linked to the specific
        use case. Examples of existing standards for levels of assurance for identity proofing include ISO/
        IEC 29115 and those issued by eIDAS, UK Cabinet Office, NIST, and others.
        “Sensitive personal information” can vary by context but commonly includes information that
     14	
        could be used to create fraudulent identities and to profile or target individuals. The release of
        identifying information may involve particularly serious risks to certain people, for example,
        asylum-seekers and refugees.




                                                           Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                                                                               Toward the Digital Age   13
14




     	   6.   Protecting user privacy and control through system design.
     	          Privacy by design. Identification systems should be designed with the
              •	
               privacy of the end-user in mind. No action should be required on the part
               of the individual to protect his or her personal data. Information should be
               protected from improper use by default, through both technical standards
               and preventative business practices.

     	           Proportionality and minimal disclosure. Data collected and used for
              •	 
               identification and authentication should be fit for purpose and proportion-
               al to the use case, and managed in accordance with global norms for data
               protection, such as the Fair Information Practices (FIPs).12 Authentication
               protocols should only disclose the minimal data necessary to ensure
               appropriate levels of assurance. These levels should reflect an assessment
               of the level of risk in the transactions and can be based on recognized
               international standards.13 Identification systems—including credentials and
               numbering systems—should not disclose sensitive personal information.14


     	
      7. Planning for financial and operational sustainability without
         compromising accessibility.
     	          Sustainability. Identification systems should be designed for long-term
              •	
               fiscal and operational stability, without compromising accessibility for
               end-users. This may involve different financial models including reasonable
               and appropriate service fees for identity verification, offering enhanced or
               expedited services to users, public-private partnerships (PPPs), recuperat-
               ing costs through efficiency gains and reduced leakages, and other funding
               sources. Commercial models for identification systems should be designed
               to incentivize high standards of trustworthiness for all parties in the
               value chain.
Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                    Toward the Digital Age   15
16




     GOVERNANCE: BUILDING TRUST BY PROTECTING PRIVACY
     AND USER RIGHTS
     Identification systems must be built on a legal and operational
     foundation of trust and accountability between government agencies,
     international organizations, private sector actors and individuals.
     People must be assured of the privacy and protection of their data, the
     ability to exercise control and oversight over its use, and processes for
     independent oversight and the redress of grievances.


     	
     8. Safeguarding data privacy, security, and user rights through
        a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework.

     	       Legal and regulatory frameworks. Identification systems must be
           •	
            underpinned by legal and regulatory frameworks and strong policies that
            promote trust in the system, ensure data privacy and security, mitigate
            abuse such as unauthorized surveillance in violation of due process, and
            ensure provider accountability. Legal frameworks should be clear in
            delineating liability and recourse for end-users, and should be overseen
            by independent regulatory bodies with appropriate powers. They should
            also protect end-users against inappropriate access and use of their data
            by third parties’ for undue commercial surveillance or unlawful profiling.
            Frameworks require the right balance between regulatory and self-regula-
            tory models that does not stifle competition, innovation, or investment.

     	        User rights. Identification services should provide end-users (individuals)
           •	 
            with genuine choice and control over the use of their data, including the
            ability to selectively disclose only those attributes that are required for a
            particular transaction. Users should be given simple means to have
            inaccurate data corrected free of charge and to obtain a copy of personal
            information held about them. Personal information should not be used for
            secondary, unconnected purposes without the user’s informed consent,
            unless otherwise required under the law. Stakeholders should be transpar-
            ent about identity management, develop appropriate resources to raise
            users’ awareness of how their data will be used, and provide them with
            tools to manage their privacy. Identification providers should ensure that
            the initial process to correct errors is administrative rather than judicial in
            order to increase speed of resolution and reduce costs. Data sharing
            arrangements should also be transparent, fully documented, and only
            agreed to in the best or vital interests of the individual(s) concerned.
9. Establishing clear institutional mandates and accountability.
	
	            Institutional mandates. Ecosystem-wide trust frameworks must establish
          •	 
            and regulate comprehensive governance arrangements for identification
            systems. This should include specifying the terms and conditions governing
            the institutional relations among participating parties, so that the rights and
            responsibilities of each are clear to all.

	           Accountability. There should be clear accountability and transparency
          •	
            around the roles and responsibilities of identification system providers.


	  Enforcing legal and trust frameworks though independent
10. oversight and adjudication of grievances.
	           Oversight. The use of identification systems should be independently
          •	
            monitored (for efficiency, transparency, exclusion, misuse, etc.) to ensure
            that all stakeholders appropriately use identification systems to fulfill their
            intended purposes, monitor and respond to potential data breaches, and
            receive individual complaints or concerns regarding the processing of
            personal data.
	           Adjudication. Disputes regarding identification and the use of personal
          •	
            data that are not satisfactorily resolved by the providers (for example,
            refusal to register a person or to correct data, or an unfavorable
            determination of a person’s legal status) should be subject to rapid and
            low-cost review by independent administrative and judicial authorities
            with authority to provide suitable redress.




    Photo Credits | Cover Top: UN Women/Fatma Elzahraa Yassin; Page 7: UNICEF/BANA2012-02020/Jannatul Mawa;
    Page 15: UN Media/Jashim Salam; Page 11: Sébastien Rieussec/Safran




                                                            Principles on Identification for Sustainable Development:
                                                                                                Toward the Digital Age   17
                     ENDORSING ORGANIZATIONS




   We welcome additional organizations to join us in endorsing these Principles and
hope to maintain this as a living document to be updated based on lessons of experience.

                                     February 2017
