Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.1 COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES (including SMEs)
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. STATUTORY FRAMEWORK									4
B. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES			                                                     5
C. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE			                                                        7
D. FILING/PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS						8
E. AUDIT COMMITTEES										9
F. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS		                                                    9
G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE									10
Additional information										12




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the general financial reporting and audit
requirements for commercial enterprises in a jurisdiction as established by law or other regulation (e.g., Companies’
Act). “Commercial enterprises” are defined here as companies established with a profit-making objective that do not
issue equity/debt on a public exchange1, are not financial institutions (such as banks or insurance companies)2, and
are not owned/controlled by the state. The definition of “commercial enterprises” also includes small and medium-
sized enterprises (“SMEs”).

The focus of this questionnaire is commercial enterprises with limitations of liability, such as limited liability
companies (“LLCs”) and joint stock companies. Unless otherwise stated, questions do not apply to sole traders or
general partnerships. The questionnaire is structured as follows:




     A. Statutory Framework

     B. Financial reporting requirements for
     commercial enterprises


     C. Statutory audit and other forms of
     independent assurance

     D. Audit committees


     E. Filing/publication of financial
     statements

     F. Monitoring and enforcement - financial
     reporting

     G. Corporate Governance




How should the questionnaire be completed?

• The questionnaire should be completed by the body responsible for the regulation of commercial enterprises in
  the jurisdiction.
• If a requirement applies to listed companies and/or to financial institutions only, please state this.
• Where applicable, state the legal instrument or code that establishes a requirement and the date of enactment.




1
    See Module B Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed Companies
2
    See Module B Institutional Framework – B.3 Financial Sector - Banks and Module B Institutional Framework – B.4 Financial Sector
    Insurance respectively
                                                                                                                                          3
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                                             Organization



Date of preparation                                                                 Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                                           Address




Job Title(s)                                                                        Email




A. STATUTORY FRAMEWORK


1. Does the jurisdiction apply the concept of “public interest entity” (PIE)3 for the purposes of determining financial
reporting or audit requirements? If so, please provide the definition of a public interest entity.




2. What are the most common types of commercial enterprise as defined by law (e.g., joint-stock company, limited
liability company (LLC), public company, private company etc.)? Please indicate requirements/criteria for each type,
(e.g., minimum share capital, minimum/maximum number of shareholders) stating the source(s) of data provided.

Type of enterprise/Requirements/criteria




Type of enterprise/Requirements/criteria




Type of enterprise/Requirements/criteria




3
 Public interest entities are typically defined as listed companies, banks, insurance companies and other companies designated as such on
account of the nature of their business, size or ownership (e.g., state-owned enterprises).                                                 4
                         ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




3. Please provide the following information for the most common types of commercial enterprise, stating the source
of data provided.
Type of enterprise/ Number of enterprises




4. Does the statutory framework differentiate commercial enterprises by size? If yes, please provide: (i) the
classifications (e.g., micro, small, medium and large enterprises), (ii) the basis of definition (e.g., maximum
number of employees, annual revenues, etc.) and (iii) the source of the definitions (i.e. law/regulation and year).




5. Please provide the following information for each category of commercial enterprise (if known), stating the
source(s) of data provided.
Size                          Number of enterprises             Contribution to GDP               % of workforce employed
Micro

Small

Medium

Large



B. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES


6. Which factors affect the financial reporting obligations of unlisted commercial enterprises in the jurisdiction?
Please select all that apply.

        Legal form of enterprise (i.e. corporation, limited liability company, etc.)

        Size of enterprise (annual revenues, number of employees, total balance sheet etc.)

        Other (please explain)




                                                                                                                               5
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




7. Please indicate the financial reporting requirements for different types of commercial enterprises.
  • If an enterprise’s legal form drives the requirements, please provide a response for joint stock companies/
  corporations and LLCs only.
  • If an enterprise’s size drives the requirements, please provide a response for each size category, noting any
  exemptions or simplifications allowed for certain types of commercial enterprise where applicable (use the
  ‘Additional Information’ page at the end of this questionnaire if necessary).

 a. Required to prepare annual financial statements?




  b. If so, what do the annual financial statements comprise? (Balance sheet/ Statement of financial position,
  income statement, cash flow statement, etc.).




  c. Which accounting standards must be followed (e.g. national GAAP, IFRS etc.)? Please indicate whether
  different standards apply to commercial enterprises by size or other classification, for consolidated financial
  statements and/or for legal entity financial statements.




  d. If IFRS has been adopted, is it the full and current version of the standards issued by the International
  Accounting Standards Board? If not, please indicate the version and year.




  e. Are the financial statements required to follow a specific presentation? If so, please describe the presentation
  requirements (e.g., standardized format, chart of accounts etc.) and indicate the corresponding law/regulation.




  f. Are there consolidation reporting requirements (e.g., for groups of enterprises)? If so, please indicate:
     i. Which consolidated financial statements have to be prepared
     ii. If there is an exemption for small groups.




                                                                                                                                6
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




    g. Are enterprises required to submit their financial statements to a central registry or equivalent body? If yes,
    please provide the name of the body.




    h. What is the deadline for submitting annual financial statements? Please indicate for both legal entity and
    consolidated financial statements.




    i. Are interim or periodic (e.g., quarterly, half-yearly) financial statements required? If so, please describe:
       i. which statements are required
       ii. the filing/publication deadlines
       iii. if an audit or limited review is required to be conducted.




    j. Are there any requirements for enterprises to prepare a management report/ management discussion and
    analysis? If so, please briefly describe the requirements.




C. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE


Note that throughout the diagnostic tool, the term “audit” refers to a statutory audit of financial statements which is
defined here as an independent audit of general purpose financial statements4 mandated by law or regulations issued
by an institution with the legal authority to establish such requirements. In this regard, “auditors” are individuals or
firms which are licensed or certified to perform statutory audits.

8. Which categories of commercial enterprise are required by law (or other regulation) to have their annual financial
statements independently audited (i.e., by an external auditor)?




4
 General purpose financial statements are those prepared to meet the needs of a variety of users of financial statements as opposed to those
prepared for regulatory or other purposes.
                                                                                                                                               7
                         ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




9. For commercial enterprises with an independent audit requirement, please complete the following table, noting
any differences in requirements due to category/size of enterprise.
                                                              Requirements
 a. Who appoints the external auditor? Please
 describe the mechanisms governing the
 appointment and termination of external auditors.
 b. Are external auditors required to follow
 International Standards on Auditing (ISA) as issued by
 the International Auditing and Assurance Standards
 Board? If not, please indicate which auditing
 standards must be followed.

 c. Are there requirements regarding auditor
 rotation (i.e. change of audit partner and/or firm
 after a specified period of time)? If so, please
 briefly describe.

 d. Does legislation or other regulation require
 the external auditor to attend the annual general
 meeting of shareholders?



D. FILING/PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

10. Are commercial enterprises required to make their financial statements publicly available? Please note the
categories of enterprises required to do so, and any exemptions.




11. If publication is required, please indicate what is made publicly available from the list below, noting whether
summary or abbreviated statements are published.
                                                                Full	Abbreviated
 Statement of financial position (or “balance sheet”)
 Income (or “Profit and loss”) statement
 Statement of cash flows
 Statement of changes in equity

 Notes and disclosures

 Auditor’s report

 Management report (or “management commentary”
 or “management discussion & analysis”)
 Other (please describe)


                                                                                                                               8
                           ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




12. Please indicate where financial statements of commercial enterprises (including SMEs) can be accessed by the
public, selecting all that apply. If there is a cost for accessing financial statements, please indicate the cost.

        Enterprise’s own website

        In person at the companies’ registry

        Central registry website

        Official gazette

        Newspaper

        Other (please explain)




E. AUDIT COMMITTEES


13. Please complete the following table for commercial enterprises, indicating the applicable law or regulation which
establishes the requirement.
                                                             Requirements
 a. Which categories of enterprise (if any) are
 required to have an audit committee?

 b. Are the responsibilities of the audit committee
 prescribed by law or other regulation?

 c. Please describe any mandatory competences required
 in order to serve as an audit committee member (e.g.
 experience/knowledge of financial reporting).
 d. Is the audit committee required to report to the
 shareholders on an annual basis?



F. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS


14. Is there a public body responsible for receiving financial statements from commercial enterprises (e.g.,
companies’ registry)?




                                                                                                                                 9
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




15. Please indicate what checks (if any) are performed by the public body on the financial statements received. Select
all that apply from the following list.
                                                              Comments
        Statements filed on time

        Consolidation requirements met

        Statements have been audited where required

        Other (please explain)


16. Please indicate the number of staff who perform these checks and the experience/competence requirements.




17. What are the sanctions and other consequences (if any) for non-compliance with filing/publication requirements
(e.g., sanctions, fines, loss of licenses etc.)? Please indicate all possible sanctions (administrative, civil and criminal)
as they may relate to the commercial enterprise itself, its directors, managers, and auditors.




G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE


18. Please complete the following table for commercial enterprises, indicating the legal requirements and any
exemptions where applicable.
                                                             Requirements
  a. Are commercial enterprises required to have a board
  of directors? If so, please specify which categories of
  enterprise are subject to this requirement.
  b. Please indicate the requirements (if any) with
  respect to structure and composition of the board of
  directors (e.g., one-tier structure, with executive and
  non-executive members, or a two-tier structure with
  a management board and supervisory board)

  c. Please describe the responsibilities of the board and
  individual directors with regard to financial reporting
  and audit (e.g., reviewing and approving financial
  statements, appointing/dismissing auditors etc.)

  d. Are there minimum qualifications/competences
  for board members/directors (e.g., experience/
  knowledge of financial reporting)?

                                                                                                                               10
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




  e. Is there a requirement to hold an annual general
  meeting of shareholders (AGM)? If so, is there a
  deadline for holding the AGM?
  f. Please describe the powers of the AGM with
  regard to financial reporting and audit.



19. Is there a code of corporate governance or similar in the jurisdiction? If yes, is compliance with the code of
corporate governance voluntary or on a “comply or explain” basis?




20. Which types of commercial enterprise are required/expected to follow the code of corporate governance?




21. What are the consequences (if any) for non-compliance with the code of corporate governance?




                                                                                                                               11
                         ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                              12
