 Reviewing the Impact of
Capacity Building in GFDRR
Acknowledgments
Abigail Baca, Andrea Zanon, Barbara Minguez Garcia, Bouke Ottow, Fouad Bendimerad, Fernando
Cortes, Francis Ghesquiere, Francis Nkoka, Iwan Gunawan, Jared Mercadante, Jolanta Kryspin-
Watson, Laisa Obando, Luis Tineo, Maite Rodriguez, Manuel Alfredo Lopez Menjivar, Marc Forni,
Margaret Arnold, Michel Matera, Mikio Ishiwatari, Oscar Anil Ishizawa Escudero, Philip Karp,
Prashant Singh, Prema Gopalan, Ruby Mangunsong, Saurabh Dani, Swarna Kazi.




The report was developed by the University College London’s (UCL) City Leadership Initiative (CLI) and Institute for
Risk and Disaster Reduction (IRDR). The UCL team was led by Michele Acuto, Research Director and Professor in
Diplomacy and Urban Theory, and included Ilan Kelman, Joanna Faure Walker, Louisa Barker, and Zehra Zaidi. The
report was developed in collaboration with the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), with
support from Andres Gonzalez Flores, and the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice (GSURR), with
support from Federica Ranghieri.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of the authors. The text in
this publication may be reproduced for educational or nonprofit uses — in whole or in part, and in any form — without
special permission, provided acknowledgement of the sources is made. No use of this publication may be made
for resale or other commercial purpose without prior written consent from the authors. All images remain the sole
property of the source and may not be used for any purpose without written permission from the source.

Notes: Fiscal year (FY) runs from July 1 to June 30; all dollar amounts are in US ($) unless otherwise indicated.



Design: Miki Fernandez/ULTRAdesigns, Inc.




Cover photo: Turkmenistan, data processing and analysis. Photo credit: World Bank
 Reviewing the Impact of
Capacity Building in GFDRR




          December 2016
ii / Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR




                                   Table of Contents
                                   p1	    Report Overview

                                   p4	    Current Landscape: Stocktake Analysis Overview

                                   p6	    Current Practices: Case Study Overviews

                                   p8	    Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building

                                   p16	   Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan

                                   Annexes

                                   p25	   Annex A Stocktake: Understanding the Landscape

                                   p35	   Annex B The Case Studies: Taking a Deeper Dive

World Bank Group President Jim     p79	   Annex C World Bank Capacity Building Resources
Yong Kim visits Colegio de Alto
Rendimiento in Chontabamba,
Peru. Photo: Domingo Giribaldi /
World Bank
                                                                                                    1




                                                                                      Report Overview



T
     he Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) devotes a signifi-
     cant proportion of its resources—up to 24 percent—to capacity-building efforts. In
     line with its mission, this is aimed at boosting the capacity of developing countries
to better understand emerging disaster risks, reduce their vulnerabilities to natural haz-
ards, and adapt to climate change. Capacity-building activities are generally integrated
into GFDRR projects to support the overall objectives, rather than standalone projects.

However, despite the level of investment, capacity building is often considered secondary to
larger activities. To date, some of GFDRR’s capacity-building activities have been perceived
as scattered by clients, partners, and colleagues at the World Bank. Moreover, there is little
systemic knowledge about the effectiveness and long-term impact of capacity-building
activities within GFDRR or, more generally, within the broader disaster risk management
(DRM) community. It appears, even anecdotally from current practice, that GFDRR could
better leverage the impact of capacity building.

In order to address this analysis and practice gap, this study assesses the effectiveness of
capacity building across the GFDRR portfolio. The report evaluated projects active in fiscal
years 2014 and 2015 (FY14 and FY15), focusing on “human capacity building – developing
and sharing knowledge and skills, as well as consensus and network building. This study
is composed of a stocktaking exercise and the development of in-depth case studies. This
approach offers a baseline methodology to more strategically capture the role of capacity
building in GFDRR, and more broadly, DRM operations.

This report is aimed at a two-fold audience: (i) the World Bank and GFDRR, to encourage
better planning and strategic thinking about the value of capacity building; (ii) GFDRR’s
Consultative Group and DRM community more generally, to highlight the critical role of
capacity building in enhancing the effectiveness of operations.

At an operational level, three key questions underline the study and frame its
recommendations:

1.	 Planning. How can capacity building be effectively planned?

2.	 Management. How can the impact of capacity building be identified and managed?

3.	 Sustainability. How can capacity-building activities be designed to have a lasting
    impact?

After a summary of the analysis underpinning the report, these three questions are answered
with operational recommendations. This section is of use both for program managers [e.g.
Task Team Leaders (TTLs)] and grant making facilities (e.g. GFDRR) in order to determine
which operational steps and considerations can lead to the most effective and valuable
activities.
2 / Report Overview


                      The following section outlines actionable scenarios for next steps GFDRR can take to improve
                      the value of its capacity-building efforts. Each scenario includes a menu of interventions to
                      choose from and implement. These scenarios include: (i) maintaining an already effective
                      status quo, making slight adjustments to strengthen GFDRR’s role as an effective facilitator
                      of capacity-building activities—Scenario one; (ii) developing a more carefully planned
                      approach that better captures the value added by capacity building and makes GFDRR a
                      more strategic enabler of activities in the field—Scenario two; or (iii) GFDRR becomes a key
                      provider of capacity-building activities—Scenario three.


                      An Actionable Plan on Capacity Building
                      The report advocates for the second scenario proposed, which is “Moderate Action.” The
                      study shows that the current status quo already is effective and capable of adding important
                      value to GFDRR funded activities. The authors, nevertheless, suggest small additional
                      steps to enhance the status quo, becoming more strategic about capacity building. In this
                      scenario, GFDRR is seen as cementing and enhancing its current function as an enabler,
                      albeit not a direct provider, of capacity-building activities. The interventions under scenario
                      two opt for a more strategic approach, with greater resources and staff time allocated that
                      could further increase the value added. Under this scenario there are four areas of strategic
                      intervention that could significantly enhance the impact of capacity building in GFDRR
                      supported projects: enhancing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for capacity building;
                      supporting better dissemination of best practices and lessons learned; coordinating and
                      facilitating training and e-learning on DRM; and providing specific guidance, training, and
                      resources for project leaders (e.g. TTLs) to support a well-designed approach to capacity-
                      building activities.


                      The Study and its Methods
                      The study underlying this report included an initial “stocktaking” review of capacity-
                      building activities. This exercise was conducted across a database of 300 GFDRR projects,
                      active during FY14 and FY15, to highlight trends, challenges, and areas for further research.
                      In addition, a set of 10 case studies, selected in terms of geographical location, as well as
                      a variety of project typologies (grant size, length and GFDRR pillars of engagement) were
                      analyzed. (See Annexes A and B)

                      Both the case studies and the stocktaking inform the answers to the three “key questions”
                      and “next steps” scenarios outlined at the end of the document.
                                                                                       Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 3



Defining Capacity Building




T
           here is a lack of consensus about the operational definition of “capacity building;”
           the phrase hides a vast landscape of activities, ideas, and engagements. A
           World Bank Institute (WBI) report on Capacity Development (2009)1 noted that
           most definitions are very broad, making it difficult to evaluate the outcomes
of such work or understand its impact. Definitions can encompass “technical” (tools
and infrastructures), “financial” (investments), and “human” (knowledge and skills)
capacity. Using this broader definition, an Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) report
(2012)2 determined that GFDRR “has been, first and foremost, a capacity-building
program, which has accounted for 81% of project commiments.” While important to
make a case for capacity-building assessments, this assessment might need refinement
in focus to offer more directly-applicable operational reccomendations.

For this study, capacity building has been defined as the process of developing
and strengthening the skills, instincts, abilities, processes, and resources that                                        Capacity building has
organizations and communities need to adapt and manage and reduce disaster risks.                                        been defined as the
As such, this report focuses on human capacity. Interestingly, when asked to define                                      process of developing
capacity building, the TTLs who were interviewed also focused upon human capacity.                                       and strengthening
                                                                                                                         the skills, instincts,
The research team identified capacity building as activities that contribute to one                                      abilities, processes
or more of the following3: (1) raising awareness; (2) enhancing skills; (3) improving                                    and resources that
                                                                                                                         organizations and
consensus; (4) fostering coalitions/networks; and (5) facilitating decision making. In
                                                                                                                         communities need to
order to better assess the value of capacity building, operations have been classified as                                adapt and manage/
the following activity types: (1) knowledge products; (2) short-term learning; (3) long-                                 reduce natural
term learning; (4) consultations with stakeholders; (5) campaigns; and (6) knowledge                                     disaster risks.
exchange, fostering partnerships, and network development.

The project has taken into account two types of capacity-building impact: impact on
the project’s delivery (shaping the way the project is planned and carried out), and the
impact of the project on beneficiaries and partners (shaping the project’s outcomes
and their effectiveness). In this sense capacity building is, therefore, not always a
main goal of a project; rather it can be deployed to enable a project’s objective, acting
as a tool to support other goals.



1
 	 WBI (2009) The Capacity Development Results Framework: A strategic and results- orientated approach to
    learning for capacity development, http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/gfdrr_gpr.pdf http://siteresources.
    worldbank.org/CSO/Resources/228716-1369241545034/The_Capacity_Development_Results_Framework.pdf
2
 	 IEG (2012) GFDRR Global Program Review, volume 6, issue 2. http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/gfdrr_gpr.pdf
3
  	 Drawing from the WBI (2009) Capacity Building Results Framework.
4



Current Landscape: Stocktake Analysis Overview


                        T
                               he study began by taking stock of the landscape of GFDRR engagements in order to
                               understand the overall scope of capacity-building activities.4 Following are the key
                               take-away lessons from this exercise:
Figure 1. Average
Percentage of Funding   •	How much does GFDRR invest? Twenty-four percent of the GFDRR active portfolio
for Capacity-building       in FY14 and FY15 was allocated for capacity building5. However, as discussed in the case
Activities Built into       studies (appendix B), the majority of projects had a significantly higher percentage of
GFDRR Grants Across         capacity building than was indicated in the budget5. Capacity building accounting for $33
the FY14 and FY15           million (24 percent of GFDRR funding) is, therefore, a conservative estimate.
Active Portfolio
                        •	Is capacity building a project driver? There are few projects that are driven by
                            capacity building; only a small portion of GFDRR projects dedicate more than 50 percent
                            of their budget towards these activities. The majority of capacity-building activities are
              24%           supplementary to broader DRM objectives.

                        •	Where are most capacity building-driven projects? The selection of projects
                            driven by these activities are mostly housed within the former GFDRR capacity-building
                            program, created in 2010 in cooperation with the WBI. The program focused on
                            supporting the development of DRM training courses, including a number of e-learning
                            courses. 6 As part of the program’s strategy, partnerships were formed with prominent
                            players in developing countries for course delivery and marketing.

                        •	How does capacity building align to GFDRR? The largest expenditure, and over
                            half the total budget for capacity-building activities, lies in pillars one (risk identification)
                            and two (risk reduction).

                        •	 Why do small projects count? Small projects (in budget size) tend to have substantial
                            capacity-building commitments (41 percent of the projects with over 50 percent of their
                            budget dedicated to capacity building are small in grant size).

                        •	What are key capacity-building activities? The most common capacity-building
                            activities are short-term learning activities and the development of knowledge products.
                            Out of the 300 projects 177 (59 percent) reported having at least one short-term learning
                            activity, and 94 projects (31 percent) reported the development of knowledge products.

                        •	Who benefits from capacity building? The primary beneficiaries of capacity-
                            building activities include government and institutional counterparts (191 and 109 of the
                            300 projects, respectively). The third most common beneficiaries are community groups
                            (63 projects), followed by DRM professionals or technicians as the next most common
                            (50 projects). A smaller proportion of projects are aimed at benefiting the private sector
                            (15 projects) or the wider DRM community (16 projects).

                        4
                         	 The full stocktake is available in annex A.
                        5
                         	 It is important to note that capacity-building budget per project was calculated using a proxy. Capacity building is
                           not accounted for in a separate project line, therefore, the proxy was calculated by adding the budget line “logistics”
                           (training, workshops, conference facilities and stakeholder consultation) with “dissemination costs” (translation,
                           editing, and publication).	
                        6
                         	 See Annex C for a list of GFDRR supported training & e-learning courses.
                                                                      Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 5




Figure 2. Total Capacity-building Expenditure Across the FY14 and FY15 Active Portfolio Disaggregated by Pillar (in US$ millions)

PILLAR 1                    PILLAR 2                   PILLAR 3                    PILLAR 4                   PILLAR 5
Risk                        Risk                       Preparedness                Financial                  Resilient
Identification              Reduction                                              Protection                 Recovery




     $9.46                      $8.91                       $5.31                       $3.12                      $4.22
      29%                        27%                        16%                         10%                         13%




                                                       Cross-Cutting
                                                           $1.51
                                                            5%

Figure 3. The Number of Different Capacity-building Activities Across the FY14 and FY15 Active Portfolio

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
  50
   0
        Knowledge        Short-term        Long-term       Consultations       Network          Campaigns              Not
         products         learning          learning                         development                             specified
6



Current Practices: Case Studies Overview
This section outlines some of the key findings from the 10 case studies to take a deeper dive in the current capacity-
building practices of GFDRR projects. The full case studies provide greater depth and can be found in Annex B.


 1   	 Central America Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA)                                         4   	 Facilitating Policy Dialogue
                                                                                                           in Haiti
Long-term engagement. The CAPRA                The “Knowledge Manager.” The World                    Convening power. The DRM specialist
initiative was rolled out in Central and       Bank knowledge manager, a role not                    funded by this grant was able to
South America from 2008 -2016 in three         frequently included within GFDRR-                     successfully leverage the World Bank’s
main phases. In the first and second phases,   supported initiatives, was crucial to                 convening power to facilitate coordination
World Bank specialists played a central role   integrating key lessons learned into the              between ministries and international donors
in generating risks maps.                      project design. The knowledge manager was             and partners.
Balancing local ownership and technical        responsible for interviewing the trainees
                                                                                                     Knowledge notes. In the project plan,
support. In the third phase, there was         and reporting back on recommendations
                                                                                                     funding was allocated to create knowledge
a reduction in World Bank involvement          and lessons learned.
                                                                                                     notes. The knowledge notes captured the
in order to encourage local ownership,                                                               experience of mainstreaming DRM into
sustainability and institutional capacity                                                            sector policies.
building. This objective needed to be
balanced with providing the necessary
amount of technical support to participants.




                                                                                                      Haiti
                                                                                                      See page 50/Annex B
                                                                  El Salvador, Nicaragua
                                                                   See page 36/Annex B                 4
                                                                                     1      2
                                                                                           Honduras, Guatemala
                                                                                           See page 41/Annex B


                                                                                                      Peru
                                                                                                 3    See page 46/Annex B
 2   	 South-South Cooperation                  3   	 Peru Safer Schools
       in India, Honduras and                  Rely on previous experiences. Part of
       Guatemala                               this initiative’s success can be attributed to
Rely on local communities. The                 utilizing learning from other projects. When
sustainability of community-based capacity-    creating new plans and tools, the project
building projects was enhanced by working      assessed what knowledge was needed and
with and through existing community            how existing expertise could be strategically
organizations and networks.                    incorporated to support the process.
Peer support. Peer-to-peer learning            Integrate capacity building into
networks, and a training of trainers           institutions. Capacity building is effective
approach were key to accelerate and            when it is linked to an existing institutional
scale up capacity-building and resilience      process and integrated into existing networks
initiatives.                                   and projects, in this case a government-led
                                               census of school infrastructure.
                                                                                         Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 7




      6      	 Resilient Cities in MENA                      7   	 Urban Resilience                         8   	 Resilient Recovery and
     Supporting small enterprises. DRM                             in Bangladesh                                  Financial Protection in the
     capacity building can occur through                    Link across sectors. The institutional                Philippines
     supporting small-scale private enterprises             foundation established to deliver project      Train the trainers. From the group of
     Repeated interactions. To deliver long-                outputs—including an advisory committee,       training participants, “training leaders”
     term results for DRM, repeat interaction,              scientific consortium, and focus groups—       were assigned who were responsible for
     involving the same participants, is effective.         effectively built relationships across         evaluating the learning of their peers and
                                                            government departmental silos.                 provide feedback to organizers. Adjustments
     Flexible project management. enables                                                                  were made accordingly, resulting in a
     activities to be planned responding to the             E-learning and flexible engagements. The
                                                            use of e-learning tools gave participants      responsive and effective program. The
     participants’ needs.                                                                                  training of trainers was crucial to scaling up
                                                            with full-time jobs much-needed flexibility.
                                                            However, no progress indicators were           and sustaining the initiative.
                                                            developed, and therefore, the impact on        Review capacity-building needs. A
                                                            government staff learning cannot be easily     capacity review before the training ensured
                                                            determined.                                    that the workshops were relevant to
                                                                                                           participants’ needs.

                                                                                                            9   	 Mainstreaming DRM in
                                                                                                                  Indonesia
                                                                                                           Broad local ownership. Local ownership
                                                                                                           of technical assistance outputs, such as
                                                                                                           the disaster risk financing strategy, was
                                                                                                           encouraged by engaging a number of
                                                                                   Japan                   stakeholders throughout the life cycle of the
     Lebanon                                                                  10   See page 75/Annex B     project.
     See pag58/Annex B
         6                                    Bangladesh                                                   Know your (local) partner. WBI worked
 6                                            See page 62/Annex B                                          with the National Agency for Disaster Risk
Egypt                                          7                                                           Management (BNPB) to build its capacity
See page 58/Annex B                    2                                                                   to share knowledge with local and district
                                                                            Philippines
                                      India                             8                                  agencies, as well as an international
                6                     See page 41/Annex B
                                                                            See page 66/Annex B
                Djibouti                                                                                   audience. WBI conducted a review of
                See page 58/Annex B                                                                        BNPB’s capacity, ensuring that it had the
                                                                            Indoensia                      human, technical, and financial resources to
                                                                        9   See page 70/Annex B            sustain the knowledge exchange program.
     5       See page 54/Annex B
                                                                                                           10 	   Learning from Mega Disasters
                                                                                                           Create value that is relevant at the local
         5   	 Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) and Recovery Framework                                level. Adopting a participatory process in
               in Malawi                                                                                   order to select the content and design, and
     Government staff turnover and                          DRM champions. DRM champions were              to create the knowledge notes ensured that
     sustainability. A degree of institutional              identified, and proved to be key actors        they were of value to the targeted countries.
     capacity was lost between the 2012 and                 in carrying forward skills between the         Sustaining (virtual) engagements. The
     2015 PDNA training, due to government                  different interventions. These champions       online community of practice was an
     staff turnover. However, the development               also provided knowledge for the future and     effective means of scaling the knowledge
     of a multi-stakeholder network, including              helped to share the methodology with a         exchange in order to transfer the lessons
     non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and              wider audience.                                to a wider audience. However, despite the
     international institutions, enabled a means                                                           growth in membership, the withdrawal of
     of sustaining a significant proportion of                                                             World Bank engagement after the grant
     institutional capacity.                                                                               end date led to a decrease in member
                                                                                                           participation.
8



Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building
Operational Recommendations for Project Managers and
Grant-making Facilities


                      R
                            esearch findings from the report not only speak to the value added from capacity
                            building to GFDRR operations, but also to the important need to better plan, monitor,
                            and evaluate its contribution to broader DRM efforts. In particular, the case studies
                      and stocktake analysis highlight a series of answers to the three core questions set out in
                      the introduction:

                      (1)	 How can capacity building be effectively planned?
                      (2)	How can the impact of capacity building be identified and managed?
                      (3)	How can capacity-building activities be designed to have a lasting impact?

                      Below, answers and related operational recommendations for each question have been
                      highlighted. These answers are useful for both program managers (e.g. TTLs) and grant
                      making facilities (e.g. GFDRR) to determine which operational steps and considerations
                      can lead to the most effective and valuable activities.


         Question 1   Q1   Answer 1: Designing capacity-building activities in a project
                                   proposal
         How can
capacity building     Thinking strategically about capacity building from the inception phase of a project;
   be effectively     assessing, monitoring, and evaluating throughout; and documenting experiences, can
                      substantially increase projects’ impact, especially for smaller initiatives.
        planned?
                      Capacity building is not always clearly delineated as “capacity building.” These activities
                      can occur outside of specifically identified line items and project proposals—through the
                      process of continual learning, exchange, and acting as part of project implementation.
                      This informal or indirect capacity building can be difficult to document. Tangible outputs
                      or outcomes are challenging to identify. Therefore, assessment throughout the project is
                      necessary.

                      In this study, it was established that few projects fully monitored activities and outputs
                      (e.g. the number of workshop participants), and even fewer monitored capacity-building
                      outcomes. A handful of projects had a review of a particular training (e.g. the 2012 Malawi
                      PDNA). However, this was not undertaken consistently; a post-training report for the
                      2015 Malawi PDNA has not been created. These outcomes are not usually included within
                      measurement and evaluation progress reports, and therefore might not be easily accessible
                      or comparable.
                                                                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 9



A training and needs assessment review was carried out prior to the PDNA training in the
Philippines, laying the foundation for future interaction with stakeholders, and allowing capacity-
building activities to be tailored to the needs of local participants. Capacity reviews should be
cognizant of available human, financial, and technical resources. As part of the same project, a
review of human capacity was undertaken for the Philippines Project Monitoring and Evaluation
System for DRM. However, after a three-day training program, the Office of Civil Defense
did not have the information and communication technology capacity for this system to be
institutionalized. As a result, the project required an extension.



Operational Recommendations
 Recommendation # 1 Capacity building is more likely to be effective when identified as a
goal in the planning stage, and based on
i)	 reviews of existing capacity and capacity needs, and
ii)	 a consideration of the institutional and external contexts.
    Recommendation # 2     Following the definition outlined in the introduction, include
capacity-building activities within both project design and budget. Identify, which
components should be marked as capacity-building activities, including describing
expected, informal capacity building, such as continual learning through implementation.
  Recommendation # 3 Selecting indicators to monitor throughout project implementation
ensures the role of capacity-building activities (and investments) are clearly assessed. This
links capacity building to defined outcomes in proposals and allows the TTL and GFDRR to
assess progress throughout implementation and upon project completion. See question 3
in this section for further information.
    Recommendation # 4    Developing a timeline for capacity-building activities in collab-
oration with local stakeholders provides a clear project implementation structure for both
the project manager and the client.
 Recommendation # 5 Including a mid-term review of capacity-building activities enables
progress to be monitored and adjustments to implementation to be made accordingly, if
necessary.


    Q1   Answer 2: Strategically identify activity types and beneficiaries

When developing the project proposal, it is key to identify the most suitable capacity-
building activities and their beneficiaries, given the objectives and the scope of the
project. This means strategically putting capacity building “in context” of the project’s
overall goal(s), not just as a subsidiary activity. Extensive literature confirms that the
activity selection, in terms of time horizon—long term vs. short term, and type 7—should
follow an assessment of: existing capacities (local and GFDRR); capacity needed (locally);


	 As defined above: (1) knowledge products; (2) short-term learning; (3) long-term learning; (4) consultations with
7

  stakeholders; (5) campaigns; (6) knowledge exchange/fostering partnerships/ network development
10 / Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building


                              and lessons learned from previous actions (supported by GFDRR, and when possible,
                              by other donors and stakeholders). Furthermore, a participatory process of selecting
                              capacity-building activities and beneficiaries encourages ownership of the process and
                              local sustainability of its outcomes.
                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1 Capacity-building activities can and should include a combination
                              of complementary activities (e.g. workshop followed by knowledge products). This is
                              already practiced in part - 75 percent of GFDRR projects with capacity building in their
                              proposals had more than one type of capacity-building activity. However, these activities
                              would benefit from more strategic thinking. Case studies and the stocktake show that,
                              though most common activity is short-term learnings, there is a tendency to combine
                              different activities, targeting different audiences, rather than planning a set of capacity-
                              building activities as connected processes.
                               Recommendation # 2        A clear phase of consultation with the clients—and, ideally,
                              a number of relevant stakeholders—is key to legacy. Formal consultation allows the
                              identification of the most appropriate capacity-building activities and beneficiaries, and
                              enhances the chances that these activities are locally owned and, thus, more sustainable,
                              beyond GFDRR efforts, in the long term.


                              In the Bangladesh Urban Resilience Project, stakeholder consultations were organized with
                              approximately 40 different government ministries and organizations, academic institutions, and
                              civil society members in order to decide on the composition and coordination of the focus groups.
                              This approach gave participating organizations greater ownership of the process and, ultimately,
                              greater sustainability. Although the focus groups were not intended to continue after the project
                              outputs were created, the multi- stakeholder focus groups continue to have a working relationship,
                              discussing the challenges and opportunities they face. Furthermore, one of the focus groups has
                              formed its own Urban Resilience Unit.




                               Q1 Answer 3: Where possible, identify and build upon previous
                              capacity-building activities

                              Continuity of capacity-building activities aids effectiveness. Many case studies built
                              upon previous World Bank implemented capacity-building activities. This is easier when
                              consecutive projects are led by the same TTL. For example, the Malawi 2015 PDNA built upon
                              the 2012 PDNA, expanding upon and increasing the skillset of the participants. Given that
                              many capacity-building activities are short-term learnings, linking activities creates a more
                              sustained capacity building and learning engagement.


                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1       Consult formally with the regional or country focal point to
                              ascertain whether previous capacity-building activities have taken place, which could
                              compliment the new initiative.
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 11


 Recommendation # 2         If conducting a capacity review, ascertain whether the targeted
beneficiary has already participated in either Bank-led or other capacity-building activities
that are relevant to the project initiative.



Q2  Answer 1: Developing M&E as a way to understand impact                                      Question 2
and create value
                                                                                                How can the impact
There are two main purposes driving M&E for capacity building: i) accountability, and ii)       of capacity building
learning to improve performance. Technically speaking, M&E of capacity building should
focus on the quality and relevance of efforts and their ability to promote immediate changes.
                                                                                                be identified and
Given that the duration between capacity-building interventions and their outcomes can be       managed?
long (longer than the project) and stretched across different stakeholders and sectors, M&E
generally focuses on the immediate changes in a specific project, organization, or activity.
In addition, it must be pragmatic, simple, and its costs should not outweigh the benefits.

Operational Recommendations
 Recommendation # 1         M&E of capacity building should be included in the project
proposal. A description of capacity-building activities—including activity type and
beneficiaries, as discussed in question 1—should be outlined, followed by a series of
indicators. Inputs and capacity-building objectives should be clearly linked to intended
outputs and outcomes (see annex C, figure 3 for further information). These indicators
should then be monitored throughout all project phases, through impact evaluation. All
projects should include indicators to measure immediate outcomes of capacity-building
activities such as “raised awareness.” For extra depth, projects can include indicators
measuring broader and longer-term outcomes, such as “formulated policies.” In order
to monitor and evaluate, assessments are generally done at least twice throughout the
activity, at the mid-term juncture and upon completion.


 Recommendation # 2       Both the progress and final assessment should also seek ways
to describe informal capacity building (as discussed above), even if anecdotally. Not
everything should be labelled as capacity building. Rather, capacity building should be
accepted as both a formal and informal process and described as such.


 Recommendation # 3      M&E to improve performance was identified as a key component
by many of the TTLs interviewed. Here, M&E is seen as an illustration of changes
brought, processes and procedures followed, the level of satisfaction of beneficiaries and
partners, etc. Knowledge notes or short reports and briefs, perhaps following a common
framework, can help to communicate the main lessons learned. These can then be built
upon systematically.
12 / Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building


               Question 3      Q3  Answer 1: Consider whether mechanisms to scale up or sustain
                              the learning can be incorporated.
How can capacity-
building activities           The outcome of legacy thinking includes a lasting commitment from clients to mainstream DRM
                              into development policies and planning. Mechanisms are needed through which DRM interest,
   be designed to             knowledge, and skills can be retained and scaled to create a self-sustaining post-project legacy.
    have a lasting
          impact?
                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1         Consider whether a training of trainers approach can be
                              incorporated, even after the mid-project review. The trainings offered can focus upon
                              training a smaller group, which would then be equipped to train others in their country.
                               Recommendation # 2         Training of trainers needs to consider two operational questions:
                              i)	 What knowledge and skills does a person need to be able to train others?
                              ii)	 What structures will be available for the person to pass on knowledge to others in his/
                                   her country?


                              In the Philippines, a training-of-trainers module was included within the 2011 PDNA program. Upon
                              project completion, “champions” were identified and tasked with rolling out PDNA trainings across
                              government authorities as well as to Local Government Units (LGUs). The module was designed to
                              equip the “champions” with the necessary skills and knowledge to train others. Another GFDRR
                              project ran a DRM capacity building program across LGUs. Establishing these DRM structures and
                              processes in LGUs was critical for an effective PDNA training rollout.


                               Recommendation # 3       Consider whether (and what) knowledge products can be
                              produced by the project (e.g. manuals or e-learning modules), which can help to create
                              institutional memory.


                              The WBI worked with BNPB in Indonesia to create learning modules to be used both internally and
                              to scale learning to local DRM agencies. Internally, the modules allow knowledge to be passed onto
                              new staff, thus creating institutional memory.



                               Recommendation # 4 When organizing a knowledge exchange, consider how the community
                              of practice will be sustained.
                              i)	 Create an online community of practice. This could require additional funding for a
                                  community of practice manager after the project end date. Alternatively, local community
                                  of practice coordinators could be designated.
                              ii)	 Organize a follow up event to ensure another opportunity to develop relationships and
                                   share knowledge.
                                                                        Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 13


Q3  Answer 2: Where possible/appropriate include non-governmental
local partners

Projects that identify and target key local actors, and encourage a participatory approach
to capacity building, result in greater ownership of processes and outcomes by local
stakeholders.

In a number of case studies, including key actors from government, universities, and
civil society strengthened the outcomes of the project and resulted in long-term shifts in
the local risk management landscape. Including non-governmental actors is particularly
useful in situations when there is high staff turnover in government institutions. Non-
governmental actors, such as civil society and academia, often have relatively lower
turnover rates. Therefore, they can be competent at taking ownership of the project and
ensuring its continuation.


Operational Recommendations
 Recommendation # 1       When possible identify a local delivery partner to assist in project
outputs and project legacy.


In the Peru Safer Schools Project, a team of engineers were contracted to develop retrofitting
solutions. These engineers were selected from the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru and the
Japan-Peru Center for Earthquake Engineering Research and Disaster Mitigation based at the
National University of Engineering in Peru. Support was also provided from Universidad de los
Andes in Colombia. Using knowledge from local academic platforms helped create an enabling
environment for DRM and facilitated relationships between the Universities and the Ministry of
Education. Local expertise, rather than that provided by an external consultant, is often a more
trusted knowledge source.




 Recommendation # 2 When possible include a number of local stakeholders in capacity-
building activities.


In Malawi, a degree of institutional capacity was lost between the 2012 and 2015 PDNA training
due to ministry staff turnover. However, the development of a multi-stakeholder network, including
local NGOs and international institutions enabled a means of sustaining a significant proportion of
institutional capacity.
14 / Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building


                               Q3   Answer 3: Maintaining a flexible approach

                              Processes of consultation, learning, and knowledge exchange require an adaptive approach,
                              but must also retain focus on, and commitment to, the long-term project goals. Factors to
                              account for include differing rates of learning and changes in the external environment (e.g.
                              sudden political or environmental events) and changes in institutions (e.g. leaders, and
                              personnel). While not advocating for doing away with project planning—a cornerstone to the
                              previous key question—a degree of flexibility might ensure that capacity-building activities
                              are responsive to their beneficiaries and contexts while retaining the fundamental goals.


                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1        Periodically review the utility and applicability of capacity-
                              building activities in order to adjust capacity-building efforts during the course of the
                              project without losing focus on the main project goal(s). Document the adjustments made
                              in project progress reviews.


                               Recommendation # 2         Including a “knowledge manager” or a facilitating agency for
                              knowledge management and project development (e.g. the World Bank) can ensure that
                              learning is monitored, and that observations are integrated into project implementation.



                              For the CAPRA initiative, the World Bank hired a knowledge manager who was responsible for
                              interviewing the trainees and reporting back on lessons learned. Throughout its duration, these
                              lessons were integrated into project implementation, and included the format of capacity-building
                              activities. This feedback process significantly altered the course of the CAPRA initiative by shifting
                              from a Bank-led process to a locally owned approach.




                              By contrast, for the Philippines PDNA training, local knowledge managers were selected by the
                              consultant, who drew from a pool of workshop participants. The objective was for these individuals
                              to become future PDNA trainers. Their secondary role was monitoring the learning of their peers
                              and feeding this information back to the implementing consultant. This allowed the consultant to
                              adapt capacity building activities to the needs of the participants throughout the implementation of
                              the project, resulting in more effective and locally owned DRM capacity.
                                                                     Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 15


                                                                                                   St. Lucia: Discussing the surface
                                                                                                   water and slope stability issues
                                                                                                   and potential drainage solutions
                                                                                                   at a community meeting. Photo
                                                                                                   credit: David Ramos




Monitoring learning activities
(synthesized from the Capacity Development Results Framework)
Learning activities, for monitoring purposes, are actions taken, or work performed, by which
inputs are converted into specific outputs. Activities, such as providing training, conducting a      Existing World
workshop, etc. are designed to deliver outputs that enable learning objectives and outcomes to        Bank Resources:
be achieved.                                                                                          The Capacity
Inputs are the financial, human, and other resources mobilized to support activities undertaken       Development
by a capacity-building program.                                                                       Results Framework
Input indicators measure the quantity (and sometimes the quality) of resources provided               The WBI produced
for program activities. For capacity building, these can include: funding (counterpart funds,         “The Capacity
co-financing, grants); human resources (number of person-years for client/partner agencies,           Development Results
consultants, and technical advisers); equipment, materials, and supplies, or recurrent costs of       Framework” (2009)
these items (e.g. textbooks).                                                                         which provides the
                                                                                                      theoretical basis behind,
Outputs are the products and services resulting from a learning activity designed to generate
                                                                                                      and a framework for
learning outcomes. The key distinction between outputs (specific goods or services) and learning
                                                                                                      designing, implementing,
outcomes is that the former typically takes the form of an increase in supply of knowledge and
                                                                                                      monitoring, managing,
information. In contrast, learning outcomes reflect behavioral changes resulting from the use
                                                                                                      and evaluating capacity
and application of acquired knowledge and information.
                                                                                                      development in
Output indicators measure the quantity (and sometimes the quality) of the goods or services           development programs.
created or provided through the use of inputs. In capacity building, these might include              The framework includes
the number of people trained, the number of new courses offered, and the number of new                learning outcomes and
consultations conducted.                                                                              objectives, which are
Objectives can be thought of as an indicator for a given outcome. Capacity building outcomes          a useful for project
are reached through the articulation of learning objectives.                                          managers.

Outcomes are changes that occur in an individual or a group of individuals such as improvements
in knowledge and skills; changes in motivation and attitude with respect to a particular issue;
occurrences in the broader organizational or social environment, which are embodied in
improved processes or new products and services.
16



Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan



            C
                 apacity building has already added much, and has the potential to add even further, to
                 GFDRR projects. The overview of the stocktake and case studies have demonstrated
                 the reach, substantial investment, and variety of activities at hand when we consider
            capacity building as a component of GFDRR operations.

            But what now for GFDRR? How can the ‘”value added” functions of capacity building be
            enhanced in future projects? This section outlines three possible roadmaps for further
            action by GFDRR, ranging from simple consideration (scenario one), to a more strategic
            approach (scenario two), to full investment (scenario three). The research team outlines
            here what seems the most effective action plan of the three. The authors believe that the
            second scenario, focused on strategic “wins” without a major overhaul, would lead to the
            most effective benefits. The final decision, however, rests with GFDRR and its consultative
            group.
                                                                   Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 17



          Business as usual: “Maintain the status quo”
 Scenario One
—GFDRR highlights its position as effective facilitator of
capacity-building activities
While the status quo could be easily criticised by an external, uninitiated eye, the
current state of capacity building in GFDRR projects is already encouraging. As has
been demonstrated throughout the in-depth case studies, significant value is added to
GFDRR projects through capacity-building activities. The authors believe three minimal
interventions could further sustain this effective status quo and ensure GFDRR continues
to benefit from capacity-building activities. These potential next steps do not require
substantial or strategic adjustments, as in the other two scenarios, but rather are thought
of as using current resources, and are focused on GFDRR enhancing M&E, supporting better
dissemination of best practices and lessons learned, and continuing the coordination and
facilitation of training and e-learning.



Intervention 1: M&E
Systematic M&E of capacity building is critical to ensuring that capacity building is deployed
in a strategic rather than ad hoc manor. A systematic M&E framework for accountability
will ensure that capacity-building activities are clearly linked to defined objectives and
outcomes in project proposals and both the TTL and GFDRR can determine the extent to
which progress towards these has been achieved during project implementation and at
the project close. Equally, a continued review and analysis effort—as represented by this
report—is fundamental to maintaining an effective appreciation of the value added of
capacity-building activities. Equally, it is central to avoid path dependencies, unnecessary
duplications, and unexpected negative externalities to these activities.

Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

n	 Include capacity building within M&E requirements. This includes ensuring that it is
   accounted for in the proposed budget. Requirements should include a description of
   capacity-building activities, including activity type and beneficiaries (as discussed in
   the section on capacity-building planning above) in project proposals. Outputs such as
   number of participants trained should be monitored; equally, a selection of capacity-
   building indicators for TTLs to choose from should be integrated into the GFDRR M&E
   framework – the indicators outlined in the Capacity Development Results Framework
   provide one possible model (see figure 3, annex C). In this scenario the indicators should
   focus on immediate outcomes of capacity-building activities such as “skills gained” and
   “improved consensus” (for examples see outcomes 1-4 in figure 3, annex C).
n	 Continuation and formalisation of the current systematic assessment exercise (as
   represented in this report) to allow for overall GFDRR strategic planning on capacity
   building. With M&E indicators in place, a more effective assessment of impact can be
   undertaken. With more detailed data, it would be possible to analyze which capacity-
   building activities are the most effective across the GFDRR portfolio and prioritise
   investments accordingly. At a later date, a longitudinal assessment of trends will enable
   a more strategic overview.
18 / Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan




                          Intervention 2: Sharing knowledge, best practices and lessons learned
                          Dissemination of lessons learned and better communication on current activities can improve
                          capacity-building activities at an operational level. Equally, the roles played by GFDRR, as
                          facilitators and convener, as well as the support given to multiple capacity-building activities and
                          their outcomes should be explained and highlighted, in order for TTLs to be able to make better
                          use of these resources.

                          Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

                          n	 Integrate more clearly a section on capacity building in GFDRR’s annual report, flagging the
                             value added of these activities for the broader GFDRR portfolio.
                          n	 Dissemination of lessons learned (including the case studies in annex B) and better
                             communication on current activities can improve capacity-building activities at an
                             operational level. One platform for these lessons could be The Resilience and Disaster Risk
                             Management (DRM) Global Solutions Group’s (GSG) recently launched knowledge platform,
                             but there are several other venues that could be explored.


                          Intervention 3: Coordinating and facilitating training and e-learning
                          The delivery of capacity-building assistance to clients is offered through multi-year programmatic
                          engagements with key institutions. This decentralized delivery mode of capacity-building
                          efforts includes training, mentoring, knowledge sharing and South-South collaborations
                          among different partners. Partners are involved in developing core curricula, localizing these
                          core curricula to specifics of the countries, and also in delivering training activities. GFDRR
                          partnership with national, regional, and international organizations contributes to efficient use
                          of scarce resources by reducing duplications and overlaps in developing training materials and
                          tools, allowing joint and coordinated capacity-building interventions based on the comparative
                          advantages of partners, and leveraging resources by creating a pool of shared capacity-building
                          assets — training materials and standardized learning packages, knowledge and guidance
                          notes, multimedia products — accessible in public domain.

                          Suggested Next steps for GFDRR:

                          n	 These partnerships need to be maintained to ensure the sustainability of these initiatives.
                          n	 GFDRR could also play the role of coordinator/facilitator of 2 DRM courses delivered
                             through the World Bank internal learning platform Online Learning Consortium (OLC).
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 19


 Scenario Two      Moderate action taken: be strategic                                           Recommended
                                                                                                 Scenario
GFDRR enhances its position as a strategic enabler of capacity-building activities

Between continuing business as usual and offering a major capacity-building-oriented
overhaul, the research team would like to recommend this scenario, which should, based
on the evidence above, provide the most effective pathway. In this scenario, GFDRR is seen
as cementing and enhancing its current function as an enabler, albeit not a direct provider,
of capacity-building activities. There are four areas of strategic intervention that could
significantly enhance the impact of capacity building in GFDRR supported projects. The
first three interventions are organized similarly to scenario one, but also include additional
activities: enhancing M&E, supporting better dissemination of best practices and lessons
learned, and coordinating and facilitating training and e-learning. The fourth intervention
focuses on providing support to the activities promoted by project managers (TTLs).


Intervention 1: M&E
Moving beyond “business as usual,” this scenario includes a more extensive review of
potential capacity-building M&E frameworks. Additional outcome indicators would be
incorporated into the M&E framework to measure the extent to which new knowledge (1)
gets used, and (2) effects the broader organizational, socio-political, or policy environment.
A review of other capacity-building M&E frameworks should be conducted in order to ensure
the most effective indicators are selected. Given that M&E is critical to encouraging and
monitoring effective capacity building, this is a strategic investment of time and resources.

Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

n	 Include capacity building within M&E requirements. This includes ensuring that it is
   accounted for in the proposed budget. Requirements should include a description of
   activities, including type and beneficiaries (as discussed in the section on planning,
   above). Outputs, such as number of participants trained, should be monitored. A
   selection of capacity-building indicators for TTLs to choose from should also be
   integrated into the M&E framework. In scenario 1, indicators focus upon measuring
   the immediate outcome of capacity-building activities. However, in order to add more
   depth and greater understanding of capacity-building legacy, indicators should include
   broader, and longer term outcomes such as “formulated policy” (for examples, see
   outcomes 5 and 6, annex C, table C1).
n	 Continuation and formalization of the current systematic assessment exercise (as
   represented in this report) to allow for overall GFDRR strategic planning on capacity
   building. With M&E indicators in place, a more effective assessment of impact can be
   undertaken. With better data, it would be possible to analyze which capacity-building
   activities are the most effective across the GFDRR portfolio, and prioritize investments
   accordingly. At a later date, a longitudinal assessment of trends will enable a more
   strategic overview.
20 / Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan


                         Intervention 2: Sharing knowledge, best practices, and lessons learned
                         Hosting a capacity-building forum for TTLs, project staff, and managers provides an important
                         space for interactive knowledge sharing.

                         Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

                         n	 More clearly integrate a section on capacity building in the annual report, flagging the value
                            added of these activities for the broader GFDRR portfolio.
                         n	 Dissemination of lessons learned and better communication on current activities can improve
                            capacity-building activities at an operational level. The recently launched Resilience and Di-
                            saster Risk Management Global Solutions Group knowledge platform might provide a channel
                            for doing so, but there are several other venues that could be explored.
                         n	 A regular capacity-building forum for TTLs (internal to the Bank), project staff, and managers,
                            would allow for a more structured exchange on on-going efforts and options.

                         Intervention 3: Coordinating, facilitating, and developing specific training
                         and e-learning
                         Beyond maintaining the current, existing partnerships and delivery channels, including with the
                         Tokyo DRM Hub and the Tokyo Distance Learning Center (TDLC) (as described in the previous
                         scenario), this intervention advocates for additional efforts devoted to the development of
                         specific courses, to serve several training purposes. These new courses could be developed with
                         international partners and delivered through the OLC.

                         n	 Coordinate and facilitate two existing training/e-learning courses on the basics of DRM
                            (“Introduction to DRM” and “Safe and Resilient Cities”), all existing courses on PDNA, and
                            new programmed courses on gender and DRM, as well as social impact assessment and
                            DRM. These courses should be updated frequently to capture the changes in the political
                            and international agenda, as well as new case studies, or innovative tools and practices.
                            The coordination and facilitation activities could be assured internally by GFDRR, while
                            update and integration of new concepts/tolls might need additional support.
                         n	 GFDRR could provide support to partners in the development of new DRM courses, as long
                            as they are complementary to, and not duplicative of, the existing DRM courses. GFDRR
                            could assist in disseminating and communicating these courses when needed, or as per
                            specific agreements.
                         n	 Develop further basic training on needs assessments and planning for capacity building.
                            This could be provided for TTLs and Bank staff to encourage more explicit appreciation of
                            existing efforts and also help them to plan to ensure future capacity-building value.
                                                                   Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 21



Intervention 4: Supporting activities promoted by project leaders (TTLs)
This intervention focuses upon providing guidance, training, and resources for TTLs in order
to support a well-designed approach to capacity-building activities. These activities could
suggest the recruitment of a dedicated expert to knowledge and capacity-building advising and
management.

Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

n	 Provide support in the selection of capacity-building activities and the implementation of
   M&E indicators. The socialisation of a new M&E system will require time and guidance.
   Support in selecting activities can contribute to a more strategic deployment of activities,
   moving beyond the idea of capacity building as a subsidiary component.
n	 Access facilitation to networks and expert rosters. GFDRR’s facilitation of expert networks
   is recognized as one of the most effective capacity-building activities. Expert rosters have
   proved useful for identifying appropriate experts. Updating and disseminating these would
   ensure full advantage is taken of this valuable resource.
n	 Pilot more in-depth needs assessments in up to four projects in the next fiscal year, developing
   a closer appreciation of how capacity building shapes legacy and further investments.
n	 Develop a toolkit of resources for TTLs, outlining the most effective ways to conduct various
   capacity-building activities (e.g. a South-South knowledge exchange). The best practices estab-
   lished in the pilot capacity-building needs assessment could be Included within this toolkit.
22 / Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan



                                     Major action taken: GFDRR becomes a key
                           Scenario Three
                         provider of capacity-building activities
                         GFDRR could, in principle, consider shifting capacity building to the core of its activities. Doing
                         so would require the creation of a unit/function. This would necessitate a significant allocation
                         of funding and resources, including a team of capacity-building experts. The work by GFDRR on
                         capacity building would have to be advertised and viewed as central in the eyes of both internal
                         audiences (the World Bank and the plethora of project partners for GFDRR), as well as in those
                         of the broader DRM community. This centralization would need to take place on two levels:

                         n	 The new unit/function would support and supervise capacity-building activities. In so
                            doing, it would provide guidance on both identifying suitable activities—dependent upon
                            the project and context—and designing, implementing, and delivering capacity-building
                            activities. This would require a more extensive formalization of capacity-building planning
                            and monitoring, making capacity-building assessments mandatory before each project/
                            activity starts, and embedding them into current planning, monitoring, and reporting
                            frameworks.
                         n	 GFDRR would take a more distinctive position in the DRM community as a provider of
                            capacity-building services. This scenario implies significant additional human and financial
                            resources to be addressed, specifically to capacity development on DRM through this unit.
                            On the basis of the practices and lessons discussed above, this scenario seems unlikely
                            and a more complex transition from the status quo. While the authors of this report would
                            certainly be available to provide more information as to possible steps towards scenario
                            three, the research team would like to place greater emphasis on the other two possible
                            scenarios, and encourage GFDRR and donor thinking in those very feasible, directions
                            (scenario one and two), setting GFDRR as facilitator or even a strategic enabler of capacity-
                            building efforts.

                         In conclusion, the authors are advocating for scenario two, in which GFDRR builds upon
                         and cements its current function as an enabler of capacity-building activities. This more
                         strategic approach could bring better scoping of activities and support to TTLs as well as
                         enhancing legacy thinking when designing capacity-building activities.

                         Table 1 summarizes the three scenarios and outlines the organizational structure that would
                         be required in order for each scenario to be successful, including: the necessity to add specific
                         functions to those that already exist; the type of activities that would be included; and
                         partnerships and collaborations with clients and external partners.
                                                             Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 23


Table 1: A summary of the 3 scenarios for GFDRR
                      Organizational structure      Activities                        Partnerships
                                                    1) M&E for accountability
                                                    of project/activities;
                                                                                      1) Maintain existing
                                                    2) Development and
                                                                                      partnership for e-learning
                                                    dissemination of knowledge
                                                                                      deliveries; 2) Assure key
Scenario 1                                          notes to document selected
                      No changes                                                      partnership with clients and
Business as usual                                   project/activities;
                                                                                      local partners for specific
                                                    3) Coordination and
                                                                                      capacity-building activities
                                                    facilitation of existing
                                                                                      within projects.
                                                    e-learning and training
                                                    through existing partnerships.
                                                    1) M&E for accountability
                                                    of project/activities and
                                                    impacts; 2) Development and
                                                    dissemination of knowledge
                                                    notes as a systematic practice
                                                    for every capacity-building       1) Maintain existing
                                                    activity; 3) Coordination         partnership for e-learning
                                                    and facilitation of existing      deliveries and activate new
                      One expert on capacity        e-learning and training,          ones for new courses to be
Scenario 2
                      building and knowledge        plus additional courses to        developed; 2) Assure key
Moderate action
                      management                    be developed on a needs           partnership with clients and
                                                    basis; 4) Support activities of   local partners for specific
                                                    TTL: advise and support on        capacity-building activities
                                                    capacity-building activities      within projects.
                                                    selection, access roster and
                                                    networks, piloting capacity-
                                                    building needs assessment,
                                                    implementation of effective
                                                    M&E.
                                                     1) Several toolkits to be
                                                     developed, including
                                                                                      1) For specific projects: client/
                      Capacity-building unit/        one for capacity-building
                                                                                      partners and local experts;
                      function to support/supervise needs assessment to be
                                                                                      2) For capacity-building
                      capacity-building activities,  operated before any project/
                                                                                      global initiatives: new
                      and provide guidance on        activity; 2) Training and
Scenario 3                                                                            partnerships to be activated
                      how to: identify activities;   e-learning courses on an
Major action taken                                                                    for global initiatives (not
                      design, implement and          ad hoc basis; 3) M&E for
                                                                                      related to specific projects)
                      deliver capacity building; and accountability and impacts;
                                                                                      with selected partners, e.g.
                      disseminate and communicate 4) Extensive dissemination
                                                                                      the United Nations, academic
                      outcomes and lessons learned. and communication activities
                                                                                      institutions, Foundations, etc.
                                                     to present capacity-building
                                                     outcomes.
           Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 25




ANNEX A


STOCKTAKE: UNDERSTANDING
THE LANDSCAPE
26 / Annex A: Understanding
     Reviewing               Capacity
               the impact of the      Building in GFDRR
                                 Landscape


                              An Overview of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
                              Recovery’s Capacity-building Activities
                              The team began by taking stock of the overall landscape of The Global Facility for Disaster
                              Reduction and Recovery’s (GFDRR) active portfolio of projects. There were three main
                              purposes for this exercise:

                              1.	 Understand the level of engagement on capacity building by isolating a capacity building
                                  component in projects supported by GFDRR funds;
                              2.	 Allow for comparison to other current and former projects;
                              3.	 Offer recommendations that are evidence-based, replicable, and effective in further
                                  enhancing the value capacity building brings to GFDRR investments.

                              Summary of Findings
                              Key takeaway lessons from the exercise are:
                              n	   Twenty-four percent of GFDRR active portfolio in FY14 and FY15 was allocated for capacity
                                   building;
                              n	   The largest expenditure and more than half the total budget for these activities was in risk
                                   identification (pillar 1) and risk reduction (pillar 2);
                              n	   Capacity building in risk identification (pillar 1) accounts for 29 percent of the overall
                                   capacity-building budget, more than financial protection (pillar 4), resilient recovery (pillar
                                   5) and cross-cutting combined;
                              n	   The majority of GFDRR projects tend to have a short lifespan somewhere between one and
                                   three years, which makes implementation of long-term capacity building a challenge;
                              n	   There are few projects that are driven1 by capacity building; only a small portion of GFDRR
                                   projects dedicate more than 50 percent of their budget towards capacity-building activities;
                              n	   Small projects (in budget size) tend to have substantial capacity-building commitments (41
                                   percent of those with more than 50 percent of the overall budget in this area);
                              n	   The most common capacity-building activities are short-term learning activities (34 percent
                                   of projects) and knowledge products (18 percent).


                              Developing the Stocktake
                              The research supporting this report was constructed primarily on a review of the current GFDRR
                              portfolio of projects. In particular, the University College London-World Bank team tasked with
                              this review analyzed 300 GFDRR grants active during FY 2014 and FY 20152.

                              In this study, capacity building was identified as activities that contribute to one or more of the
                              following areas outlined in Box A13.

                              1	
                                  Projects driven by capacity building are defined as those that have over 50% of their budget dedicated specifically
                                  to capacity building activities.
                              2
                                	 The team’s analysis included the review of project documents, including those housed within the results-based
                                  management system (RBMS).
                              3	
                                  Drawn from: WBI (2009) The Capacity Development Results Framework: A strategic and results- orientated approach
                                  to learning for capacity development, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/CSO/Resources/228716-1369241545034/
                                  The_Capacity_Development_Results_Framework.pdf. It is important to note that capacity-building budget per project
                                  was calculated using an approximation as capacity building is not accounted for in a separate project line. The
                                  approximation was calculated by adding the budget line ‘logistics’ (training, workshops, conference facilities,
                                  and stakeholder consultation) with ‘dissemination costs’ (translation, editing, and publication). Capacity-building
                                  accounting for $33 million (24% of GFDRR funding) is, therefore, a conservative estimate.
                                                                                    impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 27
                                                                      Reviewing the Impact



     Box A1: Types of Capacity-building Activities


     A.	 Knowledge products (e.g. issue analyses, country studies, evaluations)
     B.	 Short-term learning (e.g. workshops, training sessions)
     C.	 Long-tern learning (e.g. courses, e-learning, university programs)
     D.	 Consultations with stakeholders
     E.	Campaigns
     F.	 Knowledge exchange (e.g. fostering partnerships, developing networks)



This assessment of capacity-building activities summarizes the following:
n	 The level of investment in different areas (geographically, thematically);
n	 The type and length of the engagements;

n	 The beneficiaries targeted across GFDRR’s portfolio of projects.

Because capacity-building outputs (e.g., number of participants trained, knowledge
products created), objectives (e.g., stakeholder agreement reached) and outcomes (e.g.,
policies formulated) were often not thoroughly documented, this stocktake cannot compare
or comment on the impact and outcomes of these activities.


How Much Does GFDRR Invest in Capacity Building?
Out of more than $137 million in GFDRR commitments (during FY14 and FY15) that were
reviewed under this study, approximately $33 million (24 percent) was dedicated to                  Figure A1. Average
capacity-building activities. This shows that capacity building is a substantial part of the        Percentage of Funding
GFDRR portfolio (figure A1).                                                                        for Capacity-building
The overall picture of current GFDRR capacity-building activities points to a need for a            Activities Built into
committed, strategic and well-planned future focus on capacity building.                            GFDRR Grants Across
                                                                                                    the FY14 and FY15
                                                                                                    Active Portfolio
How much does GFDRR invest?
The overall picture of GFDRR capacity building activities builds a clear case for serious,
systematic and forward-looking attention to capacity building. Out of more than $137 million                        24%
committed during financial years FY14 and FY15, approximately USD33 million (24 percent of
GFDRR funding) was dedicated to capacity building activities. This shows that capacity building
is a substantial part of the GFDRR portfolio.

It is important to note that capacity building budget per project was calculated using a
proxy as capacity building is not accounted for in a separate project line. The proxy was
calculated by adding the budget line ‘logistics’ (training, workshops, conference facilities
and stakeholder consultation) with ‘dissemination costs’ (translation, editing, and
publication). Capacity building accounting for $33 million (24 percent of GFDRR funding)
is, therefore, a conservative estimate.

Significantly, out of the 300 GFDRR grants analyzed for this study, roughly a third (109/300)
supported large-scale projects for a total of $6,956,009,900. This points to a connection
between capacity-building activities and broader investments in key areas, and highlights
the potential value added of capacity building (for capacity-building legacy and impact see
28 / Annex A: Understanding
     Reviewing               Capacity
               the impact of the      Building in GFDRR
                                 Landscape


                              ‘key questions’ 2 & 3 in the main body of text). This evidence further supports the case for
                              a committed, strategic, and well-planned future focus on capacity building. Table A1 is a
                              breakdown of large-scale projects (directly supported by GFDRR grants) by region:

                              Table A1: Connecting GFDRR Grants and Wider Investments Across the FY14 and FY15
                              Active Portfolio4

                                  Region                                                        Supporting Projects Amount (in US$ Millions)
                                  Africa (AFR)                                                                                             $2231.72
                                  East Asia Pacific (EAP)                                                                                   $591.33
                                  Europe and Central Asia (ECA)                                                                             $449.34
                                  Latin America and Caribbean (LCR)                                                                       $1580.09
                                  Middle East and North Africa (MNA)                                                                           $0.91
                                  South Asia (SAR)                                                                                         $2101.10
                                  GLOBAL                                                                                                       $1.51
                                  Grand total                                                                                             $6956.01


                              Where Does GFDRR Invest?
                              The 24 percent average project budget dedicated to capacity-building activities in each
                              GFDRR grant is fairly consistent across all regions of operation for the Bank (table 2).

                              n	 The highest percentage of capacity-building financing is in the Middle East and North Africa
                                 (MENA) region, at just over 30 percent (despite being the lowest funded region in terms of
                                 overall grant amounts).
                              n	 The lowest percentages are in the East Asia Pacific (EAP) region and South Asia (SAR) region

                                 at about 1 percent and 19 percent respectively.
                              Global projects are slightly above the average, with nearly 30 percent dedicated to capacity
                              building—a clear statement to the value of these activities at both localized regional levels
                              and international cross-cutting activities. Table A2 provides a breakdown of average
                              percentage of budget for capacity building by region:

                              Table A2: Average Percentage of Budget for Capacity Building Across Regions Across the
                              FY14 and FY15 Portfolio

                                                                                         Amount of Grant for
                                                        Total Grant Amount                Capacity Building            Percentage of Budget for
                                  Regions                (in US$ Millions)                (in US$ Millions)               Capacity Building
                                  AFR                          $ 49,81                           $ 13,09                           26%
                                  EAP                          $ 32,40                           $ 5,98                            18%
                                  ECA                           $ 5,74                           $ 1,34                            23%
                                  LCR                          $ 15,59                           $ 3,88                            25%
                                  MNA                           $ 4,59                           $ 1,38                            30%
                                  SAR                           $ 11,77                          $ 2,20                            19%
                                  GLOBAL                        $ 17,77                          $ 5,26                            30%


                              4
                                  	 These figures represent the amount, in World Bank investments, that was directly supported by GFDRR grants (either
                                    through direct co-financing or for preparation purposes), and categorized as such in the World Bank´s internal
                                    system. Therefore, these figures do not include other large-scale World Bank, or external investments that may have
                                    resulted as a result of GFDRR engagements.
                                                                                     Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 29


How Does Capacity Building Align to GFDRR Pillars and
Engagements?
While a characteristic of GFDRR is the relative consistency of capacity-building funding,
it is noteworthy that the largest expenditure and more than half the total budget for these
activities lies in risk identification (pillar 1) and risk reduction (pillar 2). Risk reduction
accounts for 29 percent of the overall capacity-building budget; this is more than the
investment in financial protection (pillar 4), resilient recovery (pillar 5), and cross-cutting
activities5 combined (figure A2).

Figure A2: Total Capacity-building Expenditure Across the FY14 and FY15 Active Portfolio
Disaggregated by Pillar (in US$ millions)

      PILLAR 1                        PILLAR 2                                                      PILLAR 4                   PILLAR 5
        Risk                            Risk                             PILLAR 3                    Financial                 Resilient
    Identification                    Reduction                        Preparedness                 Protection                 Recovery




       $9,47                            $8,90                              $5,30                      $3,12                     $4,22
       29%                               27%                                16%                       10%                        13%




                                                                     Cross-Cutting
                                                                         $1,51
                                                                          5%



The frequency of capacity-building activities across different GFDRR supported projects
was also plotted (figure A3). Capacity building investments appear to be the most
frequent across GFDRR engagements in the form of strategic and preparatory work for
risk reduction. Within Pillar 1, during FY14 and FY15, risk assessments and data and
information sharing capacity-building activities were each twice as frequent as hazard
mappings. Within Pillar 3, contingency planning capacity building is more frequent than
each of early warning systems and forecasting and service delivery.




	 Cross cutting activities are those which link to more than one pillar of action.
5
30 / Annex A: Understanding
     Reviewing               Capacity
               the impact of the      Building in GFDRR
                                 Landscape


                                           Figure A3: The Number of Capacity-building Activities by Output Types Across the FY14
                                           and FY15 Active Portfolio

                                                               96
                       76
                                      70
                                                  53
                                                                                                                              47                                      46
          34                                                                                                       32                      29
                                                                             24         22        18                                                      16
         ng



                      t



                                    g


                                                 ks



                                                             t



                                                                          t


                                                                                        ng



                                                                                                  y



                                                                                                               s


                                                                                                                              ng



                                                                                                                                            g



                                                                                                                                                            t



                                                                                                                                                                       t
                    en




                                                           en



                                                                        en




                                                                                                                                                         ke



                                                                                                                                                                     en
                                                                                                            em
                                  in




                                                                                                  er




                                                                                                                                          in
                                               or
         pi




                                                                                     ni




                                                                                                                           ni




                                                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                                        nc
                                ar




                                                                                               liv
                   m




                                                         tm


                                                                        em




                                                                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                          st
                                             ew




                                                                                   an




                                                                                                                         an
     ap



               ss




                                                                                                                                                                ss
                                                                                                                                                  km
                              sh




                                                                                                                                     na
                                                                                             de



                                                                                                        sy
                                                           s


                                                                      rc


                                                                                  pl




                                                                                                                        pl
     m




                                                        ve
                                           m
               se




                                                                                                                                                                se
                                                                                                                                   k fi
                            n




                                                                    fo




                                                                                                       ng
                                                                                         ice




                                                                                                                                                 ris
                                        ra



                                                      in
  rd




                                                                              se
                          io




                                                                                                                    cy
              as




                                                                                                                                                             as
                                                                en




                                                                                                                              ris
                                       lf




                                                                                                        i
                         at
za




                                                                             -u




                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                        rv



                                                                                                     rn
                                                   n




                                                                                                                                            he



                                                                                                                                                          er
          sk




                                                                                                               ge
                                   ga



                                                 tio



                                                               d
                    frm




                                                                         nd



                                                                                        se
Ha




                                                                                                  wa




                                                                                                                              er




                                                                                                                                                         st
         Ri




                                                                                                                                             p
                                                               an




                                                                                                              tin
                                  le




                                                                                                                                          ro
                                               uc




                                                                                                                                                       isa
                                                                                                                             st
                                                                        La


                                                                                    nd
                   /in




                                                                                               rly
                                                          es




                                                                                                                                          st
                                  d




                                                                                                                         sa
                                                                                                               n
                                             ed




                                                                                                                                                   t-d
                                                                                   ga
                              an




                                                                                                            Co




                                                                                                                                     ta
               ta




                                                         od




                                                                                             Ea




                                                                                                                         di
                                           kr




                                                                                                                                   Ca
               Da




                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                  tin
                            es




                                                       gc




                                                                                                                                                 Po
                                                                                                                        gn
                                        ris
                              i




                                                                              as
                          lic




                                                   in




                                                                                                                    ei
                                         r




                                                                             ec




                                                                                                                   r
                                                  ild
                                      fo
                       Po




                                                                                                                ve
                                                                           r
                                               Bu
                                  es




                                                                        Fo




                                                                                                              So
                                  gi
                              te
                            ra
                            St




                                           What Is the Average GFDRR Project Lifespan?
                                           In terms of project timeframes, the majority of GFDRR projects tend to have a lifespan
                                           somewhere between one and three years (30 percent between one and two years, and
                                           29 percent between two and three years). This could make long-term capacity building
                                           implementation challenging. As we highlight below, these timeframes are often at odds
                                           with political, legislative and even academic cycles, and might present some important
                                           challenges to the effective deployment of capacity-building schemes by GFDRR. Nonetheless,
                                           as in the case of the Malawi Post-disaster and Recovery Framework project which lasted 17
                                           months (although did build on previous work) or Women 4 Resilience in MENA) project that
                                           lasted 14 months, short time frames are not always a limitation to what can be achieved. As
                                           we detail more explicitly in Annex B.

                                           What Are Key GFDRR-Supported Capacity-building Activities?
                                           The most common capacity-building activities are short-term learning activities and the
                                           development of knowledge products. Out of the 300 projects 59 percent reported including
                                           at least one short-term learning activity and 31 percent reported including knowledge
                                           products. Long-term learnings and campaigns are the least common capacity-building
                                           activities. Out of the 300 projects 10 percent reported including a long-term learning
                                           activity and eight percent reported including a campaign. However, it is noteworthy that
                                           long-term learning activities and campaigns have a longer life span thus the frequency is
                                           expected to be lower (figure A4).
                                                                     Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 31


  Figure A4: The Number of Different Activity Types Across the FY14 and FY15 Active
  Portfolio
  400
  350
  300
  250
  200
  150
  100
   50
    0
        Knowledge   Short-term   Long-term Consultations Network    Campaigns         Not
         products    learning     learning              development                 specified




  Who Are the Beneficiaries of GFDRR-supported
  Capacity-building Activities?  
  The range of beneficiaries on the ground who are targeted by capacity-building efforts is
  also wide. An analysis shows that a large proportion of projects are primarily focused on
  government and institutional counterparts (191 and 109 of the 300 projects respectively).
  The other most common beneficiaries are community groups (63 projects) and DRM
  professionals or technicians (50 projects). Only a minority of projects are aimed at
  benefiting the private sector (15) or the wider DRM community (16).

  Unpacking the Stocktake
  While knowing the overall landscape of where and how GFDRR’s capacity-building efforts
  are being targeted is useful, the correlation of the categories of projects provide some of
  the most important early conclusions on the role of capacity building in GFDRR supported
  projects. In order to compare the categories, the research team classified projects by budget
  size, project duration, and percentage of budget dedicated to capacity building (box A2).


Box A2: A Categorization of Projects by Budget Size, Duration, and Percentage of Budget Dedicated to Capacity
Building

  Budget Categories (in US$ Millions	              Duration Categories                   Percentage of Budget
  Small	         $ 0.01-0.2M                       One year or less                      Categories
  Medium-Small	 $ 0.2-5M                           Between one and two years             Up to 10%
  Medium-Large	 $ 0.5-1M                           Between two and three years           10-25%
  Large	         $ 1-5M                            More than three years                 25-50%
  Outlier	       $ <0.1M or >5M                    Outliers                              Over 50%
32 / Annex A: Understanding
     Reviewing               Capacity
               the impact of the      Building in GFDRR
                                 Landscape


                              Comparing Budget, Duration, and Activity Type
                              Comparing budget size to the duration of projects shows that 53 percent of medium-small
                              projects last between one and two years. This means that the typical timeframe available
                              for capacity-building efforts is somewhat short (below one year) and unlikely to surpass
                              legislature, political and even academic terms.

                              The majority of large projects tend to last at least two years or more, with 41 percent lasting
                              between two and three years and an encouraging 36 percent lasting more than three years
                              with possibilities for long-term capacity-building exercises. It appears that projects lasting
                              less than a year are unusual, (only 11 percent of the total) although as we discuss further
                              in Annex B, it might be premature to equate length of a project to its potential capacity-
                              building effectiveness.

                              Regardless of size and length, there are few projects that are driven by capacity building;
                              only a small portion of GFDRR projects dedicate more than 50 percent of their budget
                              towards capacity-building activities (approximately eight percent of projects reviewed).
                              And, those projects that budget more than 50 percent of their budget for capacity-building
                              activities tend to be small in overall budget size, such as the Malawi PDNA and Recovery
                              Framework project.6

                              Table A3: Overall Project Budget Size Compared to the Percentage Invested in Capacity-
                              building Activities Across the FY 14 and FY15 Active Portfolio

                                  Project budget size        Percentage of Budget for Capacity-Building Activities
                                                          Up to 10%            10-25%              25-50%       Over 50%   Grand Total
                                  Large                      27.91%             41.86%             25.58%        4.65%       100%
                                  Medium-Large              26.32%              31.58%             36.84%        5.26%       100%
                                  Medium-Small              19.67%              50.82%             21.31%        8.20%       100%
                                  Small                     30.61%              34.69%             20.41%        14.29%      100%
                                  Grand Total               25.71%             40.00%              26.19%        8.10%       100%



                              Moreover, when we consider jointly the length of projects and the percentage of budget
                              dedicated to capacity building, those that budget more than 50 percent for capacity-
                              building activities tend to be longer in length, with 43 percent of those over 50 percent
                              lasting between two and three years and 36 percent lasting over three years. When we
                              consider this in relation to the types of activities conducted, we find the majority of
                              activities are short-term learning activities (59 percent of projects reported having at least
                              one short-term learning), followed by knowledge products (31 percent reported knowledge
                              products). This seems to be driven more by the length of the project than the activities
                              needed. Very little network development takes place in projects that last less than a year
                              (only six percent of projects undertaking network development are less than one year in
                              length). This might have implications for the long-term effectiveness of capacity building
                              as the case studies flag in Annex B. In the main body of text, the answers to key question 2:
                              ‘How can we build sustainability and a lasting impact from capacity building?’ propose means
                              by which the legacy and impact of short-term learnings can be multiplied.

                              	 See Annex B for a case study of capacity building activities in this project.
                              6
                                                                                                              Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 33


     The majority of capacity-building activities take place in projects with higher and medium
     budgets, respectively at 42 percent and 33 percent, signalling a need for a wider commitment
     when this activity is deemed necessary. Approximately 43 percent of long-term learning
     activities take place in projects with a medium-large budget.

     Figure A5: Overall Project Budget Compared with the Percentage of Budget for Capacity
     Building and Project Duration Across the FY14 and FY15 Active Portfolio
                                             100                                                                                                                   100


                                             90                                                                                                                    90


                                             80                                                                                                                    80
Percentage of budget for capacity building




                                              70                                                                                                                   70




                                                                                                                                                                         Legth of project (in months)
                                             60                                                                                                                    60


                                             50                                                                                                                    50


                                             40                                                                                                                    40


                                             30                                                                                                                    30


                                              20                                                                                                                   20


                                              10                                                                                                                   10


                                              0                                                                                                                    0
                                                   –   $0.50   $1.00       $1.50       $2.00      $2.50         $3.00      $3.50      $4.00          4.50   5.00

                                                                                     Project budget (in $US millions)
                                                               % of budget for capacity-building activities         Project duration (# of months)
34 / Annex A: Understanding
     Reviewing               Capacity
               the impact of the      Building in GFDRR
                                 Landscape


                              Geographies of Capacity-Building Budget
                              GFDRR-supported capacity-building activities vary geographically; therefore, we should
                              also consider regional differences in the ways in which GFDRR has been investing. From
                              an initial stocktake of GFDRR efforts, some counter-intuitive lessons emerge. For instance,
                              while in FY14 and FY15 there were large budget projects in MENA, over 66 percent of
                              MENA projects had at least a quarter of their budget dedicated to capacity building. With
                              approximately 11 percent of projects dedicating 50 percent or more of their budget to
                              capacity building, MENA is the third highest region behind ECA (about 13 percent) and
                              global projects (about 14 percent).

                              Global and ECA projects have a more balanced budgetary allocation for capacity building
                              as measured by project allocation spread. The former is showing a fairly even allocation
                              between the lowest number of projects (about 14 percent dedicated to capacity building
                              over 50 percent of total budget) and the highest (approximately 31 percent dedicated to
                              capacity building between 10 and 25 percent of total budget). On the contrary, regions
                              like MENA or LCR and EAP (respectively with 49 percent and 46% of projects dedicating
                              between 10 and 25 percent of total budget to capacity building) all show specific investment
                              focuses in the type of projects put in place.

                              Table A4: Percentage of Budget for Capacity Building Compared with Region

                               Regions                    Percentage of Budget for Capacity-building Activities
                                              Up to 10%              10-25%                25-50%                 Over 50%
                               AFR              22.41%                37.93%               32.76%                  6.90%
                               EAP              35.90%               46.15%                15.38%                  2.56%
                               ECA              25.00%               37.50%                25.00%                  12.50%
                               GLOBAL           38.89%               30.56%                16.67%                  13.89%
                               LCR              14.29%               48.57%                31.43%                  5.71%
                               MNA              0.00%                33.33%                55.56%                  11.11%
                               SAR              33.33%               38.10%                19.05%                  9.52%
                               Total           26.64%                39.72%                25.70%                  7.94%
                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 35




ANNEX B


THE CASE STUDIES:
TAKING A DEEPER DIVE

Developing the Case Studies
Annex A reviewed the broader landscape of capacity building across the Global Facility for
Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) fiscal year 2014 and 2015 portfolio (FY14 and
FY15), this annex takes a deeper dive into ten case studies. The case studies presented
provide useful insights into the potential that capacity building holds in GFDRR supported
projects. This section does not seek to provide a comprehensive overview of all types
of GFDRR supported projects, but rather a chance for the reader to better understand
capacity building in context. To provide a diverse sample, the case studies were selected in
terms of geographical location as well as a variety of project typologies: grant size (cost),
proportion of capacity-building activities, multiple phases or single take, length, and pillar
of engagement. Task Team Leaders (TTLs) were also consulted as to which projects would
be interesting to research in more depth.
    36 / Annex B: The
         Reviewing theCase
                       impact
                           Studies:
                              of Capacity  a Deeper
                                    TakingBuilding  Dive
                                                   in GFDRR



    Central America Probabilistic Risk Assessment—
    A Case Study in Technical Capacity Building

                                  Budget                                   Capacity-building budget

                                  $1,700,000                               $44,200
                                                                                                            26%

1

                                  Duration                                 Pillar

                                  3.5
                                          years
                                                                                    Risk
                                                                                    Identification
                                  March 2013–September 2016

                                  Capacity-building activity types         Capacity-building beneficiaries
                                  n	 Knowledge products, short-term        n	 Government/public officials

                                    learning, knowledge exchange           n	 Professionals/technicians




    Summary



                                  n	 The presence of a knowledge manager, a role not frequently included in
                                      GFDRR funded projects, was crucial to integrating key lessons learned into the
                                      project design.

                                  n	 When possible, involving Disaster Risk Management (DRM) champions from
                                      the beginning of the project was critical in disseminating risk assessment
                                      results to decision-makers.

                                  n	 A community of practice coordinator could ensure long-term sustainability of
                                      knowledge networks.
                                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 37


Description
DRM has begun to emerge as a priority for many national governments in Latin America.
However, mainstreaming DRM into development policies and programs remains a challenge.
In response, in 2008, several trust funds financed through GFDRR and the Spanish Fund
for Latin America and the Caribbean (SFLAC) supported the development of the Central
America Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA) Program. The CAPRA initiative started as
a partnership between the Center for Coordination of Natural Disaster Prevention in Central
America (CEPREDENAC), the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UNISDR), the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), and The World Bank. The main
objective of CAPRA was to provide countries in Central America with an online disaster risk
assessment platform to help understand and quantify disaster risk. Training on how to use the
platform was provided to government officials and DRM experts.

The CAPRA initiative was an eight-and-a-half-year program that recently came to an end. The
project was rolled out in three phases. The first phase (2008-2010) focused on creating the
software platform and generating disaster risk information for six Central American countries.
The second phase (2010-2013) shifted focus to building institutional capacity by engaging
governments as owners of the risk analysis process and results. This was then operationalized
through Technical Assistance Projects (TAPs) for targeted government agencies. Additionally,
during this phase the program was extended to several South American countries. In phases
one and two, the World Bank played a leading role in both the development of the software and
the generation of the risk assessments. In the third and final phase (2013-2016), with funding
from The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) through GFDRR, and a
recipient-executed trust fund from SFLAC to CEPREDENAC, five TAPS were implemented. In
this phase the CAPRA initiative refocused in Central America. CEPREDENAC was responsible
for coordinating the TAPs in Panama, Guatemala, Nicaragua and El Salvador. The World Bank’s
role was limited to providing training and technical assistance to local teams. The TAPs in El
Salvador and Nicaragua will be the focus of this case study.


Problem Addressed
Both Nicaragua and El Salvador are active members of CEPREDENAC, an inter-governmental
network established to strengthen disaster prevention and preparedness at a regional level.
Nicaragua is considered a DRM leader in Central America due to its legal framework that takes
a comprehensive and multi-sectoral approach to DRM. El Salvador also has a comprehensive
legal and institutional structure for DRM. However, both countries have the challenge of
generating, refining, and interpreting disaster risk information that can be integrated into
policies and programs within changing built, socio-economic, and natural environments.


Proposed Activities and Outputs7
In order to support governments in overcoming this challenge, the CAPRA program was
developed. The CAPRA program uses a modular, free platform for probabilistic risk assessment
of natural hazards. Specific areas requiring disaster risk information were identified based
on the priorities of the requesting government institution. For Nicaragua, a seismic risk

	 A similar approach to El Salvador and Nicaragua was adopted across all phase three TAP projects.
7
38 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR




                                             Knowledge Management



   T
          he World Bank knowledge manager role, a role not frequently included within GFDRR-funded projects,
          was crucial to the success of the project and fulfilled responsibilities that the TTL did not have capacity
          to undertake. The knowledge manager was responsible for interviewing the trainees and reporting back
    on recommendations and lessons learned for integration into the project design. Having a knowledge manager
    to review progress and effectiveness was particularly important given the geographical and temporal scale of
    this project. Throughout the project, lessons learned were integrated, significantly shifting the course of the
    CAPRA initiative. Major shifts included the reduction of the World Bank’s involvement in developing the risk
    assessments, as well as adjusting the structure of the TAPs to have a more flexible approach.




                              model focusing on the health, education, and housing sectors in Managua was proposed. The
                              local TAP team included members from the National System for Prevention, Mitigation and
                              Disaster Response (SINAPRED) and the National Institute of Territorial Studies (INETER). For
                              El Salvador, a seismic risk model was proposed for the metropolitan area of San Salvador,
                              city of Santa Tecla. The local TAP team included the Ministry of Environmental and Natural
                              Resources (MARN), the Ministry of Public Works (MOP), and the University of El Salvador.

                              The TAPs were composed of a series of technical capacity-building activities that included:
                              training courses on CAPRA software, regional workshops for knowledge exchange, and a
                              final workshop to disseminate the results achieved. The desired outcomes of these activities
                              were: build institutional capacity to conduct risk analysis, and improve risk understanding
                              for decision-making in order to develop risk reduction programs, and lastly build a regional
                              community of practice (CoP) of experts in disaster risk assessments hosted on the online
                              CAPRA platform.


                              Capacity Building Shaping the Project
                              Core workshops on how to use CAPRA software were provided for the TAP teams. These were
                              then supplemented by webinars, and if further help was needed in a particular area, additional
                              targeted training was provided by World Bank consultants. For example, the Nicaragua team
                              was given supplementary technical training for generating vulnerability curves after the core
                              training sessions. This flexible approach to project management and learning was adopted
                              to account for differing capacity levels of participants – a lesson learned from phase two of
                              CAPRA and integrated into phase three TAPs. Furthermore, this signals a shift from bank-led
                              TAPs to a format guided more by local institutions and universities.

                              However, the Professor of Civil Engineering, responsible for leading the creation of the
                              risk maps in El Salvador, argued that the core training was not sufficient for understanding
                              how to use the CAPRA software and how to run and interpret risk assessments. Rather,
                              he maintained that the World Bank consultants were not always available to address
                              questions from the team and, given the complexity of concepts and tools, the consultants
                              should have been more accessible to provide supplemental training. The University of El
                              Salvador team consequently sought support from technical experts from international
                                                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 39


academic institutions. In the absence of effective monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for
capacity-building activities, this could be a reflection of a broader accessibility issue,
but could also be a ‘false negative’ emerging from an individual experience – thus further
reinforcing the need for M&E mechanisms to appreciate the real value, or limitations, of
capacity building in the field. The idea behind a reduction in World Bank involvement was
to encourage ownership, sustainability, and institutional capacity building. El Salvador’s
experience, including collaboration with international academic institutions, can also be
seen as contributing to local ownership of the learning process and project outputs by
reducing the team’s dependence on technical assistance; however, based upon the feedback
from the Professor at the University of El Salvador, and lacking any other clear M&E data,
ownership needs to be balanced with providing the necessary amount of technical support
to participants.

The TAP in El Salvador was one of the most effective in building technical risk analysis
capacity, largely due to the involvement of the University of El Salvador in the TAP
team alongside members from the Ministries. The university already had the theoretical
knowledge and expertise necessary for launching the workshops. Conversely, Nicaragua
did not have involvement of an academic institution and lacked available human resources
from government agencies. Therefore, the risk map was of a lower quality and the team
were unable to take full advantage of capacity-building activities.

The involvement of universities can help bridge capacity gaps by building a platform of
local expertise connected to the government. For example, at the University of El Salvador
engineering postgraduate students collaborated with teams to collect data for risk
modelling and were involved in the data analysis. This extended expertise beyond TAP
participants. Furthermore, the Technological University of Panama (UTP) has established a
diploma course in the CAPRA methodology in order to grow the pool of local expertise and
contribute to the legacy of the initiative.

Three regional workshops took place in Managua, Guatemala City, and San Salvador during
2014 and 2015. The first focused on developing vulnerability curves, the second discussed
how to run the risk analysis, and the third ran creative sessions on how to communicate
to non-technical audiences and provide visibility to the technical output of risk modelling.
This creative session used role-playing exercises where World Bank consultants played
the role of different ministries and had the teams presented the technical outputs of their
models. After this session, there were significant improvements in the participants’ ability
to pass on technical knowledge more effectively to decision-makers. These three workshops
supported the learning process of the TAP teams by enabling peer-to-peer knowledge
exchange and development a regional CoP. For example, the team in Guatemala, that was
just starting to engage with the CAPRA project, was able to learn from teams further along
in the learning process, particularly the team in El Salvador. In addition, the presence of
World Bank consultants at the regional workshops provided a crucial source of technical
expertise.

To ensure that a connection was made between the TAP results and decision-making
processes, when possible, ministries were involved throughout the implementation of the
TAP. Ideally, meetings were held with different ministries at the outset to help form the local
TAP teams. Involving technical participants from ministries early made it easier to explain
40 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                              findings and discuss the methodological process in later stages. At the end of each TAP,
                              there was a presentation of results to relevant ministries. This strategy created champions
                              of the CAPRA process within government ministries and increased government trust in the
                              outputs. In El Salvador, for example, participants from the Ministry of Environmental and
                              Natural Resources (MARN) were actively involved in promoting CAPRA results within their
                              own and other ministries.

                              The CAPRA online platform provided a means of consolidating and sharing knowledge
                              products created throughout the eight-and-a-half-year engagement, and an important
                              virtual space where TAP teams could communicate.


                              The Legacy of Capacity Building
                              Building upon the TAP process, the World Bank, supported by GFDRR financing, provided
                              a number of client countries with technical assistance to develop sector-specific risk
                              reduction programs. For example, in El Salvador, a Safer Schools project took advantage of
                              the data and expertise developed through previous TAPs and worked with the local team
                              (The Ministry of Education and MARN) to develop a detailed seismic risk assessment of the
                              entire school infrastructure.
                              The regional workshops and online platform were intended to strengthen partnerships and
                              support the creation of a formal CAPRA web-based Community of Practice (CoP). Despite
                              these intentions, only an informal CoP around CAPRA emerged and interactions have
                              reduced over time. A CoP manager likely could have ensured long-term sustainability of
                              knowledge networks. It was hoped that CEPREDENAC would take this role, however, they
                              were unable to due to internal restructuring. The online platform ECAPRA is due to be taken
                              offline since the project has concluded. For the legacy of the project to live on, its tools
                              and modules need to remain available. The CAPRA team recently launched an Open Call
                              for Expression of Interest for transferring the CAPRA website to an institution interested
                              in hosting the site and maintaining the CAPRA community. The objective is to keep the
                              website and all the current content open and freely available. These resources, even if they
                              are static, are essential to building sustained capacity.


                              Leveraging
                              The World Bank, with financial support from GFDRR, is financing a project in El Salvador that
                              will use CAPRA data to assess the risk exposure of the country’s education infrastructure.
                              The main partners are the Ministry of Education and MARN. In addition, a TAP in Peru, from
                              phase 2 of CAPRA, which assessed the seismic risk of schools across the Metropolitan Area
                              of Lima and Callao, created interest amongst the Ministry of Education. This led them to
                              request support from the World Bank to conduct a national disaster risk assessment of all
                              school infrastructure, develop the National School Infrastructure Plan, and create a Seismic
                              Retrofitting Program.
                                                  Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 41



    South-South Knowledge Exchange—Building
    Women’s Leadership in DRM

               Budget                                       Budget break down not

               $330,000
                                                            provided in
           2
                                                            project documents
2

               Duration                                     Pillars

               3.5
                       years

               January 2010–June 2013

               Capacity-building activity types             Capacity-building beneficiaries
               n	 Knowledge exchange/                       n	Citizens/communities

                 partnership development,                   n	 Government/public officials

                 short-term learning                        n	 Civil society organizations




     Summary

               n	 The sustainability of community capacity building projects can be enhanced
                   by working with and through existing community organizations and networks.

               n	 Peer-to-peer learning networks and a “training of trainers” approach were
                   key to accelerating and scaling up capacity building and resilience initiatives.

               n	 Local organizations can be highly effective in leveraging funds for further
                   resources.
42 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                              Description
                              In 2010, the Building Women’s Leadership and Fostering Collaborations toward Community
                              Disaster Resilience project was launched by GFDRR, the World Bank, and Grassroots
                              Organizations Operating Together in Sisterhood (GROOTs). The project was implemented
                              in high-risk regions of India (by Swayam Shikshan Prayog), in Guatemala (by Fundación
                              Guatemala), and in Honduras (by WAGUCHA). This project was a standalone capacity
                              building project and sought to support women from resource-poor communities in their
                              efforts to shape disaster resilience agendas and practices on the ground. The initiative
                              allowed Grassroots Women’s Organizations (GWOs) to demonstrate their skills as builders
                              of community resilience, helping them to engage in effective partnership with local and
                              national government to innovate and scale up locally led DRM initiatives. A key component
                              of this project was the creation of knowledge exchange platforms between policy makers
                              and practitioners, both within and across the three countries. This case study focuses upon
                              building capacity among local communities, specifically GWOs. Although the initiative
                              spread across three countries, the main focus will be upon activities undertaken in India.


                              Problem Addressed
                              Across the three countries, two common gaps in current government DRM practices were
                              identified:

                              n	 The prevailing tendency to conflate DRM with emergency preparedness and response
                                 measures, which fail to address the long-term vulnerabilities embedded in poverty;
                              n	 The failure to recognize or facilitate innovative community resilience strategies, often
                                 led by women’s groups, and their proactive leadership amongst local communities.


                              Proposed Activities and Outcomes
                              The overarching goal of the project was the facilitation of women’s leadership and forging
                              of partnerships to drive the demand for the implementation of locally-driven resilience
                              practices, which reduce community vulnerability. A series of core activities were
                              implemented through local civil society organizations (CSO), the activities were adapted to
                              the context of the respective countries. The core activities included:

                              n	 The training of GWOs and local authorities in disaster risk mapping in order to develop
                                 local resilience plans;
                              n	 Providing financing for, and scaling up of, a Community Resilience Fund (CDRF),
                                 established in 2008, to give seed funding to GWOs to demonstrate community
                                 resilience practices;11
                              n	 Facilitation of relationships with GWOs and government institutions through activities
                                 such as workshops and information fairs; and
                              n	 The development of local, national, and international knowledge sharing platforms.




                               	 In 2008, ProVention Consortium supported SSP in partnership with Huairou Commission and National Alliance
                              11

                                 for Disaster Risk Reduction (NADRR) India to create the CDRF. The pilot initiative took place in high-risk areas of
                                 eight states across India – it was coordinated by SSP and CSO and was endorsed by the Indian National Disaster
                                 Management Authority (NDMA).
                                                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 43


The project built upon the idea that if GWOs were provided with knowledge and financial
resources, this would give them the confidence and legitimacy to leverage newly-built
partnerships with government institutions, and to advocate for scaling up and integrating
community resilience practices in local, national and regional DRM plans.


Capacity Building Shaping the Project
The GROOTS network member Swayam Shikshan Prayog (SSP) along with three supporting
CSOs, were responsible for project implementation in India. SSP and the other CSOs had
previously worked with and helped to form GWOs as their basic building blocks of project
implementation. These pre-existing networks were utilized as the organizational structure
for this project. Over the three-year project time frame, SSP and its local partners worked
with 350 GWOs across their network, spread across 70 villages. Fifteen hundred women
were trained to become community resilience leaders.

The first phase of the project included the training of GWOs, alongside representatives from
local authorities, to conduct risk and vulnerability mapping. The outputs of these interactive
exercises included the creation of 70 village maps and community-led resilience plans. This
project was centred upon the belief that local communities that live in hazardous regions
hold existing capacity and local knowledge in disaster resilience practices. As a result, the
disaster risk maps and subsequent planning documents built upon community resilience
practices and existing social networks.

Through the disaster risk mapping exercise, women were organized and trained to
analyze the root causes contributing to their vulnerability to natural hazards and climate
change. This was a foundational step towards identifying concrete actions that GWOs, in
collaboration with local authorities, could undertake to increase community resilience. The
Executive Director of SSP noted that it was important to include local authorities from
the beginning in the mapping and then planning process. In Guatemala and Honduras, the
same approach was adopted.

The CDRF provided GWOs with an opportunity to operationalize concrete solutions for
strengthening ecosystem management and reducing the impact of disasters on their
livelihoods. In India, over the three years, grants totalling close to $51,000 were distributed
to 50 community-driven models of disaster resilience. This acted as seed funding for GWOs
to experiment and demonstrate simple yet effective ideas, including the development of
seedbanks, vegetable cultivation for food security, and re-forestation. Because the funds
were modest, it encouraged GWOs to negotiate, match, and leverage resources from
government schemes.

An important component of this project was facilitating relationships between the GWOs
and local and state government institutions. In these resource-poor communities, the
efforts of GWOs to build community resilience would not be sustained without long-term
partnerships with local, district, or state governments. SSP and the supporting CSOs
facilitated this relationship through workshops, including on collaborative risk mapping.
However, there were two key obstacles to overcome in building these partnerships. First,
women were considered inexperienced by government agencies resulting in resistance
to women-led initiatives. Second, it was difficult to shift the government’s mind-set from
disaster response to risk reduction and resilience. These obstacles were countered through:
44 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                             involving local government officials from the outset, starting with the risk mapping; the
                             demonstration of women’s leadership skills through their CDRF projects; coverage of the
                             women’s innovative projects in the media to generate public support.

                             These measures were ultimately successful. During the project timeline, the increase in local
                             partnership between GWOs and local government at the district and local levels unlocked
                             resources from 20 government development schemes to fortify community resilience efforts.
                             In addition, the GWOs persuaded state technical institutes and universities to provide
                             specialized training to support their initiatives.12 These training linkages ensured that more
                             than 750 rural women gained skills related to sustainable agriculture, nutrition, sanitation,
                             and primary healthcare. Furthermore, successful rounds of negotiation between GWOs and
                             local government bodies led to the formation of six disaster task forces that were linked
                             with the District Disaster Management Authorities for relief, and other disaster management
                             activities. Women resilience leaders received public acknowledgement for their roles as
                             information providers and conduits between communities and government.

                             There was also a “training of trainers” component to the project, which spread the impact of
                             the capacity-building activities. In collaboration with SSP and supporting CSOs, the women-
                             led disaster task forces developed a dedicated training manual and provided peer-to-peer
                             training at village, district, and block levels. In a three-year period, they trained a further
                             900 women.

                             An innovative way of enabling knowledge exchange was the creation of model villages,
                             which were “live classrooms” for learning. Fifteen to 20 villages, that had effectively
                             demonstrated community resilience practices and succeeded in leveraging funding to scale
                             their projects, were identified as model villages. Selected GWOs members travelled to these
                             model villages, “their purpose was to serve as laboratories for learning and replication of
                             community resilience strategies.”13

                             Peer learning networks acted as dialogue platforms and were key to accelerating and
                             scaling up resilience initiatives. Learning exchanges were organized at local to national
                             level in Guatemala, Honduras, and India. Peer learning was focused on adaptive agriculture
                             practices, sustainable livelihood initiatives, disaster task force, and preparedness by
                             grassroots communities, and local partnerships to strengthen resilience initiatives.



                             The Legacy of Capacity Building
                             Although creating systemic changes and building partnerships is a long-term process, “the
                             project, in a short three-year period, built new paradigms and triggered behavior change for
                             local women resilience leaders.”14 The women who participated in the initial training, roll-
                             out training, and subsequent initiatives have continued their roles as community leaders
                             in DRM. In India, three years after project completion, GWOs continue to work with local
                             authorities in order to scale up their community resilience initiatives, and peer-to-peer

                             12
                               	 These were poverty alleviation and employment guarantee and entitlement schemes, not specifically allotted to the
                                  local disaster agendas and disaster management offices of districts.
                             13
                               	 Manisha Gupta (2013) Building Women’s Leadership and Fostering Collaborations for Community Disaster Resilience:
                                  Process Innovations and Case Studies from India, p. 22. http://disasterwatch.net/resources/WB-SSP-resilience-
                                  report2013.pdf
                             14
                                	 Ibid, p. 6.
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 45




    Certification of Grassroots Women as Disaster Risk Reduction and Development Practitioners
                                           in Guatemala



   I
        n Guatemala, a different partnership framework was developed between the GWOs and government
        institutions. Impressed by the women’s groups who had created local risk maps and resilience plans, the
        National Coordinator for Disaster Reduction in Guatemala (CONRED), supported by Fundación Guatemala,
    supplemented these efforts by training seven GWOs in disaster preparedness, prevention recovery, and
    emergency response. The women were then certified as local development agents for Disaster Risk Reduction. As
    a result, the women have been recognized as local leaders in disaster resilience and response. For example, they
    have access to CONRED information, allowing them to prepare their communities when a disaster is predicted.
    Furthermore, their traditional and technical knowledge is acknowledged by CONRED, and is used to inform the
    incorporation of community interventions into the Disaster Risk Reduction National Policy.

    The GWOs worked with Fundación Guatemala to create a certification training curriculum. The “training of
    trainer” approach has resulted in approximately 200 women being certified in Guatemala. Additionally, through
    coordination with the Central American Center for Natural Disaster Prevention, this model of certification
    has spread beyond national boundaries to Honduras and Nicaragua, and is now also being considered by the
    government of Panama, India and Nepal.




training sessions are still occurring. Part of this legacy can be attributed to the continuing
role played by GROOTS members, and, in the case of India, to SSP. This highlights the
value of conducting capacity building projects with existing community organizations and
networks. The women were able to achieve more sustainable outcomes and project legacy
due to their established community networks.

Furthermore, selected GWO leaders, whose participation was funded by GFRR, presented
their work at Grassroots Academies at the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction in
2011 and 2013. This was an opportunity to convene grassroots community experts to share
practices and lessons learned. Local authorities and national government members also
participated in these international knowledge exchanges.


Leveraging
This project support formalized sub-granting funds to create numerous Women’s Federation
Managed Community Resilience Funds in Guatemala, Honduras, and India. These community
financial mechanisms have grown and continued to run successfully, entirely managed by
Women’s Federations, to support grassroots innovations for resilience practices. GROOTS
International and the Huairou Commission have created operational guidelines globally for
the CDRF and training programs for managers and monitoring systems. The CDRF is now
working to build capacity in community resilience in 25 countries.
    46 / Annex B: The
         Reviewing theCase
                       impact
                           Studies:
                              of Capacity  a Deeper
                                    TakingBuilding  Dive
                                                   in GFDRR



    Peru Safer Schools—A Case Study of Learning from
    Other Projects

                                  Budget                                     Capacity-building budget

                                  $14,000,000                                $3,500,000                              25%

3
                                  Duration                                   Pillars

                                  2
                                     years

                                  October 2014–December 2016

                                  Capacity-building activity types           Capacity-building beneficiaries
                                  n	 Short-term learning, knowledge          n	 Government/public officials

                                    exchange/partnership building            n	Professionals/technicians




      Summary

                                  n	 Part of this project’s success can be attributed to the learnings gleaned from
                                      other projects.

                                  n	 Capacity building is effective when it is linked to an existing institutional
                                      process and integrated into existing networks.

                                  n	 When creating new plans and tools, assess what knowledge is needed and
                                      how existing expertise can be strategically incorporated to support the
                                      process. Capacity building is improved when the process is based on quality,
                                      relevant information and technology.
                                                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 47


Description
As part of a long-standing collaboration, GFDRR and the World Bank have been working with
the Government of Peru to strengthen the country’s technical and institutional capacity for
assessing and understanding disaster risk, and integrating risk-related data into decision-
making processes. From 2010 to 2013, the Geophysical Institute of Peru, in partnership
with the World Bank, developed new national-level seismic probabilistic hazard maps and
models using the Probabilistic Risk Assessment Program (CAPRA), a free resource for risk
analysis and decision-making. The results from the assessment demonstrated that only
approximately 8 percent of school buildings in the cities of Lima and Callao complied with
seismic-resistant design standards, and raised awareness regarding the risk of structural
failure of school buildings in the event of an earthquake. In 2013 and 2014 the Ministry
of Education (MINEDU) conducted the first nationwide School Infrastructure Census of an
estimated 50,000 public school facilities to evaluate their current structural and functional
condition. Nearly 65 percent of Peru’s public schools are located in rural areas, where the
large majority of schools are built with adobe or other artisanal materials and often do not
meet structural standards or building regulations).

The results from the census highlighted the magnitude of existing school infrastructure
challenges, which the government will need to address. MINEDU requested technical
assistance from the World Bank to support them in the formulation of the first National
Plan for School Infrastructure (NPSI). In addition, part of the technical assistance activities
support the development of a Seismic Retrofitting Program (SRP) for school infrastructure.
With financing from the GFDRR grant, the World Bank is able to provide support to MINEDU
in mainstreaming DRM throughout the lifecycle of Peru’s national school infrastructure.


Problem Addressed
MINEDU faces the challenge of defining an articulated intervention strategy that addresses
both short-term infrastructure needs, as well as medium- and long-term measures for better
planning, efficiency, and sustainability of school infrastructure.


Proposed Activities and Outputs
To address these challenges, National Plan for School Infrastructure was proposed to guide
the construction, rehabilitation, replacement, improvement, and maintenance of school
infrastructure nationwide, as well as help to prioritize the required public investments that
will be needed to implement this plan. This plan includes a seismic risk assessment of public
school infrastructure at the national level, which builds on the seismic risk assessment for
the Lima Metropolitan area, completed in 2014, as part of another World Bank technical
assistance activity.

In addition, the proposed SRP included the following components: (i) a proposal for the
National Building Regulation to incorporate Incremental Retrofitting to school infrastructure;
and (ii) A proposal for a Methodology of Structural and Functional Visual Inspection of
public school infrastructure.

The project also aimed to build the capacity of MINEDU. The main capacity element of the
project proposal included a series of workshops. These aimed to provide support to MINEDU
48 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                             for developing an increased understanding of the sectors’ infrastructure challenges and the
                             methods that could be employed to integrate risk information into their decision processes.

                             Another aim of the project was fostering, maintaining, and building knowledge partnerships
                             between MINEDU and seismic experts. This was to be operationalized through contracting
                             a team of engineers from the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru (PUCP) and the Japan-
                             Peru Center for Earthquake Engineering Research and Disaster Mitigation (CISMID) of the
                             National University of Engineering of Peru to develop retrofitting solutions for the SRP and
                             to promote knowledge exchange throughout the implementation of the project. In addition,
                             the Japanese International Cooperation Agency was engaged to provide expertise in seismic
                             retrofitting techniques.

                             In the medium and long term, the project is expected to contribute to the reduction of
                             existing risks by informing and guiding the retrofitting and construction of over 30,000
                             Peruvian schools.


                             Capacity Building Shaping the Project
                             A team of World Bank consultants was hired to review the National School Infrastructure
                             Census and support MINEDU in developing the NPSI. This was done in collaboration with
                             General Directorate for School Infrastructure, National Program for School Infrastructure,
                             and the Secretariat for Strategic Planning departments within MINEDU. The participation of
                             key stakeholders and relevant agencies in the formulation of the NPSI was critical in order
                             for the government to have ownership of the technical reports that helped inform the plan.

                             The following workshops have been conducted with MINEDU: (i) territorial planning of
                             school infrastructure (Colombia experience), (ii) management of school infrastructure
                             (Europe and Central Asia countries experience), (ii) design standards and norms for school
                             infrastructure (Brazil experience). These have been based upon lessons learned from
                             international experiences.

                             Experts from the PUCP and UNI, with support from Universidad de los Andes were
                             contracted to design innovative retrofitting solutions for the SRP. They were given the task
                             of identifying best practices and design solutions for retrofitting existing buildings. This
                             was a strategic move by World Bank specialists to build on existing expertise and develop
                             partnerships between MINEDU and the universities. The collaboration with the engineering
                             community provided MINEDU with the support and complimentary expertise necessary to
                             implement the program once it is ready. The participation of PUCP and UNI also gave them
                             the opportunity to contribute to the safer schools’ agenda to make school facilities and the
                             communities they serve more resilient to natural hazards. A team of renowned engineering
                             professors at both institutions have led the research for the SRP, and engineering students
                             within the faculty also gained exposure to the project. It is expected that this will feed into
                             student theses and future academic research. Such engagement with universities can be a
                             way of building local DRM expertise. Meetings between MINEDU and the universities have
                             fostered a working partnership and created a space for collaboration. The project manager
                             is confident that this will lead to future collaborations.

                             The partnership between the World Bank and the Government of Japan has been timely and
                             key to this project. The PUCP and UNI benefited from the provision of Japanese expertise
                                                                Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 49


in retrofitting techniques. This knowledge exchange was coordinated through JICA.
Documents such as ‘Learning from Mega disasters’ were provided and shared at committee
meetings. The project manager noted that capacity building is contingent upon the quality
of information available and the provision of expert knowledge by JICA was very useful in
this project. However, it is important to note that when presented to the MINEDU engineers
and architects, the information was too technical and beyond their capacity.

The project is ongoing and there are plans for a study tour to Japan for MINEDU officials
to deepen their understanding of implementing a sound risk-informed sector strategy if
additional funds are available.


The legacy of capacity building
Integrating capacity building into the process of developing the NPSI and SRP is having
a tangible impact on fostering long-term DRM networks in Peru. Building on existing
expertise through participatory engagement has consolidated the capacity and knowledge
built through prior initiatives in Peru and should sustain future engagement by GFDRR.


Leveraging
The NPSI is in its final stages of development and the MoE is committed to supporting its
implementation.
    50 / Annex B: The
         Reviewing theCase
                       impact
                           Studies:
                              of Capacity  a Deeper
                                    TakingBuilding  Dive
                                                   in GFDRR



    Haiti—A case of Facilitating Coordinated Policy
    Dialogue

                                  Budget                                      Capacity-building budget

4                                 $450,000                                    $112,500                          25%


                                  Duration                                    Pillar

                                  3
                                     years

                                  August 2012–June 2015

                                  Capacity-building activity types            Capacity-building beneficiaries
                                  n	 Knowledge products,                      n	 Government/public officials

                                    consultation with stakeholders            n	 Professionals/technicians

                                                                              n	 Civil society organizations




      Summary

                                  n	 DRM policy dialogues were enabled through the establishment of two forums,
                                      one technical and donor working group, and another multi-stakeholder group
                                      chaired by the Government of Haiti (co-chaired by Ministry of Planning and
                                      Ministry of Interior and Local Authorities).

                                  n	 The DRM specialist funded by this grant was able to successfully leverage
                                      the World Bank’s convening power to facilitate coordination between line
                                      ministries and international donors and partners.

                                  n	 Raising awareness amongst other World Bank practices about the importance
                                      of integrating DRM into their projects has provided leverage to expand the
                                      World Bank’s post-disaster portfolio.
                                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 51


Description
According to the World Bank’s Natural Disaster Hotspot study, Haiti has one of the highest
exposures to multiple natural hazards. The physical vulnerability of the population is
exacerbated by extreme poverty, urbanization, and an unregulated construction sector.
Furthermore, political instability has weakened institutions and governance mechanisms
including the National Disaster Risk Management System (SNGRD).

This GFDRR grant is framed within a wider International Development Association (IDA)
funded Disaster Risk Management and Reconstruction project. The wider project aims to
facilitate a coordinated response by providing strategic and institutional support to the
Government of Haiti’s (GoH) national DRM system, supporting disaster preparedness and
community response and the rehabilitation of the critical transport infrastructure. This
grant, alongside two other GFDRR grants, worked towards the first component, supporting
Haiti’s national DRM system.8


Problem Addressed
Haiti faces institutional and governance challenges in preventing and responding to
natural disasters. The SNGRD has no legislative authority or assigned budget to support
its activities, and most line ministries do not have the legal mandate, strategic framework,
or technical capacity to effectively fulfil their DRM roles and responsibilities. Furthermore,
a lack of inter-ministerial cooperation is a significant challenge. National and sub-national
risk reduction activities rely heavily on human and international financial resources from
various donors and are often implemented by the United Nations (UN) and international
non-governmental organizations (INGOs). The country is in great need of assistance for
developing its DRM system and legislative framework.


Proposed Activities and Outcomes
The main objective of this grant was to strengthen the GoH’s institutional capacity to
mainstream DRM through improved in-country dialogue and strengthened donor cooperation.
The grant co-funded a World Bank DRM specialist to be based in Port-au-Prince for three
years. The specialist was tasked with supporting inter-ministerial dialogue and external
donor coordination. The first activity proposed under this grant was the establishment
of two working groups—one donor working group and another multi-stakeholder working
group chaired by GoH.

These activities were proposed in order to support two other interconnected GFDRR grants.
The first of these grants was created to provide technical assistance to GoH on a DRM legal
framework, revising the national DRM plan, and creating a monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
system to track progress. The grant in this case study aimed to support these activities
by coordinating multi-stakeholder dialogue and building a consensus for action through
the two working groups. The second of these grants aimed to provide country-based
technical assistance to introduce a DRM approach in select line ministries and government
agencies. The grant in this case study aimed to support these activities by facilitating inter-

	 This grant has closed, yet the two other GFDRR supported grants are still active. The amounts stated in the project
8

  grant and text in this section refer only to this grant that has now closed.
52 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                              ministerial dialogue. The project proposal included developing knowledge notes to capture
                              the experience of mainstreaming DRM into sector policies and investments.


                              Capacity Building Shaping the Project
                              All of the components of this project were capacity-building activities, contributing to
                              fostering partnerships, improving consensus, and facilitating a coordinated response.

                              First, two working groups were launched and subsequently supported for the three-year
                              project duration. The first working group established was a DRM technical and donor working
                              group. This platform was a space where external funding outside of the government budget
                              was discussed. In order to ensure participation and encourage sustainability a rotating
                              chair model was formed, starting with the World Bank, followed by the European Union
                              (EU), United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and so on. The second
                              working group created was the multi-stakeholder GoH chaired working group. This group
“This grant enabled           included the general directors of line ministries, international partners, donors, private
                              sector representatives and academics. These working groups were critical for facilitating
the delivery of better
                              the coordinated response necessary to support the GFDRR grants, a number of activities
results in World              under the wider IDA grant as well as other donor initiatives. Furthermore, the donor and
                              technical working group also strengthened World Bank relationships with other donors in
Bank operations as
                              Haiti.
it helped to build
                              With regards to the GFDRR grants, under the first one, UNDP was responsible for providing
institutional capacity        support to SNGRD in creating a legal framework, revising the DRM plan, and developing an
                              M&E system. To begin the process of building multi-stakeholder consensus around these
and cooperation.”
                              deliverables, the World Bank DRM specialist facilitated discussion around developing a
                              coordinated DRM strategy, as a result a common advocacy note was created outlining the
Task Team Leader (TTL)        DRM challenges and opportunities. Following this setting of a joint agenda, the working
                              groups discussed how to revise the National Plan and create a legal framework. As a result
                              of these discussions an agreement was effectively reached on the changes to be made;
                              however, implementing these actions has not yet been possible due to postponed elections.

                              The second GFDRR grant provided technical assistance in order to introduce DRM
                              approaches into the housing and urban development, education, and health sectors. Many
                              of the proposed activities required inter-ministerial cooperation. For example, in order for
                              the Ministry of Health to validate and disseminate guidelines for disaster resilient health
                              infrastructure, the guidelines needed to be officially approved by the Ministry of Public
                              Works as an annex to the Haitian Building Code. The TTL noted the challenge of working
                              in a context of low institutional capacity with little inter-ministerial cooperation. The DRM
                              specialist funded by this grant played an instrumental role in supporting coordination
                              across line ministries. This included organizing and coordinating daily inter-ministerial
                              meetings. As a result of previous projects, the World Bank has good relationships with
                              many ministries, including the Public Works and the Health Sector involved in this project.
                              The DRM specialist was able to successfully leverage the World Bank’s convening power
                              to facilitate coordination between these ministries, bringing them together to work on
                              building codes and standards.

                              In order to capture the knowledge learned in mainstreaming DRM into different line
                              ministries, knowledge notes were created. These have recently been peer reviewed at the
                                                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 53


World Bank and are soon to be presented at the GoH chaired working group. The TTL noted
that this working group is an effective platform to discuss DRM with different line ministries.


The Legacy of Capacity Building
This project created two platforms which facilitated the multi-stakeholder dialogue and
coordination necessary for creating a stronger system for DRM in Haiti. Although meeting
less frequently, both working groups are still functioning and supporting DRM initiatives -
those supported by GFDRR and beyond. The working groups can run at a low cost and are
proving to be self-sustainable. One of the reasons for the reduced frequency of the GoH
chaired working group meetings is a result of political fragility rather than the organizational
design.

With regards to the inter-ministerial dialogues facilitated, since the DRM specialist has left
Porte-au-Prince the amount of dialogue has scaled down. The TTL noted the challenge of
building inter-ministerial relationships. The knowledge notes are a means of capturing and
re-applying the knowledge learned through this process.

Another forthcoming component of the IDA grant includes the provision of technical
assistance to strengthen national capacity to conduct risk assessments and collect risk
data. The GoH chaired working group helped to initiate interest amongst ministry general
directors for these next steps.


Leveraging
The TTL noted that having a DRM specialist on the ground was critical to raising awareness
amongst other World Bank practices about the importance of integrating DRM into their
projects. Subsequent IDA funded projects have integrated resilience considerations in
project implementation.
54 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR



Malawi Post-disaster Needs Assessment and
Recovery Framework—A Case Study of A Sustained
Capacity Building Engagement

                              Budget                                     Capacity-building budget

                              $370,000                                   $225,700                          61%


           5
                              Duration                                   Pillar

                              1.5
                                     years

                              February 2015–July 2016

                              Capacity-building activity types           Capacity-building beneficiaries
                              n	 Short-term learning                     n	 Government/public officials

                                                                         n	 Civil society organizations




Summary

                              n	 This case study highlights the effectiveness of sustained interventions, which
                                  progressively build capacity.

                              n	 The development of a multi-stakeholder network, including non-governmental
                                  organizations (NGOs) and international institutions was crucial to the
                                  sustainability of capacity building.

                              n	 DRM champions were identified and proved to be key actors in carrying
                                  forward skills and knowledge for future interventions, including
                                  dissemination to a wider audience.
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 55


Description
GFDRR has supported the Government of Malawi (GoM) in identifying and mitigating disaster
risk. In January 2015, devastating flooding resulted in 170 deaths and over 230,000 displaced
people in 15 districts across the country. The Government of Malawi, through the Department
of Disaster Management Affairs (DoDMA), requested international assistance to conduct a
post-disaster needs assessment (PDNA) and develop a Recovery Framework for prioritizing
and implementing recovery and reconstruction investments. This initiative aimed to build
on previous capacity building and was supported by GFDRR, the EU, the UN), and the World
Bank. The response effort was led by the Office of the Vice President and coordinated through
the National Disaster and Preparedness and Relief Committee (NDPRC), which included focal
points from various line ministries, NGOs and international institutions.


Problem Addressed
The GoM did not have sufficient capacity to assess and respond to one of the worst flood
events in decades in Malawi. Expertise was required in conducting a PDNA exercise and in
formulating a comprehensive response and recovery strategy.

At the time of the 2012 PDNA training, DRM specialists from the World Bank noted the ad hoc
nature of impact assessment activities in the GoM, despite an institutional DRM framework
for disaster response being established by Malawi’s Disaster Preparedness and Relief Act
(1991). The Act sets out clear lines of responsibility between relevant ministries, government
departments, and a small number of NGOs; however, these protocols were not followed during
emergency situations and during a disaster, DoDMA was largely dependent on the ad hoc
availability of individual personnel.


Proposed Activities and Outcomes
The aim of the project was to undertake a PDNA exercise in order to provide a multi-sector
assessment of the socio-economic impact of flooding in Malawi. This assessment would later
be used to develop a Recovery Framework. The combined activities proposed to identify
immediate response needs after the flood emergency and facilitate future risk reduction
through mainstreaming DRM into national policies.

Two capacity-building activities were conducted to equip and train government staff and other
stakeholders with the necessary skills to undertake the proposed activities. These included
PDNA training and support for the multi-stakeholder NDPRC, and hosting multi-stakeholder
workshops at the national and district levels in order to develop the Recovery Framework.


Capacity Building Shaping the Project
The PDNA training conducted for the 2015 flooding followed and built upon a previous GFDRR-
funded PDNA training in 2012. The foundation laid by the 2012 training was vital in shaping
the outcome of the 2015 intervention, demonstrating the importance of building on previous
capacity building.

An important component of the 2012 capacity building exercise was the development of
relevant partnerships for a multi-stakeholder post-disaster impact assessment response.
56 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                             This included conducting training that brought together 33 technical participants from 18
                             line ministries and departments, and organizations such as UNDP, Malawi Red Cross Society
                             and the Malawi Institute of Engineers. As noted by the technical consultant on the project,
                             the convening power of GFDRR was crucial in bringing stakeholders together and building
                             consensus on a unified approach. Each line ministry, department and NGO assigned a
                             focal point as an organizational lead for future impact assessments. Furthermore, specific
                             institutional mechanisms were developed. For example, the DRM specialist found that data
                             availability varied greatly across sectors so data collection guides were created for different
                             ministries. These actions contributed towards the creation of a foundation of institutional
                             capacity.

                             An advantage of conducting training in the absence of a real-time disaster event (as was done
                             in the 2012 training) is that the World Bank DRM specialists could build capacity without
                             immediate time pressure. During high-impact disaster events such as the 2015 floods, PDNA
                             training is, by necessity, an exercise of speed. The timeframe for the 2012 activities allowed
                             for a more iterative process whereby the training program could be adapted to incorporate
                             participants’ needs. For example, based on feedback collected through training evaluation
                             forms and observations, a deficit in fieldwork skills and data analysis was noted. World
                             Bank DRM specialists then organized a disaster simulation exercise based on fieldwork and
                             provided extra training on data analysis.

                             Although the foundation laid down by the 2012 capacity-building exercise was extremely
                             useful for the PDNA training in 2015, the scale of the 2015 event combined with the loss of
                             institutional capacity due to staff turnover in government departments resulted in the need for
                             further capacity building in 2015. As part of the activities of the 2015 project, the World Bank
                             sent DRM specialists to train over 75 individuals to conduct the PDNA exercise. This included
                             20 members, mostly from government departments, who had previously been involved in
                             the 2012 training and were now assigned the role of team leaders for the PDNA exercise. The
                             sector-specific guides for data collection, created in 2012, were operationalized to facilitate
                             the assessment.

                             The varied capacity of different line ministries to absorb the methodology was noted as a
                             potential risk in the project proposal. Individuals who had already taken part in the 2012
                             exercises were significantly more experienced and required considerably less supervision
                             in developing the PDNA. NGOs generally have a lower rate of staff turnover. So, to some
                             degree, the loss of institutional capacity in government departments was offset by the
                             involvement of NGOs and international institutions in the 2012 training. In this project, the
                             same NGO participants were involved in both rounds of training and were, therefore, able to
                             carry forward skills acquired during the 2012 capacity-building exercises. Institutional staff
                             turnover is a common challenge for capacity-building projects, and the engagement of cross-
                             sector organizations and experts has demonstrable impact on sustaining impact of capacity-
                             building activities.

                             The policy of the World Bank to train local stakeholders as PDNA specialists, rather than
                             conduct the exercise and deliver the results to the GoM, was also an effective capacity-building
                             strategy for adding long-term value and capacity to local systems for resilient recovery.

                             The individuals involved in the PDNA training exercises were also part of the team responsible
                             for the development of the Recovery Framework workshops. This was crucial to the
                                                                     Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 57




                              The Training of the Trainers: Internal PDNA Training



   T
         he World Bank Disaster Risk Management specialists providing training and support for the GoM had
         themselves received internal PDNA training. The bank specialists noted that these trainings were effective
         in providing necessary skills and tools for leading PDNA trainings. However, drawing from his experience
    in Malawi, a World Bank DRM specialist noted that there was limited capacity to practice effectively what had
    been learned in a fieldwork scenario before the 2015 Malawi PDNA. A key recommendation from this case was
    to enhance the process of staff capacity building, potentially by coupling recently trained World Bank staff, with
    more experienced colleagues on fieldwork missions.



effectiveness of the workshops and development of the framework as the PDNA information
provided the foundations of the framework. In this way, the teams were already familiar with
the content.

However, significant capacity still had to be built in the new skills of generating a strategy      “The team dynamic
for action and investment from this data. In order to address this deficit in capacity, two
                                                                                                    continued building
strategies were adopted by the TTL in order to make sure that the engagement was effective.
There was consistent and iterative engagement surrounding the workshops, as well as the             upon existing
provision of templates for different sections of the Recovery Framework.
                                                                                                    networks as a

The Legacy of Capacity Building                                                                     continuum.”
The legacy of the 2012 and 2015 trainings is evident. The development of the institutional
structure and the PDNA methodology taught in 2012 and operationalized in 2015 has been              Task Team Leader (TTL)
taken up at the national level. Furthermore, there is a clear link between the development of the
Recovery Framework and DoDMA’s subsequent operations and investments. This project has
further contributed to capacity building on a wider scale through knowledge sharing. Some
of the participants of the 2012 and 2015 trainings have presented the Recovery Framework as
an example of best practice at the International Recovery Forum in Japan. Furthermore, the
World Bank consultant who supported the Malawi Recovery Framework applied the lessons
learned in Malawi to other projects, such as the recovery process in Nepal, following the 2015
earthquake.


Leveraging
As noted above, there was a link between the Recovery Framework and DoDMA’s actions and
investments. This was the basis for additional funding from GFDRR to institutionalize some of
the policies and next steps recommended in the Recovery Framework.
58 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR



Resilient Cities and Women in Middle East and North
Africa—Brokering Innovation

                              Budget                                   Capacity-building budget

         6
             6
             6
                              $420,000                                 $130,200                          26%


                              Duration                                 Pillar

                              1
                                year

                              March 2014–June 2015

                              Capacity-building activity types         Capacity-building beneficiaries
                              n	 Knowledge exchange/                   n	 Citizens/communities

                                partnership development,               n	 Government/public officials

                              	 short-term learning, long-term         n	 Private sector

                                learning                               n	 Civil society organizations




Summary

                              n	 The project demonstrated the importance of “legacy thinking;” the project
                                  design considering sustainability from the beginning, while being flexible to
                                  participants’ needs.

                              n	 To deliver long-term results for DRM, repeat interaction involving the same
                                  participants and continuous and sustained capacity building efforts are
                                  effective.

                              n	 DRM capacity building can occur through supporting small-scale private
                                  enterprise.
                                                                     Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 59


Description
The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region has been affected by 388 disasters in the
past 35 years. Rapid urbanization has led to 62 percent of the population living in cities,
and increased vulnerability of people and economic assets to disaster events. In addition,
the region has the highest gender inequalities in the world. Despite progress towards gender
parity in education and health, only 21 percent of women participate in the labor market.
Socially constructed gender roles contribute to differences in the vulnerability of women and
men to disaster risks.

GFDRR and the World Bank are working together to build resilience in the MENA region. As part
of these efforts, two activities were organized. Both were designed to facilitate innovation.
First, a multi-stakeholder Resilient Cities Forum was organized, with participation from
mayors and deputy mayors from 15 cities in MENA, city representatives from Latin America,           “We are building the
the Caribbean, Europe and Central Asia, the East Asia Pacific regions, local and international
                                                                                                    knowledge capital
NGOs, and the private sector (specifically big data, technology, and risk financing companies).
Second, a Women Entrepreneurship Resilient Cities (WE’Resilient Cities) competition was             to be able to convert
organized, based in Beirut, Cairo, and Djibouti. This innovative event was the result of a strong
                                                                                                    risk in cities into job
public-private partnership between the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation,
Johnson & Johnson, Instituto Empresa Business School, the Center for Mediterranean                  creation”
Integration, the MENA Early Stage Investment Facility, and Smart Data Science.

                                                                                                    Task Team Leader (TTL)
Problem Addressed
Given the ongoing political turmoil in the region, responding to natural disasters is often a
low priority for governments, the private sector, and individuals alike. Although several MENA
countries have engaged in DRM efforts, none have established a comprehensive national DRM
framework, or integrated DRM into development plans. However, a number of regional DRM
initiatives have emerged over the last few years, mainly facilitated by intergovernmental
organizations.


Proposed Activities and Outcomes
In order to help cities in MENA increase resilience to shocks, a Resilient Cities Forum
was proposed with a goal of raising awareness and fostering regional multi-stakeholder
partnerships. This interregional and cross-regional knowledge exchange aimed to provide an
opportunity for sharing urban resilience practices from major cities around the world. The
forum was designed to bring together disparate stakeholders from government, the private
sector, civil society, and women’s groups. For example, MENA city mayors would have the
chance to share the opportunities and challenges they face in enhancing their cities’ resilience.

In addition, a pilot capacity-building initiative was proposed to encourage innovative
business solutions to urban risk, led by female-owned or run enterprises. Business support
packages to turn urban resilience efforts into scalable businesses were to be offered to three
teams chosen by the selection committee for having the best business ideas. These packages
included a financial reward of $100,000, funded by private sector partners, and one year of
mentoring after the competition. A crash course in marketing and business, run by the world-
leading Instituto Empresa Business School was planned for the twelve semi-finalists. This was
in addition to orientation workshops for discussing urban resilience and building skills, such
60 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                             as writing business proposals, for all competition entrants. To attract participants and raise
                             awareness of urban resilience to a wider audience, a digital campaign was planned.


                             Capacity Building Shaping the Project
                             The Resilient Cities Forum took place in Marseille in June 2014. The forum was effective in
                             enabling knowledge exchange and raising awareness of the importance of building urban
                             resilience. For example, city representatives from Dhaka, and the partnering consultant EMI,
                             presented the Resilient City Master Plan that is currently being implemented (see Urban
                             Resilience Bangladesh - A Case of Capacity Building Through Structured Delivery in this annex).
                             Although EMI had proposed this strategy to the mayor of Beirut in the past, the presentation
                             by Dhaka city officials, and the surrounding discussions at the forum, were critical in securing
                             Beirut’s decision to develop a Resilient City Master Plan.9 The involvement of NGOs in these
“It is important to
                             discussions was crucial for the integration of local knowledge and citizen needs to be included
integrate a broad            in city level planning.

range of actors into         The forum had a format that encouraged networking; there was discussion for approximately
                             six hours per day with remaining time being flexible for social interaction, which helped
risk management at
                             foster the development of new connections and partnerships. For example, discussions
city level, including        occurred between the Mayor of Djibouti and a big data company, and between the Mayor of
                             Beirut and a risk finance company. In order to capture the information shared and lessons
decision makers, the
                             learned for future use, knowledge notes were created after the event and disseminated to
private sector, civil        event participants digitally.
society and citizens”        The WE’Resilient Cities competition had more than 150 teams enter from Beirut, Cairo, and
                             Djibouti, with over 200 women attending the orientation workshops. Given the political
Task Team Leader (TTL)       context in these cities, the word “risk” was rarely associated with natural hazards, thus
                             presenting a communication challenge. Therefore, the project team used the language of
                             “resilient” and “safe” cities rather than “disaster risk management.” The team started a digital
                             #sheisresilient campaign to encourage the public to engage in urban resilience conversations
                             online. Although effective in reaching a large number of entrepreneurs, the TTLs thought that
                             including experts who had more experience in social media, as well as NGOs with greater
                             community links, could have helped achieve a greater impact.


                             The orientation workshop introduced participants to the concept of resilience, outlining
                             key regional resilience challenges and opportunities that can be tackled through business
                             solutions. The following crash course in marketing and business equipped the semi-finalists
                             with important skills and resources. A flexible approach in project implementation allowed
                             for greater effectiveness. For example, the project team provided resources and training to
                             facilitate video submissions, as preferred by some entrepreneurs, in addition to traditional
                             written proposals. As well as skill development, the involvement of private sector partners
                             and industry leaders in risk management was an invaluable networking opportunity for the
                             entrepreneurs to gain advice and build future connections.


                             The Legacy of Capacity Building
                             9
                              	 This Resilient City Master Plan was supported by GFDRR.
                                                                  Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 61


The development of sustained partnerships and networks was also one of the proposed
outcomes of the Resilient Cities Forum. Although there was initial interest and individual
connections, the forum did not result in sustained partnerships on a large scale. To deliver
long-term results, repeat interaction involving the same participants and continuous and
sustained capacity building efforts are needed.

The We’Resillient Cities competition, on the other hand, is an example of “legacy thinking”
integrated throughout a project. In order to ensure sustainability, workshops included
sessions on how to retain momentum beyond the competition. For the three winning
enterprises, the business packages of funding and mentorship ensured that appropriate
support was given during and after the event. In order to improve their scalability and
access to capital, these enterprises were connected to local, regional, and international
financial institutions, such as Lebanon BLC Bank and the Goldman Sachs Foundation, that
focus on promoting women’s entrepreneurship. A year after the project end date, these
social enterprises are thriving. Its success highlights the importance of including long-term
capacity building in the design and implementation stage of a project cycle.


Leveraging
Based on the success of the We’Resillient Cities competition, GFDRR plans to expand the
program to 30 other MENA cities to promote the creation of resilient start-ups. The winners
of the last competition will act as mentors and participate in training the new participants.
62 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR



Urban Resilience Bangladesh—A Case of Capacity
Building Through Structured Delivery

                              Budget                                     Capacity-building budget

                 7            $1,272,467                                 $101,797                         8%


                              Duration                                   Pillars

                              4
                                 years

                              February 2012–December 2016

                              Capacity-building activity types           Capacity-building beneficiaries
                              n	 Knowledge products, learning            n	 Government/public officials

                                short-term, learning long-term,          n	 Professionals/technicians

                                consultation with stakeholders,          n	 Civil society organizations

                                knowledge exchange and
                                fostering partnerships.




Summary

                              n	 The integration of capacity-building activities in every component of this
                                  project enhanced the relevance and sustainability of its outcomes.

                              n	 The institutional foundation established to deliver project outputs, including
                                  an advisory committee, scientific consortium, and focus groups effectively
                                  built relationships across government silos.

                              n	 The use of e-learning tools gave participants with full-time jobs flexibility.
                                  However, there were no metrics or indicators developed alongside this short-
                                  term capacity-building activity, therefore, the effectiveness and impact on
                                  government staff learning cannot be easily measured.
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 63


Description
Bangladesh is one of the most disaster-prone countries in the world; over the years, the
government of Bangladesh, alongside international development institutions and civil
society, has invested heavily in protecting coastal areas from floods and cyclones. In
addition to these hydro-meteorological hazards, there is a medium to high level of seismic
risk across the country. Yet, despite this seismic risk, the National Plan on Disaster
Management (2010-2015) lacks a comprehensive vision for a national earthquake strategy.
This could be, in part, because the threat of earthquakes is less visible and not present in
the living memory of the country’s inhabitants, and is harder to predict. Adding to matters,
the concentration of people and assets in urban areas makes cities particularly vulnerable
to seismic risk. Dhaka, for example, has 15 million people living in the metropolitan area, 28
percent of which are classified as poor. Nearly 300,000 new migrants move to the city each
year, and land use planning has failed to keep up with the pace of urban growth.

GFDRR and the World Bank are in the last year of a multi-phase project to build institutional
capacity to mitigate the impact of earthquakes in Bangladesh, with a specific focus on the
city of Dhaka. The project outputs were organized through structured delivery: defined
as the creation of temporary organizational structures such as focus groups; these were
composed of multiple stakeholders. This case study will focus on the first phase of this
project, which sought to create the knowledge base and build the institutional environment
required for developing a comprehensive approach to earthquake risk management.


Problem Addressed
The institutional structure of city-level governance is highly complex in Bangladesh. In
Dhaka, up to 50 different agencies have jurisdiction over the functions of urban planning,
governance, and public service provision. Roles and responsibilities are not clear, and the
complex institutional environment is a barrier to the effective inclusion of DRM in policy
and planning. The government requires substantial assistance in improving knowledge and
awareness of seismic risk in urban centers, and the development of clear and collaborative
institutional structures for managing earthquake vulnerability.


Proposed Activities and Outcomes
The objective of the first phase of this multi-phase project is to establish the enabling
environment required to develop a comprehensive approach to managing earthquake risk.
The final outputs of the wider project will be a Risk Management Master Plan for Dhaka
and a National Earthquake Risk Management Strategy for Bangladesh. This enabling
environment includes building an institutional foundation for the deliverables of this and
subsequent project phases. The proposed structure includes an advisory committee, a
scientific consortium, and focus groups.

In order to build a knowledge foundation, a training program was proposed with an
emphasis on earthquake risk, limiting the physical and social vulnerability of high-density
settlements, and risk-sensitive land use planning.

To further engage stakeholders and build on existing knowledge, a participatory process
between the consultant, the Earthquakes and Megacities Initiative (EMI), and three
64 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                              designated focus groups was proposed to create (i) a Hazards Vulnerability and Risk
                              Assessment (ii) a Land Use Planning Guide, and (iii) a Legal and Institutional Framework
                              Guidebook. These outputs constitute the preliminary elements for a Dhaka City Earthquake
                              Risk Management Plan and build the foundations for the National Earthquake Strategy.
                              In addition, the project planned for a fourth focus group to work with EMI to develop an
                              information, education and communication campaign, as well as a software platform for
                              existing earthquake vulnerability data.


                              Capacity Building Shaping the Project
                              Developing a rigorous organizational structure was crucial to engage and coordinate a
                              multitude of stakeholders. This was needed as previous projects demonstrated that only
                              limited success could be achieved if the activities focused only on individual ministries or
                              technical experts, and failed to consider the larger governance system. In addition, working
                              with a large number of stakeholders was critical in raising awareness of seismic risk and
                              urban development.
                              Stakeholder consultations were organized with approximately 40 different government
                              ministries and organizations, academic institutions, and civil society members in order
                              to decide on the composition and coordination of the focus groups. This approach gave
                              participating organizations greater ownership of the process. Four multi-stakeholder focus
                              groups were formed around the thematic project outputs. Over the course of the project,
                              60 focus group meetings were organized. These focus groups helped to build working
                              relationships across ministries, thus breaking down previously engrained silos.

                              Building a knowledge foundation included the delivery of a training course for the Land Use
                              Planning focus group; over 30 technical specialists from various government ministries
                              and departments; and some representation from the private sector, academia and civil
                              society. The training materials were designed to promote land use planning, disaster risk
                              assessment, and mainstreaming of risk reduction into detailed area plans for Dhaka. This
                              training course was delivered through a combination of face-to-face learning and e-learning.
                              The use of e-learning tools gave participants with full-time jobs needed flexibility. As
                              there were no metrics or indicators developed alongside this short-term capacity-building
                              activity, the effectiveness and impact on government staff learning cannot be easily
                              determined. However, the TTL and EMI noted that the project was effective in building
                              basic skill sets through the training program. As a result of increased exposure to DRM
                              concepts, the participants expressed an interest in taking other DRM e-learning courses.
                              However, the low starting capacity of some of the participants meant that the training did
                              not necessarily result in advanced technical learning.

                              In addition to more targeted training and learning activities, capacity building was
                              integrated across all elements of the project. Focus group participants were able to share
                              knowledge, participate in discussions, and contribute their own experiences towards
                              defining and developing project outputs. Not only did the integration of capacity building
                              and focus group input into the reports add significant value to the project outcomes, it also
                              created an increased sense of ownership among stakeholders. Rather than solely delivering
                              a report, the focus group participants had the opportunity to learn the methodology and
                              tools from the EMI practice leaders.
                                                                     Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 65


The lack of a data platform to store and manage hazard and vulnerability data previously
limited the integration of earthquake risk into development planning. The organizational
structure established was crucial to the effective delivery of the data platform. First, meetings
were organized with the advisory committee, composed of key decision makers, in order to
explain the significance of data sharing. This ultimately led the creation of a memorandum
of understanding to authorize data centralization. Then, the scientific consortium, in
participation with the focus group, supported the data collection and validation. In the
process, the focus group learned how to use the platform, resulting in knowledge being
spread across different ministerial technical experts, which was crucial to the sustainability
of the platform.


The Legacy of Capacity Building
The reports produced in this phase, alongside additional outputs developed by a recovery
response focus group in the second phase, have contributed to the Dhaka City Earthquake
Risk Management Plan and have built the foundations for the National Earthquake Strategy.

Although the focus groups created by this project are no longer meeting after project
completion, their legacy continues. The time frame of this project did not allow for the
development of institutionalized partnerships, but the multi-stakeholder participants
built working relationships and continue to communicate and discuss challenges and
opportunities they face in integrating urban resilience into urban planning and development
practices. Furthermore, the land use planning focus group, the main recipient of the blended
training course, has formed an Urban Resilience Unit. This institutional change signals
government investment and ownership of the initiative. Additionally, the data platform is
still being populated with a certain degree of supervision. While it is still a work in progress,
the platform is one of the greatest achievements of the project.


Leveraging
This project laid the foundation for the design of the $173 million Urban Resilience
Project (URP). The URP will provide government agencies with facilities and equipment
to significantly improve emergency response capacity, as well as institutional resources
to incorporate disaster risk into development planning. By providing access to improved
emergency preparedness and response services, the URP will benefit the approximately 17
million people living in the cities of Dhaka and Sylhet. This project is in its first phase and
laying the foundation for investments to be made in the coming years.
66 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR



Resilient Recovery and Financial Protection in the
Philippines—A Case of Legacy Building

                              Budget                                      Capacity-building budget


                      8
                              $491,621                                    $147,486                          30%


                              Duration                                    Pillars

                              2.5
                                     years

                              September 2011–March 2014

                              Capacity-building activity types            Capacity-building beneficiaries
                              n	 Short-term learning, knowledge           n	 Government/public officials

                                exchange                                  n	Professionals/technicians




Summary

                              n	 The training of trainers strategy can increase the project’s impact and legacy.

                              n	 Developing institutional ownership by engaging government ministries and
                                  agencies from the beginning assists in project sustainability.

                              n	 Clear resource assessment is necessary for capacity-building activities to be
                                  effective.
                                                                                  Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 67


Description
The Philippines is ranked fourth in terms of exposure to at least three hazards, fourth in
mortality risk, and ninth in impact to GDP, with an estimated 79% of GDP tied to areas
of risk. This grant was part of a wider World Bank engagement that aims to enhance
the capacity of the Philippines to manage the impacts of natural disasters through: (i)
strengthening institutional capacity; (ii) mainstreaming DRM into development planning;
and (iii) managing the government’s fiscal exposure to natural hazard impacts. The activities
supported by this GFDRR grant contributed to all three of these objectives. The grant
included training on PDNAs, the development of a transparent monitoring and evaluation
system for ex-ante and post-ante disaster expenditure (PMESD), and support to develop a
national Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Strategy (DRFI). This case study focuses on
the PDNA training, PMESD and DRFI and whether these activities effectively established a
legacy post projection completion.


Problem addressed
Disaster risk management is integrated into the general policy of the state. However,
analytical studies point to weak institutional capacities and a limited budget as major gaps
in implementing existing laws. These weaknesses were highlighted when Tropical Storm
Ondoy and Typhoon Pepeng consecutively hit the country in 2009. Upon the request of
the Philippine Government, the World Bank supported the mobilization of local and
international experts, private sector and civil society representatives and development
partners in undertaking a PDNA. The PDNA emphasized the necessity for ex-ante measures
to prevent and/or mitigate the impact of disasters. In response, the 2010 Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management (DRRM) Act was passed. The act promotes a proactive approach
to DRM emphasizing preparedness and mitigation. The new law established a National
DRRM Council, an interagency council responsible for disaster preparedness, prevention
and mitigation, response and rehabilitation, and recovery. Institutional capacity must be
built in the National DRRM Council in order to support this new more proactive approach
to DRM.10 In addition, the Philippines employs a policy of staff rotation which means that
personnel are moved often with little notice, meaning that DRM positions are led frequently
by inexperienced staff.

In terms of budget, funding for DRM in the country has been inadequate, making the
government reliant on donor support to promote DRM policies and programs.


Proposed Activities and Outcomes
The proposed activities responded to the problems outlined above. Their overlying objective
was to enhance the capacity of the Philippines to manage the impacts of natural disasters.

As noted above, the 2009 tropical storms highlighted the weak institutional DRM capacity.
In the wake of the storms, a PDNA was conducted with the World Bank and partners. In
order to support DRM capacity, the use of a common methodology for future assessments is
needed as well as training for government staff. Therefore, under this grant, PDNA training

 	 The National DRRM Council does not implement activities; daily operations are carried out by the Office of Civil
10

   Defence
68 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                             of officers and staff of the Office of Civil Defense (OCD) and members of the NDRRMC was
                             proposed. The objective was to build the capacity of national and regional entities to
                             undertake post-disaster assessments to inform recovery and reconstruction

                             The development of a PMESD was also proposed, in order to enable the government to
                             better manage resources for DRM through a system that allows the monitoring of funding,
                             expenditure, and progress of DRM and/or response programs and projects. Part of this
                             project component included training on the use of the PMESD.

                             The grant also supported the development of a national DRFI strategy. The ultimate
                             objective was to reduce the fiscal burden of natural disasters on the public and private
                             sectors through catastrophic risk financing measures.


“Conducting a                Capacity Building Shaping the Project
capacity review              The aim of the PDNA training was to build government capacity in resilient recovery. Over
                             a three-day period, 62 OCD staff and NDRRM members were trained in the use of PDNA
enables training to          sector-specific guidance notes.
be focused upon the          In order to effectively build the necessary capacity, a training and needs assessment review
participant’s needs”         was conducted by the implementing consultancy, Deltares. However, despite time dedicated
                             to this activity, it was difficult for the Deltares’ team to identify the correct people within the
                             OCD with whom to consult. The difficulty in coordinating with the OCD for this process was a
Deltares training leader     result of institutional restructuring in the wake of Typhoon Pablo (Bopha) two months prior.
                             As a result of this lack of information, when the training began, the Deltares consultants had
                             overestimated the amount of experience participants had in fieldwork. When this capacity
                             gap was identified, Deltares adapted the training accordingly to include a day of fieldwork.

                             Given the high rate of staff rotation, one important element of the PDNA training was the
                             development of sector-specific guidance notes. These tools captured much of the knowledge
                             shared in the training and could be learned and used by different generations of OCD and
                             NDRRM staff.

                             Another critical element of the training that increased the project’s impact and legacy
                             was the training of trainers. From the pool of 62 participants, 16 ”training leaders” were
                             identified. After the training, these individuals were responsible for rolling out the PDNA
                             training across government authorities as well as to Local Government Units (LGUs).
                             Specific modules were integrated into the three-day program which helped provide the
                             trainers with the necessary resources and skill set to achieve this. Furthermore, these 16
                             participants also played an important role in the three-day training. The ”training leaders”
                             were responsible for “continuously evaluating how applicable and useful what was being
                             taught, presented, and learned was to the participants” (Deltares training leader). With this
                             information, an iterative process of feedback integration took place across the delivery of
                             the training.

                             The PMESD training was interlinked with the PDNA training. The PMESD software tracks
                             the movements of funds against actual identified needs on the ground. Given that the
                             PDNA participants are responsible for assessing post-disaster needs on the ground, it is
                             crucial that they are familiar with this system. However, despite the completion of the
                             PMESD training, there was not sufficient Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 69


capacity or budget to host the software. A departmental capacity review was conducted
before the training, including an analysis of human resources. However, capacity-building
activities should also be cognizant of available financial, technical, and policy resources.
The World Bank team worked on the PMESD beyond the project end date in order to ensure
the software was installed and operationalized.

An international expert and local consultant were hired to facilitate the development
of the national DRFI strategy. As this was the first step in building finance resilience to
natural disasters, it was necessary to raise government awareness of the importance of risk
financing tools and their effective use. Therefore, this process began with a forum where
international experts were invited to demonstrate different strategies to the Department of
Finance. After the forum, the Ministry of Finance became very engaged in the development
of the action plan, working with the consultant to decide which strategies would work best
for them. This demonstrates the institutional ownership of this agenda. As will be discussed
below, the Ministry of Finance requested technical assistance for implementation of the
strategy.


The Legacy of Capacity Building
The PDNA training program was followed by the training rollout and application of the
methods by staff of NDRMC member’s agencies during PDNAs conducted after Typhoons
Pablo and Yolanda. The PDNAs constituted the real-life application of the training. Guidelines
and materials developed under this grant have been continually used in the PDNAs led
by OCD, including in response to Typhoon Yolanda in 2013. Furthermore, drawing on the
sector guidelines, multi-sectoral disaster preparedness drills and training are conducted
periodically by the member agencies of the NDRRMC as part of the National DRRM Plan’s
long-term goal on disaster preparedness.


Leveraging
Based on the DRFI strategy and supporting capacity building activities, the Ministry of
Finance requested technical assistance in implementing the strategy. A GFDRR supported
project providing this technical assistance began in 2014 and will end in 2017. The DRFI
strategy was key to leveraging the second Disaster Risk Management Development Policy
Loan with a Catastrophe-Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO2), approved in 2015, which
provides $500 million to strengthen investment planning and regulations to reduce disaster
risks and help manage the financial impacts when disasters strike.
70 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR



Indonesia—A Case of Building Local Ownership of
Processes and Outputs

                              Budget                                     Capacity building budget

                              $1,635,000                                 $343,350                          21%

                     9
                              Duration                                   Pillars

                              5
                                 years

                              October 2010–December 2015

                              Capacity building activity types           Capacity building beneficiaries
                              n	 Short-term learning, knowledge          n	Citizens/communities

                                exchange/partnership                     n	 Government/public officials

                                development, knowledge
                                products




Summary

                              n	 Local ownership of technical assistance outputs, such as the Disaster Risk
                                  Financing strategy, was encouraged by engaging a number of stakeholders
                                  throughout the life cycle of the project.

                              n	 In order for initiatives to be locally owned, local stakeholders must have the
                                  capacity (human, technical, financial) to sustain and/or scale processes and
                                  outputs.
                                                                       Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 71


Description
According to the Indonesian National Disaster Management agency (BNPB), over the last 30
years, there have been on average 289 significant natural disasters per year in the country, with
an average annual death toll of approximately 8,000. Since the 2004 Tsunami, the Government
of Indonesia has taken a proactive approach in addressing disaster risks, including the creation
of the BNPB in 2008. The GFDRR grant focused upon in this case study (2010-2015) supported
the second phase of a project established in 2008 to assist Indonesia mainstream DRM.

Partners in this project included, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the
Australian Agency for International Aid (AUSAID), the Department for International Development
(DFID), the United States Agency for International Aid (USAID), European Commission (EC),
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), Forum Komunikasi Winongo Asri (FKWA), the
National Agency for Disaster Authority (BNPB), selected Provincial Disaster Management
Agencies (BPBDs), and the Ministry for National Development Planning (BAPENAS).

The first phase of the project focused upon analytical and policy work, for example, supporting
the formulation of the Indonesian National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction (NAP-DRR
2010-2012). Activities in the second phase supported the movement of plans and policies into
implementation. The activities in the second phase have focused upon the national, provincial,
and local scale, as well as on four out of five GFDRR pillars of action. This case study will focus
upon a number of the activities conducted, and whether local ownership of the processes and
outputs has been achieved.


Problems Addressed
GFDRR’s engagement in Indonesia began in 2008, the same year that the BNPB was
established, in order to support the agency fulfill their mandate. While annual DRM allocation
increased significantly in 2010, signalling a national realignment of priorities, post-disaster
reconstruction was largely funded through the reserve of the state’s general treasury, which
requires parliamentary approval. At the time of project implementation, the budget available
through this mechanism was insufficient to deal with a major catastrophe or a series of moderate
to severe disasters in a given fiscal year.


Proposed Activities and Outcomes
The proposed activities are summarized in figure B1. The primary objective of the proposed
activities was to build Indonesia’s resilience to disaster and climate change impacts through
multi-level development investments. The project aimed to build national government, regional
government, local government and community capacity to carry out risk identification, reduction,
and response. The strategy leveraged existing priority government programs and projects —
starting with those financed by the World Bank and other donor agencies — especially those in
areas identified as high priority in the NAP-DRR 2010-2012.

This case study will focus upon the policy dialogue occurring in conjunction with the
development of the disaster risk finance strategy and the development of the Indonesia
Scenario Assessment for Emergencies (InaSAFE).
72 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


Figure B1. Proposed Multi-Scalar Activities to Build Indonesia’s Resilience to Disaster and Climate Change Impacts


       Risk                   	 Continue the development of a national level risk assessment
   Identification             	 Support a risk review of 6 Indonesian mid-sized cities



                              	 Technical assistance for the development of national and regional disaster response
                                and management policies and legal frameworks
  Risk Reduction
                              	 A Safer Schools initiative
                              	 Co-financing community and local government capacity building in DRM



                              	 Part of a partnership to develop InaSAFE: free software that produces realistic natural
   Preparedness                 hazard impact scenarios, the software will generate an impact summary including the
                                estimated number of the population that will need to be evacuated.




      Financial               	 Continue technical assistance to support the development of a comprehensive risk
     Protection                 financing strategy




     Resilent
                              	 Community-based settlement rehabilitation and reconstruction project
     Recovery



                              Capacity Building Shaping the Project
                              Project outputs included a report outlining options for a national Disaster Risk Financing
                              strategy. Report development was led by a World Bank team, which included specialists from
                              GFDRR. A series of policy dialogues took place in conjunction with the disaster risk financing
                              analytical work. This was due, in part, to the fact that the production of the analysis required
                              continuous engagement with different ministries, including the Ministry of Finance, BNPB, and
                              the Ministry of Home Affairs, among others. Furthermore, these dialogues created awareness of
                              the importance of disaster risk financing among a number of ministries. There was also a three-
                              day knowledge sharing event organized through Jakarta Association of Southeast Asian Nations
                              (ASEAN), providing an opportunity for member states, academics, and the private sector to
                              discuss risk financing, highlighting examples of best practices and lessons from international
                              experience.

                              An innovative component of the project was the creation of InaSAFE, a free software that
                              produces realistic natural hazard impact scenarios for better planning, preparedness, and
                              response activities.15 The software provides practical tools for local officials to develop

                               	 InaSAFE was conceived and initially developed by the Indonesian National Disaster Management Agency (BNBP)
                              15

                                 and the Australian Agency for International Development, through the Australia-Indonesian Facility for Disaster
                                 Reduction and GFDRR.
                                                                                        Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 73


actionable contingency plans. To calculate probable impacts, the analysis requires the input of
two parameters, hazard, and exposure (people or critical assets, such as schools, hospitals and                              “A Disaster Risk
bridges). The sources of data required by InaSAFE include hazard data from technical agencies,
                                                                                                                             Financing strategy
demographic information from the national census and community knowledge captured through
participatory mapping tools such as OpenStreetMap.16                                                                         is a complex multi-
With the collaboration of the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team and the United Nations Office                                  sectoral subject;
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN-OCHA), participatory mapping tools were used
                                                                                                                             building a diverse
to collect high-resolution data on critical infrastructure in Jakarta. The collected information was
analyzed using InaSAFE during the 2012 Jakarta flood contingency planning. This information                                  pool of champions
can now be openly accessed and used for future emergency planning. In order to extend the                                    was key to creating
initiative, the tool was designed so that anyone with basic computer skills can upload data
and generate the hazard impact scenarios. During the project duration, 1,300,000 buildings                                   ownership of
were mapped in just under three years. This was, in part, a result of training on the use of the                             the initiative
tool hosted by GFDRR and its partners that took place across five provinces, with over 130
participants from local disaster management agencies, universities, and civil society.                                       and support for

In order to ensure scalability of the initiative training materials have also been developed and                             implementation”
made available on the InaSAFE platform so that anyone can learn how to download the software,
use it for contingency planning, and upload information.                                                                     Task Team Leader (TTL)


The Legacy of Capacity Building
The recommendations from the Disaster Risk Financing Strategy - Options for Consideration
and subsequent policy discussions have been adopted by the government, highlighting that
the capacity-building objective of raising awareness was achieved and that the government
took ownership of the initiative. However, the institutional complexity of implementing a
disaster risk financing strategy (involving more than five agencies) still poses a challenge.
Determining leadership of the initiative, given the absence of a clear-cut mandate from
any particular agency, is a particular challenge. Continued support through policy dialogue
and consensus building is planned through the World Bank’s Disaster Risk Financing and
Insurance Program (DRFI).17

Since its development, InaSAFE has been used to produce estimated impact assessments,
including for earthquakes in Yogyakarta, a tsunami in Padang, and for community-level
scenarios for Jakarta flood emergency planning. Furthermore, taking advantage of its open-
source development, experts in the Philippines have developed a tool, known as WebSAFE,
which meets local needs in that country. InaSAFE is also used in China, Malawi, and some
European countries, such as Portugal, and the United Kingdom.




16
   	 This exercise was able to demonstrate the potential of combining crowd-sourced data with the formal Government
     data collection processes. While the future of such participatory exercises may not necessarily lead to a single data
     collection system, the collaborative process has helped build an interface between crowd-generated data, and
     government process in data compilation for contingency planning and broader disaster risk management (e.g., for
     asset exposure mapping).
17
  	 The Program is  co-sponsored by the World Bank, GFDRR, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, the
     Ministry of Finance of Japan, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
74 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR




                                        BNPB Leading Knowledge Exchange



   O
          ne of the objectives of this project was to build the capacity of provincial and local disaster risk management
          agencies. One activity implemented by the World Bank Institute [currently known as Leadership Learning
          and Innovation], built the capacity of BNPB to capture and share DRM knowledge. While receiving technical
    support and DRM knowledge from the World Bank, GFDRR, and UNDP consultants, it was important for BNPB to
    capture this knowledge and take ownership of the knowledge sharing process.

    The WBI conducted a capacity review using their “Capacity Assessment Framework for Knowledge Hubs.” WBI
    found that BNPB lacked systematic documentation and internal sharing of operational experience, significant
    loss of institutional memory through high turnover of managers, and insufficient training of new managers. WBI
    found that knowledge sharing between BNPB and more than 400 provincial and local disaster risk management
    agencies was limited due to the insufficient capture of lessons learned and the lack of training capacity.

    In order to meet these capacity deficits, WBI worked with BNPB to develop DRM modules and learning materials
    that could be delivered through video conferencing. BNPB, aware of its capacity needs, had previously built a
    DRM training center, although it was not being effectively used. However, this demonstrates that the project was
    responsive to the agenda of BNPB. Local ownership of project processes and outputs is more likely when the
    program is driven by client demand. Furthermore, the program developed linkages between BNPB and national
    universities and NGOs to encourage sustainability.

    WBI and BNPB worked together to develop PDNA training modules. The Learning Center was launched in 2014
    and is acting as a hub of internal and external DRM training. The PDNA modules are being rolled out to provincial
    and local disaster risk management agencies across Indonesia. Capturing lessons learned and best practice is
    often not prioritized by government agencies; to ensure that this process continues, BNPB is currently developing
    an incentive system to reward those who create best practice examples and lessons learned from operational
    experiences, both at local and national levels.
                                                  Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 75



Mega Disasters—A Case of Building Transferable and
Scalable Knowledge Resources

               Budget                                       Capacity-building budget            100%

          10
               $1,000,000
               Duration                                     Pillars

               2.5
                      years

               November 2011–March 2014

               Capacity-building activity types             Capacity-building beneficiaries
               n	 Knowledge products, long-term             n	 Government/public officials

                 learning, short-term learning,             n	 Professionals/technicians

                 knowledge exchange




Summary

               n	 Adopting a participatory process of creating knowledge notes ensured that
                   the content was of value to the targeted countries.

               n	 Knowledge resources transferable to other contexts can be produced and
                   should be aimed for.

               n	 The online CoP was an effective means of scaling the knowledge exchange to
                   transfer lessons to a wider audience. Despite the growth in membership, the
                   lack of sustained World Bank engagement after project completion led to a
                   decrease in member participation.
76 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                             Description
                             Many countries can better protect themselves from major disasters by adopting—and adapting
                             as necessary—some of the measures taken by Japan, and by understanding the strengths
                             and weaknesses of Japan’s response to the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake (GEJE). To
                             help countries do this, the Learning from Mega Disasters initiative provides data, analysis,
                             and insights drawn from GEJE in printed and web-based format, in face-to-face activities,
                             and seminars presented through the Global Development Learning Network (GDLN) and
                             the Tokyo DRM hub. The main objective of the Learning from Mega Disasters project was to
                             leverage Japan’s extensive knowledge on DRM for the benefit of developing countries that are
                             vulnerable to disasters, in order to make progress towards mainstreaming DRM policies in
“The main challenge          these countries.

we had to address
                             Problem Addressed
is how to exchange
                             In many respects, Japan is at the cutting edge of DRM. For example, Japan has great expertise
knowledge between            in seismic retrofitting techniques, flood risk management, landslide and slope stability, risk
                             assessment and early warning systems, and land use planning. Given the high institutional,
different contexts”
                             economic, and technical capacity of Japan, the main challenge for this project was to create
                             knowledge resources that could translate to countries at different stages of development.
Task Team Leader (TTL)       Equally, in order to have a far-reaching impact the knowledge resources had to be adaptable
                             and scalable by design.


                             Proposed Activities and Outcomes
                             The first component of the project included the production of knowledge notes highlighting
                             the strengths and weaknesses of Japan’s response to GEJE. The project aimed to disseminate
                             these knowledge notes in a multitude of ways: first, as a report to contribute to the UN-
                             driven Sendai dialogues; second, the creation of a CoP in order to house these knowledge
                             notes and host interactive video conferencing sessions and online discussions; third,
                             through a capacity-building program across several pilot countries among World Bank
                             clients, including workshops and training sessions on specific sets of knowledge notes run
                             by Japanese experts, World Bank consultants and other partners.


                             Capacity Building Shaping the Project
                             Thirty six knowledge notes were produced covering almost all aspects of the Japanese DRM
                             system including, structural and non-structural measures, emergency response, reconstruction
                             planning, hazard and risk information, risk financing, and recovery and relocation. The
                             knowledge notes were prepared by more than 30 Japanese and international experts. The
                             World Bank Institute (WBI) effectively coordinated the collaboration of the Tokyo DRM Hub,
                             The Tokyo Development Learning Center (TDLC), the World Bank East Asia & Pacific Regional
                             Unit and GFDRR to produce these notes. There was also consultation with over 50 advisors
                             and reviewers internationally. This consultation included academic experts, the private sector,
                             international and local NGOs, and a series of GDLN video conferences with stakeholders from
                             developing countries.

                             A key means of addressing knowledge exchange between different contexts was the
                             participatory process adopted in the creation of the knowledge notes. During the process of
                                                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 77


multi-stakeholder consultation, at the mid and final stages of creating the knowledge notes,
six GDLN video conferences were organized with experts from developing countries. In these
sessions, the authors of the knowledge notes presented the key findings and a World Bank
discussant facilitated the conversation. These sessions were identified by the World Bank task
team as critical to incorporating different developing countries perspectives and ensuring the
lessons learned were transferable across multiple contexts. As the World Bank DRM specialist
noted, “the participants were able to communicate what was of value from the Japanese
experience and what was not.”

These knowledge notes were used as a basis for a pilot capacity-building program across
six developing countries - Armenia, Kenya, Indonesia, Philippines, Sri Lanka and Uganda. In
order to identify countries where the lessons from the project would have particular relevance,
consultations took place with World Bank regional coordinators and GFDRR DRM specialists.
Generally, the countries identified were those where capacity building could leverage future
DRM technical assistance. The next step was to consult with client governments to identify
thematic clusters that would be relevant for their level of DRM capacity.

For example, in the case of Uganda, a mission to Kampala was organized for this purpose. The
Office of the Prime Minister, EU, and JICA were consulted and a knowledge exchange strategy
was developed so that the content and target audiences were responsive to gaps in Uganda’s
capacity. The first workshop was targeted at technical officials from national line ministries
and representatives from vulnerable districts, and focused on specific DRM tools such as risk
mapping and early warning systems. The second was targeted at members of parliament and
more generally aimed to raise awareness among decision makers.

In the case of Armenia, the country was undertaking structural and non-structural measures
to mitigate earthquake damage, therefore, it was decided that the activities carried out under
the capacity development program would focus on structural measures and building codes,
and target the research and technical expert communities at the national level. This program
was delivered remotely through GDLN sessions.

The cases of Uganda and Armenia show how prior consultations with the client allows for
capacity-building programs to be tailored to the content that is most applicable and useful for
the receiving country. The fact that the program could be delivered remotely in Armenia also
highlights the flexibility and scalability of the knowledge products.

In order to disseminate the lessons learned to a wider audience, an online CoP was established.
This was an innovative and experimental activity as it was the first web-based CoP at the World
Bank. The web platform hosted a blended learning program: documents on key lessons learned
were posted, followed by GDLN sessions and subsequent interactive discussion boards. In
2014 the online CoP reached 1000 members—80 percent were from outside the World Bank,
and 40 percent actively participated in e-discussions. To ensure that these e-discussions
were sustained, initially World Bank DRM specialists were actively involved in managing the
CoP and instigating discussions. Then, in order to encourage a change of ownership from the
World Bank to the members, ten external experts were identified from the CoP as discussion
facilitators and theme coordinators. The TTL noted that this platform was extremely active
during the project and was a powerful means of scaling knowledge dissemination.
78 / Annex B: The
     Reviewing theCase
                   impact
                       Studies:
                          of Capacity  a Deeper
                                TakingBuilding  Dive
                                               in GFDRR


                              The Legacy of Capacity Building
                              The Learning from Mega Disasters project has accelerated the process of mainstreaming DRM
                              in a number of developing countries. Taking the example of the capacity-building program
                              in Uganda, the objective of the workshops was to leverage the Japanese experience in
                              mainstreaming DRM to inform actions in Uganda. The current DRM specialist working in Uganda
                              confirmed that this objective was met, he noted that following Learning from Mega Disasters
                              workshops awareness of the importance of DRM has increased significantly. For example, in
                              these sessions the issue of trans-boundary disaster management was discussed, subsequently
                              the East African Disaster Risk Reduction Parliamentarian Platform was established, organized
                              by the Government of Uganda with the support of GFDRR and the World Bank. Furthermore,
                              since the program, in 2015 a GFDRR supported technical assistance project to form a risk
                              assessment and resilient action plan began implementation.

                              The CoP is still functioning and membership has grown to over 1000 members. This highlights
                              the effectiveness of the tool as a means of scaling knowledge exchange. However, the TTL
                              noted that this CoP is not as active as it used to be, as the project funding ended and World
                              Bank DRM specialists were no longer there to manage the community and participation in
                              e-discussion forums has sensibly decreased.


                              Future Leveraging
                              These knowledge notes have been disseminated internationally to and by World Bank
                              consultants. They have been used to inform multiple projects, for example, the Bangladesh
                              Urban Earthquake Resilience Project and the Peru Safer Schools Project.
            Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 79




ANNEX C


WORLD BANK CAPACITY BUILDING
RESOURCES
80 / Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR




The Resilience Dialogue in Sendai, Japan was one of GFDRR’s flagship events at WCDRR. From left to right: Thomas Staal, Assistant Administrator, USAID; Helen Clark,
Administrator, United Nations Development Programme; P.K. Mishra, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, India; Anote Tong, President, Kiribati; Rachel Kyte, Vice
President and Special Envoy for Climate Change, World Bank Group; and Claus Sørensen, Director-General, Directorate-General for Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection.
Photo credit: World Bank
                                                                 Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 81



World Bank and GFDRR Disaster Risk Management
(DRM) Training and E-learning Resources
GFDRR’s Existing Learning Tools and Resources:
n	 “Introduction to Disaster Risk Assessment.” Developed with the Global Practice
   for Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience (GPSURR), and tested on World Bank users,
   the course, which is based on a 2014 GFDRR publication, provides users with an
   introduction to the methodology, best practices, and case studies of disaster risk
   assessments (see: http://understanding_risk.org).
n	 Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) and Disaster Recovery Framework (DRF).
   These are one-day workshops that have no specific calendar but are offered at least
   three times a year internally for Bank staff, and for clients based on demand.
n	 Gender and Disaster Risk Management (DRM). As part of GFDRR’s gender action plan,
   the purpose of this workshop is to increase the understanding and capacity of DRM
   staff to integrate gender and women’s empowerment in DRM activities. The workshop
   is currently in the pilot stage but will be available for Bank staff this fiscal year.
n	 Think Hazard! (see: www.thinkhazard.org), a free and open-source online tool that
   allows users to assess their project’s exposure to eight types of adverse natural events
   —earthquake, flood, landslide, wind, storm surge, drought, volcanic eruption, and
   tsunami. The tool also highlights how these hazards may evolve with climate change.
   Since its launch on May 17, thinkhazard.org had 42,000 page views and more than
   6,700 sessions. GFDRR is working with the Office of the Public Service Commission
   (OPSC) and the DRM community to ensure that the tool can be used in operational
   screening, as well as with partners from the EU, UNDP and other bilateral and multi-
   lateral institutions to embed Think Hazard! within their own screening systems. Future
   plans also include improving the datasets in Think Hazard! as well as improving the
   user experience and user resources.
n	 Natural Disaster Risk Management Program (NDRMP). The NDRMP offers an
   educational model for practitioners who are looking at building their career and/or
   improving their skills in disaster risk management (DRM). It consists of an introductory
   course plus a selection of nine specialized online courses. GFDRR are currently at the
   early stages, conceptualizing what the new course would look like, and although the
   course will be primarily hosted at EMI Consulting’s platform, GFDRR have discussed
   the possibility of offering the content through the Open Learning Campus (OLC).
82 / Annex C: World
     Reviewing the impact
                    Bank Capacity
                          of Capacity
                                  Building Resources
                                      Building in GFDRR



 Box C1: E-learning Courses Developed by the GFDRR Capacity-Building Program


   The former GFDRR Capacity Program was tasked with the development of a series of online training courses.

   (1)	 Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management:
        –	 Climate Change and Disaster Risks (latest revision 2009)
   (2)	 Natural Disaster Risk Management:
        –	 Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management Framework #1 (2010)
        –	 GFDRR - Natural Disaster Risk Management - Safe Cities (2010)
        –	 Gender Aspects of Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction #1 (2009)
        –	 Community Based Disaster Risk Management (2008)
        –	 Damage and Reconstruction Needs Assessment (2007)
        –	 Earthquake Risk Reduction (2007)
        –	 Financial Strategies for Managing the Economic Impacts of Natural Disasters
        –	 Risk Analysis
        –	 Risk Sensitive Land Use Planning (2009)
   (3)	 Market Based Risk Management:
        –	 Innovative Market-Based Risk Management Framework (2007)
        –	 Market Based Commodity Price Risk Management (2008)
        –	 Weather Risk Management for Agriculture (2008)




                              Other DRM online courses and learning materials available
                              through OLC

                              OLC has the following DRM related courses:

                              n	 Understanding Risk
                              n	 Introduction to Damage Loss and Needs Assessment (DALA)
                              n	 Disaster Risk Assessment
                              n	 Webinar-World Bank Disaster Risk Financing Products
                              n	 Webinar- World Bank Financing Risk Management Products FY16
                              n	 Introduction to Disaster Risk Management (They have both a self-paced and a
                                 facilitated course)
                              n	 Safe and Resilient Cities (Both self-paced and facilitated course)
                                                                                  Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 83


OLC has other DRM resources, including:

n	 Podcasts
n	 Videos
n	 Knowledge notes
n	 BITE size learning



Communities of Practice and Other Resources
n	 OPEN DATA FOR RESILIENCE INITIATIVE (GFDRR)
n	 CITY RESILIENCE PROGRAM
n	 DISASTER RESILIENCE ANALYTICS AND SOLUTIONS (D-RAS) SWAT TEAM
n	 DISASTER RISK FINANCE (DRF) COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE
n	 HYDROMET, CLIMATE SERVICES AND RESILIENCE COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE
n	 INCLUSIVE COMMUNITY RESILIENCE PROGRAM
n	 PILOT PROGRAM FOR CLIMATE RESILIENCE (PPCR)
n	 RESILIENT RECOVERY COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE
n	 RESPONDING TO DISASTERS TOGETHER (R2D2) COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE
n	 SAFER SCHOOLS PROGRAM
n	 SMALL ISLAND STATES RESILIENCE INITIATIVE
n	 URBAN FLOODS COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE (UFCOP)

Details about each CoP can be accessed at:

http://globalpractices.worldbank.org/gsg/RDRM/pages/en/FocusAreas.aspx


World Bank Capacity-Building Resources for Project Managers/
Task Team Leaders
n	 The Capacity Development Results Framework
The World Bank Institute (WBI)18 for learning and development produced ‘The Capacity
Development Results Framework’ (2009)19. The document provides a definition of capacity
development, the theoretical basis for developing a framework, and the framework itself which
provides an approach for designing, implementing, monitoring, managing, and evaluating
capacity development in development programs. The document was created by WBI to provide
an overarching construct for defining and assessing the results of its capacity development
programs. The definition of capacity development aligns to the definition of capacity building
used in this report.


 	 Now the Leadership, Learning and Innovation Department (LLI)
18

 	 WBI (2009) The Capacity Development Results Framework: A strategic and results- orientated approach to learning
19

   for capacity development, http://siteresources.worldbank.org/CSO/Resources/2287161369241545034/The_
   Capacity_Development_Results_Framework.pdf.
84 / Annex C: World
     Reviewing the impact
                    Bank Capacity
                          of Capacity
                                  Building Resources
                                      Building in GFDRR


                             The framework developed seeks to respond to the common failure of measuring the results
                             of capacity development work, and the common failure to build monitoring of capacity
                             development outcomes and impact into the design and monitoring and evaluation systems
                             of projects. The report provides information on how to conduct an impact evaluation. An
                             impact evaluation is the:

                                  Systematic identification of the effects—positive or negative, intended or not—on
                                  individual households, institutions, and the environment caused by a given development
                                  activity, such as a program or project. In the context of capacity development, impact
                                  evaluation can look at the extent to which new knowledge gets used and the effects
                                  that use of knowledge has on the broader organizational, sociopolitical, or policy
                                  environment.20

                             The report provides a framework for evaluating the impact of capacity development including
                             learning outcomes, result indicators and the corresponding evidence methods required to
                             gather data.

                             An adapted version of this framework could be adopted by the program leaders/task team
                             leaders of GFDRR supported projects. If program leaders use a generic set of indicators this can
                             improve cross-project comparability, however, the indicators may need to be adapted according
                             to the nature of the project. The framework has been outlined in table C1. More information can
                             be found in the Capacity Development Results Framework (p. 84-89) including the different
                             methods for collecting evidence for these indicators, their advantages and disadvantages, as
                             well as their relative costs.

                             For more models, methods, and tools, see Evaluation Resources, available at:
                             http://go.worldbank.org/AKJPBQFOD0.




                              	 Ibid, p 89
                             20
                                                                         Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 85


Table C1: Framework for Evaluating the Impact of Capacity Development21

 Learning outcomes     Generic learning objectives

                       Participant understanding of an issue or situation improved
 1. Raised awareness   Participant attitude improved
                       Participant confidence improved
                       Participant motivation improved


 2. Enhanced skills    New skills/knowledge acquired
                       New skills/knowledge applied

                       Discussion initiated/resumed/activated
                       Participatory process initiated/expanded
 3. Improved
                       Consensus reached
 consensus/
 teamwork              Action steps/plan formulated/improved
                       Collaboration increased/improved

                       Discussion initiated/resumed/activated
                       Participatory process initiated/improved
 4. Fostered
 coalitions/networks   Informal network(s) created/expanded
                       Formal partnerships or coalitions created/expanded

                       Stakeholders involved in process
                       Policy/strategy needs assessment completed Stakeholder agreement reached
 5. Formulated
 policy/ strategy      Action steps/plan formulated
                       Monitoring and evaluation plan designed
                       Policy/reform/strategy/law proposed to decision-makers

                       Implementation steps formulated
 6. Implemented        Monitoring and evaluation initiated
 strategy/plan         Implementation steps initiated
                       Implementation know-how improved




 	 Ibid, p 84-88
21
86 / Annex C: World Bank Capacity Building Resources


                             n	 The Art of Knowledge Exchange
                             The World Bank also published ‘The Art of Knowledge Exchange,’ a planning guide for
                             implementing and measuring a results-oriented knowledge exchange initiative. The report
                             is part of the wider Organizational Knowledge Sharing Program (OKS). The report provides
                             a framework for developing a knowledge exchange including the following steps:

                             1.	 Anchor the initiative including defining the development goal based upon a review of
                                 institutional challenges;
                             2.	 Define the initiative including identifying ideal participants, knowledge providers and
                                 intermediate outcomes;
                             3.	 Design and develop the initiative including selecting participants, verifying the
                                 objective and outcomes and organizing a delivery team;
                             4.	 Implement the project by guiding the participants, building relationships and tracking
                                 the results;
                             5.	 Measure and report the results, including synthesizing and reporting implementation
                                 data.


                             The OKS program has also produced a selection of useful notes for practitioners, providing
                             guidance upon when different knowledge exchange instruments such as conferences, expert
                             visits, and competitions are most appropriate. (see: http://knowledgesharingfordev.org/
                             resource-library/art-knowledge-exchange).
Capacity-Building has been defined as the process
of developing and strengthening the skills,
instincts, abilities, processes and resources that
organizations and communities need to adapt and
manage/reduce natural disaster risks.
                The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
www.gfdrr.org




                Recovery (GFDRR) is a global partnership that helps
                developing countries better understand and reduce their
                vulnerabilities to natural hazards and adapt to climate
                change. Working with over 400 local, national, regional,
                and international partners, GFDRR provides grant
                financing, technical assistance, training, and knowledge
                sharing activities to mainstream disaster and climate
                risk management in policies and strategies. Managed
                by the World Bank, GFDRR is supported by 36 countries
                and 10 international organizations.
