Tafila Region Wind Power Projects
Cumulative Effects Assessment
© International Finance Corporation 2017. All rights reserved.
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433 Internet: www.ifc.org


The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. IFC encourages dissemination of its work and will normally
grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly, and when the reproduction is for educational and
non-commercial purposes, without a fee, subject to such attributions and notices as we may reasonably require.


IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or completeness of the content included in this work, or for
the conclusions or judgments described herein, and accepts no responsibility or liability for any omissions
or errors (including, without limitation, typographical errors and technical errors) in the content whatsoever
or for reliance thereon. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map
in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or
the governments they represent.


The contents of this work are intended for general informational purposes only and are not intended to
constitute legal, securities, or investment advice, an opinion regarding the appropriateness of any investment,
or a solicitation of any type. IFC or its affiliates may have an investment in, provide other advice or services
to, or otherwise have a financial interest in, certain of the companies and parties (including named herein.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to IFC’s Corporate
Relations Department, 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.


International Finance Corporation is an international organization established by Articles of Agreement among
its member countries, and a member of the World Bank Group. All names, logos and trademarks are the property
of IFC and you may not use any of such materials for any purpose without the express written consent of
IFC. Additionally, “International Finance Corporation” and “IFC” are registered trademarks of IFC and are
protected under international law.


Design: Word Express, Inc.
Photo Credits: Lori Anna Conzo, Alvaro Camiña Cardenal, Rafael Palomo and Chris Van Rooyen.
Tafila Region Wind Power Projects
Cumulative Effects Assessment
Table of Contents




Acronyms List	                                                              iv

Foreword	vi

Acknowledgements	vii

Executive Summary	                                                          ix

1.  CEA Overview	                                                            1

2.  CEA Phases	                                                             11

3.  CEA Framework – Birds	                                                  30

4.  CEA Framework – Bats	                                                   78

   CEA Framework – Habitats and Other Species	
5.                                                                         88

6. References	                                                              97



Annexes

Annex A.	   Regional Environmental and Social Context	                     103

Annex B.	   Stakeholder Engagement	                                        113

Annex C.	   CEA Regulatory, Policy, and Guidance Framework	                127

Annex D.	   Database Development	                                          137

Annex E.	   Trends Analysis – Migratory Soaring Birds	                     141

Annex F.	   Standardized Bird Survey	                                      151

Annex G.	   CEA for Birds Results: Step 1 – Species Population List	       155

Annex H.	   CEA For Birds Results: Step 2 – Species Sensitivity Results	   161

Annex I.	   Calculating Likelihood of Effect for Migratory Soaring Birds
            and for Resident and Summer Breeding Raptors	                  171

Annex J.	   CEA for Birds Results: Step 3 – Likelihood of Effect and
            Final Risk Rating	                                             175

Annex K.	   Threshold Setting: Determining Estimates of Fatalities from
            External Stressors and Defining Thresholds for Priority
            Bird Populations	                                              179




                                                                             Table of Contents | iii
Acronyms List




AC	       Advisory Committee
Abour	    Abour Wind Energy Company
AUM	      American University of Madaba
BR	       (Dana) Biosphere Reserve
CEA	      Cumulative Effects Assessment
CIA	      Cumulative Impact Assessment
CMS	      Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals
CR	       Critically Endangered (IUCN)
CRM	      Collision Risk Model
CSR	      Corporate Social Responsibility
E&S	      Environmental and Social
EBRD	     European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EHS	      Environment, Health and Safety
EIA	      Environmental Impact Assessment
EIB	      European Investment Bank
EN	       Endangered (IUCN)
EOO	      Extent of Occurrence
ERP	      Expert Review Panel
ESIA	     Environmental & Social Impact Assessment
ESMMP	    E&S Mitigation and Monitoring Plan
GIIP	     Good International Industry Practice
IBA	      Important Bird and Biodiversity Area
IFC	      International Finance Corporation
IFI	      International Financing Institutions
IUCN	     International Union for Conservation of Nature
JIC	      Jordan Investment Commission
JWPC	     Jordan Wind Project Company
KEPCO	    Korea Electric Power Corporation
KOSPO	    Korea Southern Power Corporation Ltd.
LAMSA	    LAMSA Investments LLC
LC	       Least Concern (IUCN)
LoE	      Likelihood of Effect
MAB	      UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Reserve
MEMR	     Ministry of Energy & Mineral Resources
MMP	      Mitigation and Monitoring Plan
MoENV	    Ministry of Environment
MoTA	     Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities


iv | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
MSB	      Migratory Soaring Bird
NBSAP	    National Biodiversity Strategy & Action Plan
NNL	      No Net Loss (of biodiversity)
NRP	      Natural Research Projects Ltd
NT	       Near Threatened (IUCN)
PBR	      Potential Biological Removal
PS	       IFC Performance Standard
PVA	      Population Viability Analysis
RSCN	     Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature
SEA	      Strategic Environmental Assessment
SNH	      Scottish Natural Heritage
SVI	      Species Vulnerability Index
TRWPPs	   Tafila Region Wind Power Projects
UoA	      Unit of Analysis
VECs	     Valued Environmental and Social Components
VP	       Vantage Points
VU	       Vulnerable (IUCN)
WPP	      Wind Power Project




                                                         Acronyms List | v
Foreword




The historic Paris agreement to combat climate change—signed by over 190 countries, including Jordan—came
into force in November 2016. To make good on their commitments in Paris, countries around the globe will—
more than ever before—be looking to renewable forms of energy as the world pivots toward a decarbonized
energy supply. To catalyze this shift, IFC has become one of the largest renewable energy investors in the world.
We have supported nearly 7 GW of hydropower, nearly 4 GW of wind power, and nearly 2 GW of solar power
in emerging markets.

The Government of Jordan considers diversifying its energy sources a priority and was one of the first in the
Middle East and North Africa region to initiate fundamental reforms in its power sector. The Government set an
ambitious 10 percent target for renewable energy as part of the total energy mix by 2020 with a particular focus on
the development of wind (600–1000 MW) and solar (300–600 MW) power plants. New legislation has paved the
way for private sector investments making Jordan an attractive market in the region, with a conducive regulatory
environment for renewable energy projects, strong government support, and competitive financing opportunities.

Jordan sits on the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway, the second largest flyway for migratory birds in the world, and is
home to highly charismatic raptor species that are susceptible to collision with wind turbines. Recognizing the
potential impacts that an increasing number of wind power projects may have on the flora and fauna of the Rift
Valley/Red Sea flyway, IFC sought to bring together developers, conservation organizations, and government
representatives to produce this Cumulative Effects Assessment (CEA)—the first of its kind in the Eastern Europe,
Middle East and North Africa region. We conducted this CEA through our Enhanced Client Support Program,
which seeks to convene multiple stakeholders to address collective environmental and social challenges that are
beyond the ability of any one company to solve alone.

We hope this CEA will facilitate more sustainable investments in the wind energy sector in Jordan not only
by improved understanding of the highest environmental and social risks but also through aligned mitigation,
monitoring, and management measures undertaken by developers and other stakeholders to manage those risks.
We also hope that the six-step CEA Framework detailed herein, which considers migratory and resident bird
populations, bats, and habitats can be applied more widely to the renewables sector across the Middle East and
North Africa region where multiple projects may be sited in close proximity and in landscapes or seascapes with
high biodiversity values.




Morgan J. Landy                                                                           Dr. Yaseen M. Khayyat
Director                                                                                 Minister of Environment
Environment, Social and Governance Department                                                 Kingdom of Jordan
International Finance Corporation



vi | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Acknowledgements




A number of parties helped make the Tafila Region Wind Power Projects Cumulative Effects Assessment (CEA)
possible. IFC managed the technical direction of the CEA and developed the CEA Framework. The IFC technical
team, led by Lori Anna Conzo, included Alvaro Camiña Cardenal and Marjanne Sevenant. We are grateful to John
Graham for his technical review and Susan Holleran and Fiorella Facello for their editorial review and compilation
of this document. We wish to acknowledge our IFC colleagues John Mantzavinatos, Jai Asnani, Elizabeth White,
Robin Sandenburgh and Ahmed Attiga for their ongoing support throughout this process. We also recognize IFC’s
Environment, Social and Governance Department, its Infrastructure Department and its Middle East and North
Africa Regional Department for their financial support.

IFC contracted multidisciplinary international and national experts and advisors to develop and prepare the CEA.
Over the life of the CEA, the team included:

      ECO Consult                            A Jordanian development firm working in Jordan          Laith El-Moghrabi
                                             and the Middle East, across a number of sectors, and    Elizabeth Van Zyl
                                             with extensive experience in social and environmental   Lana Al-Zu’bi
                                             assessments, supported by international consultancy     Ra’ed Daoud
                                             Zyl Consulting Ltd.

      Natural Research Projects Ltd          An international environmental consultancy based in     Simon Hulka
      (NRP)                                  the U.K. specializing in ornithology with extensive     Digger Jackson
                                             experience undertaking collision risk assessments for   Blair Urquhart
                                             birds and other ornithological studies for the wind     Simon Pinder
                                             sector.                                                 Phil Whitfield

      Claverton Associates Ltd               A U.K.-based environmental consultancy—led the          Mark Mackintosh
                                             initial phases of the CEA.1

The development of the CEA would not have been possible without the partnership and expertise of in-country
experts. These especially included the continued technical review and inputs from an Expert Review Panel comprising
Mr. Sharif Jbour from BirdLife International, Mr. Mohammed Za’rour and Mr. Tareq Qaneer from the Royal
Society for the Conservation of Nature (RSCN), and Dr. Fares Khoury from American University of Madaba. The
support of RSCN’s Geographic Information Systems team in the preparation of figures used within the CEA, and
the technical input on bats and habitats provided by Dr. Zuhair Amr is also acknowledged.

The CEA also would not have been possible without the willingness and contributions of the participating
developers who agreed to pool their project-specific bird survey data so that this assessment could be conducted.



1    Note that D’Appolonia S.p.A. (Italy) was the contract manager for the Scoping Phase.



                                                                                                Acknowledgements | vii
This includes special recognition of Mr. Fereydoon Abtahi (Abour Wind Energy Company), Mr. Sean Miller
(Jordan Wind Project Company), and Mr. Taeyong Lee (Korea Southern Power Company Ltd.) who were active
participants throughout the CEA process. Their contributions ensured that the CEA recommendations put forth a
practicable approach. For that, they are recognized as leaders in their fields on environmental and social matters.

The development of the CEA was an inclusive process with equal participation from international and national
experts and developers. An Advisory Committee was formed through which bilateral and multi-lateral engagement
was undertaken throughout the CEA process. Stakeholder groups represented in the Advisory Committee included:

 •	 A developers’ representative for the four participating wind power projects

 •	 The Ministry of Environment of Jordan

 •	 BirdLife International

 •	 The Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature

 •	 A representative of Jordanian academic ornithological community

 •	 A representative of Jordanian independent consultant bird surveyors

Other contributors included the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, who were consulted during the initial phases of the CEA process. As the main Government agency
responsible for the wind sector in Jordan, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources was kept informed of
the CEA process.




viii | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Executive Summary




In the Middle East, wind power is a rapidly growing renewable energy source because of its minimal carbon
emissions and increasing cost competitiveness. In an initiative to reduce Jordan’s high energy import costs, estimated
at 13.5 percent of GDP, the government has set a target of obtaining 1,800 megawatts—10 percent of the country’s
energy supply—from renewable sources by 2020.

Although the renewable energy sector, including wind energy, is considered “green,” adverse environmental and
social (E&S) impacts of renewables also need to be considered and managed. Jordan sits on the Rift Valley/Red Sea
flyway, the second largest flyway for migratory birds in the world. It also has a suite of protected areas of national
and international significance. Jordan’s largest nature reserve—the Dana Biosphere Reserve (BR) and the surrounding
Dana Important Bird and Biodiversity Area (IBA)—is one of the few large areas in Jordan designated as important
for its flora and fauna.

The IFC (International Finance Corporation) commissioned the Tafila Region Wind Power Project (TRWPP)
Cumulative Effects Assessment (CEA) to help promote more sustainable wind energy investments in Jordan. Focusing
on biodiversity, this innovative initiative is the first of its kind in the Eastern Europe, Middle East, and North Africa
region. The overall management and technical direction of the CEA was undertaken by IFC, supported by a team
of multidisciplinary international and Jordanian experts and advisors who were contracted to develop the CEA.
The work was made possible through a partnership with developers, conservation bodies, finance institutions and
government, along with the knowledge of in-country experts facilitated through an Advisory Committee and an
Expert Review Panel (ERP).

Five wind farm developers agreed to share and pool their pre-construction environmental survey data, representing a
remarkable resource. This collaborative approach, a key component of the CEA process, allows a consistent method
for identifying and managing E&S risks when developers are working in close proximity. For energy companies
operating in middle-income and developing countries, the CEA approach is especially pertinent in that it is risk-based
and relies on survey data but can also be applied where regional data on biodiversity are limited. This is particularly
relevant when assessing the effects of external stressors on biodiversity, as data on these effects are almost always
either limited or nonexistent in the countries where IFC and other multilateral development banks operate.

The CEA study area, located approximately 200 km south of Amman, principally within the Tafila Governorate,
covers the Dana BR/IBA and the Wind Power Project (WPP) sites. The temporal scope of the assessment was defined
as three years from the start of operations at each WPP, following which an evaluation would be conducted to
determine an appropriate ongoing level of biodiversity monitoring and adaptive management.

OBJECTIVES

The overall objective of the CEA was to identify the potential cumulative effects of the WPPs on biodiversity in
the study area and propose mitigation, monitoring, and other management measures to address the highest risks.



                                                                                              Executive Summary | ix
Risks were identified with respect to Valued Social and Environmental Components (VECs). Cumulative effects also
considered non-TRWPP-sources of mortality (external stressor effects) on VECs, although data on these aspects
were severely limited. The CEA recommends both site-specific and joint mitigation and monitoring measures for
developers, authorities, and other entities to consider as well as the management and institutional arrangements
necessary to implement those measures.

CEA PROCESS

PHASE 1. SCOPING:

The scoping phase included an initial review of existing data, preliminary engagement with stakeholders, determining
spatial and temporal boundaries of the CEA, and conducting a screening process to select VECs. Birds, bats and
“habitats and other species” were identified as the three VEC categories potentially at risk, with the risk to birds
from fatal collisions with wind turbines identified as the likely highest risk. Data gaps and inconsistencies were
identified as a major challenge in conducting the CEA. Defining standardized bird survey methods and conducting
surveys over a season at WPP sites in the study area was identified as a way to ameliorate these inconsistencies.
Collision fatality thresholds for birds were identified as essential for informing the assessment of risks and
identifying adaptive management solutions. The use of baseline flight activity monitoring data was considered
a key requirement for specifying these thresholds. Post-construction monitoring of bird and bat mortality was
determined to be essential for informing the adaptive management approach.

PHASE 2. SUPPLEMENTARY DATA AND CAPACITY BUILDING:

Field survey data on all WPPs were pre-existing, and Phase 2 focused on supplementary data collection and
capacity building efforts in response to the Scoping Phase. Analyses of data were also conducted during this phase.
Activities included a three-week ornithological training program and workshop to train Jordanian bird surveyors in
standardized methods for conducting bird flight activity surveys at wind energy developments; standardized surveys
at WPP sites during the spring of 2015 to augment collision risk model (CRM) suitable data, comparable across
all WPP sites; a CRM analysis to obtain species-specific annual fatality rate estimates for at-risk bird populations;
compiling of a common database of bird flight activity records from the various WPPs; a trends analysis using the
common database to complement the CRM and allow better understanding of the flight behavior of Migratory
Soaring Birds (MSBs) in the study area; and a reconnaissance site visit and rapid effects assessment for bats and
for habitats and other species.

PHASE 3. CEA FRAMEWORK

A six-step CEA framework using a risk-based approach was developed for birds. The objective was to identify
priority VECs at highest risk of cumulative effects from the WPP in the study area so that mitigation, monitoring,
and management measures could be put in place to safeguard these populations. The identification of priority
VECs applied commonly accepted concepts within risk assessment practice and aligned with IFC’s Performance
Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability (the Performance Standards). The process identified those
species populations potentially at risk (step 1), evaluated their sensitivity (relative importance and vulnerability)
(step 2), and assessed the likelihood of cumulative effect (LoE) of WPPs on each species population (step 3). Those
species with the highest risk ratings were determined to be priority VECs.

Fatality thresholds were then determined for each priority bird VEC using species-specific demographic information,
CRM results, and ERP external stressor fatality estimates (step 4). A site-specific and joint Mitigation and Monitoring



x | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Plan (MMP) was then created (step 5), and institutional and information management arrangements were proposed
(step 6).

For bats, and for “habitats and other species,” an initial 3-step process equivalent to that for birds was used to identify
priority VECs. Fatality threshold targets were not determined for priority bat VECs due to a lack of information
on the regional size and status of these populations. Similarly, limited data on habitats and other species meant
that threshold setting would not have been possible. Mitigation and management measures were also proposed.

RESULTS

BIRDS

For birds, the initial list of 171 populations identified as potentially at risk was reduced to 13 priority bird VECs
assessed to be at highest risk through a process that included data analysis, literature review, expert review, and
reasoned evaluation of population sensitivity and likelihood of collision risk. Eleven were raptors comprising four
MSB populations (Steppe Eagle – Aquila nipalensis, Egyptian Vulture – Neophron percnopterus, Eastern Imperial
Eagle – Aquila heliaca, and Booted Eagle – Hieraaetus pennatus) that use the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway and are
present in the study area during their spring and autumn migration periods. Seven species were resident or summer
breeding raptor populations (Short-toed Snake-eagle - Circaetus gallicus, Griffon Vulture – Gyps fulvus, Golden
Eagle – Aquila chrysaetos, Verreaux’s Eagle – Aquila verreauxii, Bonelli’s Eagle – Aquila fasciata, Long-legged
Buzzard – Buteo rufinus, and Lesser Kestrel – Falco naumanni) that may use the study area during, and outside,
their respective breeding periods. In addition, two passerine species, Syrian Serin – Serinus syriacus, and Eurasian
Goldfinch – Carduelis carduelis, were identified as priority bird VECs.

Populations of these 13 priority bird VECs were assessed to determine an annual threshold of fatalities that each
could sustain without affecting their long-term viability. For all 13, the target was determined to be zero fatalities.
In addition, an extreme events threshold target was recommended to alleviate the risk of multiple-fatality events to
a small number of non-priority MSB populations that may migrate in large flocks in the vicinity of the WPP sites.

As well as identifying and putting in place safeguards for bird populations at greatest risk, the CEA has provided
unique and valuable insights into general and species-specific bird use of WPP sites and the wider study area. In
particular, it has confirmed that, despite being reasonably close to migration bottlenecks around the Red Sea coast,
the WPP sites are located within a part of the flyway where MSBs migrate across a “broad front,” and so these sites
do not typically experience high concentrations of these species during the spring or the autumn migration periods.

Mitigation and monitoring measures for birds as well as institutional arrangements were included in the CEA
Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (MMP) as described below.

BATS

For bats, an initial list of 18 species potentially present within the study area was reduced to two priority bat
VECs (Desert Pipistrelle - Hypsugo ariel and Rüppell’s Pipistrelle - Pipistrellus rueppellii) through a process that
included spatial data review, literature review, and a reasoned evaluation of population sensitivity and likelihood
of collision risk.

For bats, recommendations focused on monitoring and other considerations in project-specific Environmental and
Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Mitigation and Monitoring Plans (ESMMPs).



                                                                                                Executive Summary | xi
HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES

Four habitat types and four other species were identified as potentially at risk within the study area. Using spatial
data reviews of habitat/species distributions and existing assessments of habitat conservation priority and species
conservation status, all four species and three of the four habitats were scoped out of the assessment process
during step 2 of the CEA process. The likelihood of effect of WPPs on Thorny Salt Brush (Noaea mucronata), the
one habitat remaining in the process, was assessed as minor, based on a risk of habitat loss and degradation. As
a consequence, no habitats were identified as priority VECs.

For habitats and other species, recommendations are focused on considerations in project-specific ESIAs and
ESMMPs.

CEA MITIGATION AND MONITORING PLAN

The CEA MMP principally aims to avoid collisions of priority VECs, quantify post-construction fatality rates at
WPP sites and ensure an adaptive management approach is undertaken. Three types of measures are proposed:
(i) project-specific on-site measures focusing on monitoring of post-construction flight activity coupled with
turbine-specific shutdown protocols and searches for carcasses of bird fatalities; (ii) inter-site monitoring activities
and adaptive management; and (iii) joint management and action plans focused on priority bird VECs. Adaptive
management will respond to a variety of scenarios such as exceeded thresholds, near-miss incidents, elevated-risk
situations, pastoral or livestock movements, and deficiencies found in monitoring protocols. Exceeded thresholds
will trigger immediate review and adaptive management response.

An innovation of the CEA MMP is to describe and propose a mechanism that facilitates inter-site data-sharing, which
allows TRWPP-wide reviewing of incident reports and routine mitigation monitoring results. This mechanism will
facilitate the efficient assessment of emerging cumulative issues, allow adaptive management response recommendations,
and broaden mitigation and monitoring planning to encompass the whole of the study area. A key component of
inter-site data sharing and management is that developers establish an Internal Committee to oversee a central
data center for sharing data from bird and bat monitoring.

The CEA recommends that data shared and reviewed by the Internal Committee also be shared with the Ministry
of Environment, given its regulatory role in environmental approvals and ongoing auditing role for Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) commitments. The ministry is encouraged to engage with the RSCN, Birdlife International,
and other conservation organizations and interested parties on the long-term implementation of the recommendations
of the CEA, including adaptive management responses.

Another important recommendation within the MMP is the development of a corporate social responsibility (CSR)
fund, which is the vehicle through which a proposed preemptive biodiversity offset might be undertaken, if needed.
A CSR fund has already been established in Jordan for developers of photovoltaic solar energy projects clustered
near Ma’an. Such a fund would be a useful way to pool resources among developers for collectively carrying out
actions relevant not only to this CEA but potentially also to other environmental and social initiatives.

Future safeguarding of current and emerging high-risk populations is a key priority within the CEA. The iterative,
comprehensive program of post-construction monitoring and adaptive management that was developed as part of
the CEA is designed to provide the feedback necessary for a dynamic process that enables developers and authorities
to respond to environmental and ecological changes that may affect the conservation status of bird VECs.



xii | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
CONCLUSIONS

The process and methodology for this CEA was developed to promote more sustainable investments in the wind
energy sector in Jordan through improved identification and management of the highest environmental risks.
This is important work, given the multiple developments proposed near the Dana BR/IBA and the potential for
more development elsewhere. Though the CEA focuses on Jordan, its process and methodology are likely to be
relevant across middle-income and developing countries, many of which—like Jordan—have limited regional data
on biodiversity. Likewise, the CEA Framework could be adapted to apply to other sectors.

The recommendations proposed in this CEA are in line with IFC’s Performance Standards and analogous environmental
and social standards of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and European Investment
Bank (EIB). Their implementation would assist in the development of the ESIAs and ESMMPs, not only for
the WPPs participating in the CEA, but also for other developments near the Dana BR/IBA or other important
biodiversity areas in Jordan.




                                                                                       Executive Summary | xiii
1. CEA Overview




1.1 BACKGROUND

Concerns about climate change and the use of fossil fuels, coupled with a drop in costs to install renewable energy
sources, have bolstered the contribution of renewable energy technologies to energy generation. In the Middle
East, wind power and solar photovoltaic arrays are a rapidly growing renewable energy source owing to their
minimal carbon emissions and increasing efficiency. In 2010, the government of Jordan’s Ministry of Energy
and Mineral Resources estimated that the costs of the country’s energy imports were nearing US$3.6 billion,
or 13.5 percent of the country’s gross domestic product. In response to this energy crisis, the government set a
target to obtain 10 percent of the country’s energy supply (1,800 megawatts [MW]) from renewable sources by
2020 (Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 2007).

Although the renewable energy sector, which includes wind energy, is considered “green,” adverse environmental
impacts of renewables also need to be considered. Jordan sits on the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway, the second largest
flyway for migratory birds in the world (Figure 1 and Section 1.7, Regional Environmental Context). It also has

FIGURE 1. RIFT VALLEY/RED SEA FLYWAY




                                                                                                CEA Overview | 1
a suite of protected areas of national and international significance, in particular its largest nature reserve, the
Dana Biosphere Reserve (BR)2 and the surrounding Dana Important Bird and Biodiversity Area (IBA),3 one of the
few large areas in Jordan designated as important for its flora and fauna.

In 2013, International Finance Corporation (IFC), European Investment Bank (EIB), and others invested in the
first utility-scale wind power project (WPP) in the Middle East—the 117 MW WPP of the Jordan Wind Project
Company (JWPC), also referred to as the Tafila project, for its location in the Tafila Governorate. Located 184
kilometers (km) south of the capital city of Amman, the JWPC’s project is expected to produce 400 gigawatt-
hours of electricity a year. Inaugurated in December 2015 under the patronage of His Majesty King Abdullah II,
the project is now in operation.

While Tafila is a landmark project in Jordan and an example in the
region, it is not without its challenges. The project is located within 5
km of the Dana BR and just outside the IBA, and safeguards for birds
have been firmly integrated into the project’s E&S management system.                        Collaboration:
As part of the government’s expansion of renewable energy sources,                           Key to the CEA Process
several other WPPs have been proposed around the Dana BR and IBA.
The government has identified this part of the Jordan Valley as a focal                      This CEA would not have been possible

area for wind energy development because of its high wind-resource                           without    strong   collaboration    among
potential.                                                                                   developers, government agencies, and

                                                                                             international and national experts. The
To help promote the long-term sustainability of investments in the wind
energy sector in Jordan, IFC commissioned the Tafila Region Wind Power                       engagement, provision of expert opinion,

Projects (TRWPP) Cumulative Effects Assessment (CEA), which focuses                          and supportive participation in the CEA
on WPPs located or proposed in the surroundings of the Dana BR and                           of developers, government authorities,
IBA (referred to as the CEA initiative; see location in Figure 2). This
                                                                                             conservation entities, and other entities was
initiative, which focuses on the most at-risk biodiversity aspects of the
                                                                                             essential to identify the highest cumulative
landscape, is the first of its kind in the Eastern Europe, Middle East and
North African region. Though the CEA focuses on Jordan, its process                          risks and practical solutions for the joint

and methodology are likely to be relevant across middle-income and                           management of those risks. The development
developing countries, many of which—like Jordan—have limited regional                        of the CEA was an inclusive process with
data on biodiversity.
                                                                                             equal participation from international and

1.2 CEA OBJECTIVES                                                                           national experts and developers. The process

                                                                                             benefited greatly from the establishment of
The objective of the TWRPP CEA is twofold: (i) identify the highest risks
posed by the potential cumulative effects of the WPPs (Section 1.4) in                       two groups to guide the process: an Advisory

the study area (Section 1.3) and by external stressors, and (ii) propose                     Committee and an experienced in-country
WPP-specific and joint mitigation, monitoring, and other management                          Expert Review Panel.
measures to help developers, authorities, and other entities, including
Jordanian environmental conservation organizations, to address those risks.



 Designated by the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere program.
2 

 IBAs are areas identified by the nongovernmental organization BirdLife International, using an internationally agreed set of criteria, as
3 

being globally important for the conservation of bird populations. See http://www.birdlife.org/worldwide/programmes/sites-habitats-ibas.



2 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
FIGURE 2. LOCATION OF TRWPP CEA INITIATIVE

                                                                                                                                                                                                           IBRD 33424
                  35°E                                                 36°E                                  37°E                                           38°E                                39°E
     34°N                                                                                                                                                                                                         34°N

                   n
           Se anea
               r
             a
            er
          dit




                                                                                                          JORDAN
    Me




     33°N                                                                                                                                                                                                         33°N
                                          To                                     To
                                         Zefat                                 Damascus
                                       Lake                                                                                                                                                                   To
                                    Tiberias                                                                                                                                                                Baghdad

                                                          Um Qais
                                                              Irbid

                                                       IRBID
                                                       IRB ID                                                                                                        Ar Ruwayshid
                            AJLUN
                                                              Ajlun                 Al Mafrak
                                              River




                       JARASH                                         Jarash                                                                      MAFRAK
                                                      Arda                                                            Mahattat al Halif
                                               n
                                          Jorda




                                                      BALQA                    Az
                                                 As Salt                                                                                                                                                          32°N
     32°N                                                                      Zarka
                                                                       AMMAN                    ZARKA
                                                                                                          Azraq ash
                                                                                                            - -
                                                                                                          Shishan
                                                   Madaba
                          To
                      Jerusalem
                                              MADABA                           AMMAN
                                                      Dead
                                                      Sea
                                                                                                                                          To
                                                                                                                                        Al Jawf
                                              Al Mazra’ah

                                                                                 -
                                                                          Al Qatranah
             To                           Al Karak
          Beersheba
                                                 KARAK
                                                  --
                                              As Safi
     31°N                                                                                                                                                                                                         31°N
                                                                                                          Ard
                                              TAFILAH                                                               as
                                     At Tafilah                                                                           Sa
                                                                                                                                 w
                                        -
                                            Al
                                    Rashadiyah
                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                  Ba’ir                              aa
                                                                                                                                            n
                                  Ash Shawbak
                                                                                             MA'AN
                                       Petra
                                                                         Al Jafr
                                                                                                                                                                        0       0         50 Kilometers
                                                             Ma'an

                                                                                                                                                                        0            25                50 Miles
     30°N                                     Ra’s an Naqb                                                                                                                                                        30°N
                                                                                                                                                              38°E                                  39°E

                         AQABA

      To
                                    Ad Disi
                                                                                                                                                                            JORD AN
    Nuweiba                                                                                                                                                                 SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
                                  Jabal Ram
                  Aqaba           (1,734 m)                                                                                                                                 GOVERNORATE CAPITALS
         aba




                                                      Al Mudawwarah                                                                                                         NATIONAL CAPITAL
    of Aq




                                                                                                                           This map was produced by                         RIVERS
                   To                                                                                                      the Map Design Unit of The
                  Al B'ir                                                                                                  World Bank. The boundaries,
                                                                                                                                                                            MAIN ROADS
   Gulf




                                                                                                                           colors, denominations and
                                                                                                                           any other information shown
     29°N                                                                                                                  on this map do not imply, on                     RAILROADS
                                                                                                                           the part of The World Bank
                                                                                    To                                     Group, any judgment on the                       GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES
                                                                                   Al B'ir                                 legal status of any territory,
                                                                                                                           or any endorsement or
                                                                                                                           acceptance of such                               INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
                                                                                                                           boundaries.
                                                                                                                                                                            LOCATION OF CEA OF TRWPP
               35°E                                                   36°E                                   37°E                                                           INITIATIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           JANUARY 2005




                                                                                                                                                                                              CEA Overview | 3
The outcomes of the CEA will assist these entities in planning the project-specific Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (ESIAs) and the adaptive management of the existing E&S Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (ESMMP)
of the JWPC Tafila project. This CEA does not discuss individual WPP-specific impacts and does not include the raw
data from the WPP-specific bird surveys; this information is the subject of the project-specific ESIAs.

It should be noted that the CEA does not aim to predict the significance of impacts of the WPPs over a defined
time period as the potential impacts are not definitively known and were estimated through predictive modeling.
Rather, the CEA is based on a risk assessment approach as identified in the CEA frameworks presented in this
report. Priority valued environmental and social components (VECs)4 were selected on the basis of risks rather
than predicted impact.5 Determining the VECs at the highest risk of cumulative effects was essential to help focus
and align the efforts of the WPPs’ developers and of other stakeholders.

1.3 STUDY AREA

The study area of the TRWPP CEA includes the Dana BR, the surrounding IBA, five WPPs, and a 2 km
buffer area around each WPP (Figure 3). The 2 km buffer around each WPP relates to the survey area


FIGURE 3. TRWPP CEA STUDY AREA




4  VEC is a term used in the practice of cumulative impact assessment to indicate an environmental or social attribute that is considered
important in assessing risk. For example, VECs might be physical features, such as habitats and wildlife populations; social conditions
(e.g., health or economics) or cultural aspects (e.g., archaeological sites). VECs may be directly or indirectly affected by a specific
development or may be affected by the cumulative effects of multiple developments. For the VECs of the TWRPP CEA, see Section 2.2.5.
5  It is for this reason that this assessment is called a cumulative effects assessment rather than a cumulative impacts assessment although

it is recognized that IFC’s Good Practice Handbook on Cumulative Impact Assessment and Management (IFC, 2013) uses these terms
interchangeably.


4 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
limits used in the vantage-point (VP) 6 surveys                   FIGURE 4. THE RIFT VALLEY AND THE TRWPP CEA STUDY AREA
conducted for birds and is therefore included
within the study area.

The study area is located within the Rift Valley/
Red Sea flyway, situated to the south of the
Dead Sea in the eastern part of the Rift Valley7
(Figure 4). The WPPs lie adjacent to the Dana
IBA, oriented approximately north–south along
its eastern edge in the higher elevations of the
Rift Valley margins. It was considered important
to include the entire IBA in the TRWPP study
area so that the potential cumulative effects
on species relevant to its integrity could be
considered.

The WPP projects are administratively located
within Tafila Governorate,8 with the exception of
the WPP located farthest to the south, which is just
within the adjoining governorate, Ma’an. Tafila is
located 184 km south of the capital city of Amman
and is bordered by Al Karak Governorate to the
north and by Ma’an and Aqaba Governorates to
the south.

1.4 OVERVIEW OF THE WIND POWER
PROJECTS

This CEA provides an assessment of the potential
cumulative effects on VECs of five WPPs and
considers other external stressors. Of the five
developers, only four are considered “participants”
in the CEA in that they were actively involved in its
development, including determining the mitigation,




6  Vantage points are survey site locations strategically

positioned so that maximum airspace at a WPP can be
effectively and efficiently monitored for bird flight activity.
The buffer is a precautionary measure to reduce the risk
of failure to record birds that only occasionally use the
wind farm area.
7  The Rift Valley in this report refers to the portion of the

Great Rift Valley that stretches from the northwestern tip
of Jordan to Aqaba in the south by the Red Sea. It can also
be referred to as the Jordan Rift Valley, Jordan Valley, or
Great Rift Valley.
8  Tafila is also spelled Tafilah and Tafileh.




                                                                                                       CEA Overview | 5
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF WPPS INCLUDED IN THE TRWPP CEA


                           TOTAL
 WIND POWER              INSTALLED
 PROJECT                  CAPACITY         NO. OF TURBINES            STATUS                 OTHER INFORMATION

 JWPC Tafila                117 MW        38 turbines with an         Operational           All WPPs are likely to include the following
                                          individual installed                              infrastructure and/or facilities of varying scale
                                          capacity of 3.075 MW                              depending on the size, specific location, proxim-
 Korea Southern            49.5 MW        15 turbines with an         Approved by the       ity to existing transmission infrastructure, and
 Power Company                            individual installed        government            generating capacity of the individual project:
 Ltd. (KOSPO)                             capacity of 3.3 MW                                •	 Wind turbine generators, which include a
                                                                                               foundation, steel tower, nacelle, rotor blades,
                                                                                               rotor hub, and transformer
                                                                                            •	 Electrical substation, transmission structures,
                                                                                               overhead transmission line to connect with
                                                                                               the NEPCO system, and underground electri-
                                                                                               cal power lines
                                                                                            •	 New roads for access during operation and
                                                                                               construction
                                                                                            •	 Meteorological mast
                                                                                            •	 Office and/or ancillary structures
 Abour Wind                 50 MW         15 turbines with an         Approved by the
 Energy Company                           individual installed        government
 (Abour)                                  capacity of 3.3 MW
 LAMSA Invest-              99 MW         30 turbines with an         Unknown
 ments LLC                                individual installed
 (LAMSA)                                  capacity of 3.3 MW
 Korea Electric             90 MW         27 turbines with an         Unknown
 Power Corpora-                           individual installed
 tion’s (KEPCO)                           capacity of 3.3 MW
 Fujeija

a. The Fujeij WPP contributed raw data from the bird surveys to conduct this assessment but is not a participating WPP.




monitoring, and management actions represented in this report (see Sections 3, 4, and 5). Table 1 describes the
five WPPs.

1.5 TEMPORAL SCOPE OF THE CEA

A challenge in determining the temporal scope of this CEA was that the WPPs were at different stages of development.
JWPC’s Tafila project, the only WPP operating in the CEA study area, began operations in September 2015 and has
a design life of 20 years. The impacts of this project on birds are still in the early stages. The other WPPs are still
to be constructed and, at the time of writing, the time frame for their construction and operation was unknown. It
was also unknown whether all four proposed WPPs would be implemented. For the purposes of this CEA, using a
precautionary approach, it was assumed that all five WPPs would be operational.

The temporal scope of the assessment might therefore be defined as the time frame during which the proposed
mitigation, monitoring, and management measures will be implemented. It is during this time frame that monitoring
results should reveal the impacts of the projects. An initial three-year time frame (from the start of each WPP



6 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
becoming operational) is proposed, following which
an evaluation would be conducted to determine                 Six-Step CEA Framework for Birds
future monitoring efforts. This evaluation must also          A core innovation of the TWRPP CEA was the development of the
consider cumulative effects of other projects that
                                                              CEA framework, which consists of a six-step process for assessing
might be operational in the future.
                                                              birds. The framework was designed to identify bird populations at

1.6 UNIQUE ASPECTS OF THE CEA                                 the highest risk from cumulative effects of the WPPs in the study

This CEA was developed in the context of some                 area and external stressors so that mitigation, monitoring, and

unique circumstances, which in turn provided a                management measures could be identified. Taking a risk-based
number of opportunities.                                      approach, the framework is designed to be applied in middle-income

 •	 Though three of the four participating WPPs        and developing countries that often have little preexisting regional

    (see Section 1.4) were at the pre-ESIA stage at    data on biodiversity.
    the time of writing of this report, data from
    substantial preconstruction bird surveys at the
    participating WPPs were available for the CEA.
    This presented a unique opportunity to understand how resident and migratory birds use the area, including
    the risk of collision.

 •	 All five WPPs in the study area agreed to share their project-specific survey data. The sharing of biodiversity
    data is a notable aspect of the CEA: it allowed for in-depth review of data collection consistency between sites,
    leading to a robust analysis of likely effects on potentially at-risk populations. Data sharing also represented
    an opportunity to examine combined data for migratory soaring birds (MSBs). MSB flight activity data were
    pooled in a common database and analyzed to better understand factors that influence MSB behavior and
    collision risk.

 •	 The pooling and analysis of WPP survey results provides a baseline resource for informing the management
    of the highest cumulative risks in the study area.

 •	 The engagement, provision of expert opinion, and supportive participation in the CEA of developers, government
    authorities, conservation entities, and other entities was essential for identifying the highest cumulative risks
    and practical solutions for the joint management of those risks. The development of the CEA was an inclusive
    process with equal participation from international and national experts and developers. The process greatly
    benefited from the establishment of two groups to guide the process: the Advisory Committee (AC) and the
    Expert Review Panel (ERP) of experienced in-country specialists.

   •	 The AC provided a platform for bilateral and multilateral engagement throughout the process. Stakeholder
      groups represented in the AC included a developers’ representative for the four participating WPPs, the Ministry
      of Environment (MoENV), BirdLife International, and the Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature
      (RSCN), as well as representatives of the Jordanian academic ornithological community and independent
      consultant bird surveyors.

   •	 The ERP, primarily a subgroup of the AC, comprised ornithological experts with knowledge and experience
      of the avifauna of Jordan and the Middle East. Collectively, through members’ extensive experience-based
      knowledge of the Tafila region and the country, along with their access to and knowledge of a range of
      unpublished data and reports, the ERP represented the most extensive body of knowledge on ornithology
      in Jordan. The panel provided expert knowledge on the distribution of, status of, and threats to species



                                                                                                         CEA Overview | 7
          populations using the study area, especially useful where knowledge gaps existed. Throughout each stage
          of the CEA process, the ERP was iteratively engaged in the development and implementation of methods
          and the review of results.

     •	 The CEA goes beyond national regulatory requirements and applies international standards and guidance, thus
        providing a resource for WPPs in the study area and others in the Jordanian wind sector to use in achieving
        compliance with international requirements. The process adopted some key aspects of international standards,
        including the application of the mitigation hierarchy concept, the identification of risks through VECs, and
        the application of good-practice approaches to the management of risks (e.g., shutdown on demand and
        adaptive management).

1.7 REGIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT

The Dana BR and IBA, located adjacent and to the west of WPP sites, together constitute the majority of the
study area. Covering 300 square kilometers (km2), the Dana BR is Jordan’s largest nature reserve. The site is
globally recognized as an area of high nature conservation importance—to date 25 IUCN Red-List Endangered
and Vulnerable species have been recorded. In addition to its ecological importance, it is culturally important:
about 100 archaeological sites have been identified on the site. The reserve is designated under the Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) program of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
The program aims to establish a scientific basis for the improvement of relationships between people and their
environments.9


 The MAB program draws on the natural and social sciences, economics, and education to improve human livelihoods and work
9 

toward the equitable sharing of benefits, and to safeguard natural and managed ecosystems, promoting innovative approaches to
economic development that are both socially and culturally appropriate and environmentally sustainable (see http://www.unesco.org/
new/en/natural-sciences/environment/ecological-sciences/man-and-biosphere-programme/about-mab/).



8 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
The Dana IBA covers 310 km2, surrounding and partly overlapping with the Dana BR. In 2000, it was designated
by the global nature conservation partnership Birdlife International as a key area for the conservation of the
world’s birds due to the diverse assemblage of breeding birds of unusually mixed biogeographical origins present
in the area. The IBA has particular conservation importance for the Syrian Serin (Serinus syriacus) and the Griffon
vulture (Gyps fulvus). Griffon vulture breeding sites are known to be located within the Dana IBA and nowhere
else in Jordan.

Birdlife International has assigned the Dana IBA a “very high” MSB sensitivity rating, with records of 26 out of
a total of 37 MSBs transiting Jordan. The importance of the IBA for MSBs is explained by its location within the
Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway, the second most important flyway in the world for such birds (raptors, storks, pelicans,
and ibises). An estimated 1.5 million birds of the 37 species use the flyway to migrate between their breeding areas
in Eastern Europe and Western and Central Asia in spring and their wintering areas in Africa in autumn (BirdLife
International, 2012, 2015). (For a detailed description of MSB migration along the flyway and over the study
area, see Annex A, Regional Environmental and Social Context.) Overlapping with the southern edge of the Dana
IBA and extending to the south of the Dana BR is the proposed Shoubak Nature Reserve.10 Currently there is no
timeline for establishing the proposed reserve as a protected area.

Topographically the study area ranges in altitude from 100 m below sea level in Wadi Araba on the west side to
1,600 m above sea level in the Sharah Mountains11 on the east side. Wadi Araba is the name given to the section
of the Jordan Valley that runs south from the Dead Sea to Aqaba. The study area is characterized by a network of
tributary wadis that dissect it, running principally east–west down the Rift Valley slope into the Wadi Araba. These
wadis are dry except during rainfall events, when they are typically subject to flash flooding. The altitudinal gradients
in the study area give rise to unique biological and ecological features as well as a diversity of land use.

Vegetation in Jordan is divided into 19 types grouped into four biogeographical zones; Irano-Turanian, Mediterranean,
Saharo-Arabian, and Sudanian Penetration. (For details about each zone, see Annex A, Regional Environmental
and Social Context.) Boundaries between zones, particularly along the rift, are not always distinct and transitional
areas can contain a mixture of adjacent zones. All but one of these zones (the Saharo-Arabian) are represented
within the study area. WPPs and their surrounding buffer areas are generally located within the Mediterranean and
Irano-Turanian zones, which contain four main vegetation types: Mediterranean nonforest batha, batha-steppe,
Artemisia herba-alba steppe, and thorny saltwort (Noaea mucronata) brush.

1.8 REGIONAL SOCIAL CONTEXT

The Tafila Governorate has an estimated population of 87,500 (2011 figure), approximately 2 percent of the
national total; it is one of the least populated of Jordan’s 12 governorates. Tafila principally depends on tourism
from other parts of the country to its nature reserves and hot springs. Archaeology and agriculture (fruit and
olives) are the second and third largest sectors, respectively, by revenue.



10  The proposed reserve is located mostly in the Aqaba Governorate, except for its northeastern part which is located in Ma’an Governorate.
It has an area of approximately 77 km2. Like the Dana BR, it represents three main biogeographical zones; the Mediterranean, Irano-
Turanian, and Sudanian; the Irano-Turanian biogeographical zone covers more than 90 percent of the area. Five vegetation types are
defined in the area: juniper, evergreen oak, water, steppe and acacia, and rocky Sudanian. During the rapid assessments carried out in
the proposed area, 145 plant species, 44 bird species, 12 mammal species, 10 reptile species, and 1 amphibian species were recorded.
11  The Sharah Mountains, also referred to as the Southern Highlands, extend along the Rift Valley in southern Jordan from Karak

and southward to Aqaba. The Sharah Mountains also extend into northern Saudi Arabia.



                                                                                                                    CEA Overview | 9
There is a mixture of land ownership in the study area. The Dana BR is government land, whereas the areas outside
the reserve are either privately owned or government lands. As is the case in most of Jordan, the land in the area
is divided among tribes on the basis of watershed and pasture. Historic ownership of tribal lands, referred to as
“tribal fronts,” is still acknowledged and is based on formal agreements or semiformal understandings between
tribal groups.

The movement of the Bedouin livestock owners follows the change in vegetation cover and the availability
of pasture. Typically Bedouin livestock owners are present in the study area in their highest densities in
the spring to autumn, from March/April until late September/October and spend the rest of the year in the
east, although these movements may vary by year.

The development of WPPs in the study area will not restrict the use of land by livestock owners (either seminomadic
or local communities). However, the CEA does take into account the effect of ongoing pastoralist land use on the
activity of some species, notably vultures, in the vicinity of WPP sites. For details about tribal groups using the
study area, see Annex A, Regional Environmental and Social Context.




                                                                                   Dana Biosphere Reserve




10 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
2. CEA Phases




2.1 SUMMARY OF CEA PHASES

The CEA was developed in three phases—stakeholder engagement was a cornerstone of each. Table 2 summarizes
the CEA process. Stakeholder engagement activities conducted for the entirety of the CEA process are summarized
in Table 3 and described in detail in Annex B.



TABLE 2. OVERVIEW OF CEA PHASES


                                      PHASE                              ACTIVITIES                                                      TIME FRAME

                                      Phase 1: Scoping                   •	 Initial data review                                          January–February 2015
                                                                         •	 Identification of data gaps
                                                                         •	 Scoping assessment
critical throughout the CEA process




                                                                         •	 Identification of temporal and geographic boundaries
                                                                            and VECs
      Stakeholder engagement




                                      Phase 2: Supplementary Data        •	 Standardized bird surveys (additional to preexisting data)   February–June 2015
                                      Collection and Capacity Building
                                                                         •	 Collision risk modeling (CRM)
                                                                         •	 Database compilation
                                                                         •	 Trends analysis
                                                                         •	 Reconnaissance site visit and rapid assessment (bats,
                                                                            habitats and other species)
                                                                         •	 Ornithological training and workshop
                                                                         •	 AC established
                                      Phase 3: Six-Step CEA Frame-       •	 Development of CEA frameworks for VECs                       July 2015–March 2016
                                      work Development and Assess-
                                                                         •	 Application of CEA frameworks for priority VECs
                                      ment
                                                                         •	 Continuous review and feedback with ERP
                                                                         •	 Regular consultation with AC
                                                                         •	 Development of CEA findings and report




                                                                                                                                              CEA Phases | 11
TABLE 3. SUMMARY TABLE OF CEA PROCESS


                                                                                            STAKEHOLDER
 PHASE          ACTIVITY           SUMMARY                                                  ENGAGEMENTa

Phase 1:       Scoping             •	 A literature search was undertaken to identify guid- •	 A series of stakeholder meetings
                                      ance and references to inform the CEA methodol-         were held with developers, gov-
Scoping
                                      ogy and provide information for the determination       ernment departments, conserva-
Also see:                             of likely VECs.                                         tion organizations, and other
Annex B                                                                                       entities to seek views on the CEA
                                   •	 Stakeholders were identified and engagement
Stakeholder                                                                                   approach and scope. Overall,
                                      begun.
Engagement                                                                                    there was positive support for
                                   •	 The spatial and temporal boundaries of the CEA          the CEA concept, and feedback
                                      were identified.                                        was given in relation to the CEA
                                   •	 The VEC screening process selected birds, bats,         approach and scope.
                                     and habitats and other species as priority VECs.
                                   •	 Key issues were identified that informed subse-
                                      quent phases of the CEA, including the following:
                                    •	 Data gaps and inconsistences presented a major
                                       challenge to the CEA.
                                    •	 The determination of thresholds for birds was es-
                                       sential to inform the assessment of risks and the
                                       identification of adaptive management solutions.
                                    •	 Consultation was the route to obtaining all avail-
                                       able baseline data to support the CEA.
                                    •	 Through consultation, there was a need to define
                                       and agree on a standardized baseline methodol-
                                       ogy for bird surveys.
                                    •	 Postconstruction monitoring of bird and bat
                                       mortality was essential to inform any adaptive
                                       management approach.
                                    •	 The shortage of ornithologists and qualified sur-
                                       veyors and institutional capacity posed a problem.
                                    •	 Data confidentiality was required for certain
                                       stakeholders.
Phase 2:       Capacity Building
Capacity       Ornithological      •	 A multistakeholder workshop was undertaken            •	 Academics, conservation or-
Building and   Training and           along with a field visit to the study area. The          ganizations, and other entities
Supplemen-     Workshop               aim was to discuss the CEA initiative and gather         were engaged on the survey
tary Data                             support for standardizing some of the methods            field methodology (including
Collection                            used during the individual WPP assessments and           categorization of target species),
                                      surveys.                                                 the selected VECs, and the CEA
                                                                                               approach.
Also see:                          •	 Three weeks of in-field training for surveyors        •	 The multistakeholder AC was
                                      conducting the Spring 2015 Flight Activity Surveys       established. The outcomes of the
Annex B
                                      for the TRWPP sites. The purpose of this training        scoping phase were presented
Stakeholder
                                      program was to build capacity in Jordan to plan and      to the AC, and it was engaged on
Engagement
                                      conduct bird surveys at WPPs using a standardized        the next steps for the CEA.
                                      methodology and a consistent approach.
                                                                                                           (continued on next page)




12 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 3. SUMMARY TABLE OF CEA PROCESS (continued )


                                                                                                 STAKEHOLDER
 PHASE            ACTIVITY          SUMMARY                                                      ENGAGEMENTa

                  Supplementary Data Collection – Birds
Annex F           Standardized      •	 Because of the inconsistencies identified in the
Standardized      Bird Survey          survey approaches reviewed during phase 1
Bird Survey       and Spring 2015      (Scoping), the CEA process focused on the develop-
                  Flight Activity      ment of a standardized bird survey methodology.
                  Surveys
                                    •	 The main objective of these bird surveys was to
                                       collect data suitable for calculating comparable
                                       mortality rates from wind-turbine collision for bird
                                       species populations vulnerable to collision risk at
                                       each WPP site, using collision risk modeling.
                  CRM               •	 The scoping phase identified the principal risk to
                                       bird VECs as colliding with turbine rotor blades. In
                                       order to assess this risk, collision risk modeling was
                                       conducted for the CEA using the spring 2015 flight
                                       activity data for three WPPs along with preexisting
                                       (comparable) survey data available from the other
                                       two WPPs.
Annex D           Database Com-     •	 The sharing of bird flight activity data with the CEA
Database          pilation             by the WPP developers allowed the compilation of
Development                            a common database containing bird flight activ-
                                       ity records for multiple WPP sites. This database
                                       provided the basis for additional analysis of collision
                                       risks to MSBs and supplemented the results of the
                                       CRM.
Annex E           Trends Analysis   •	 Using the common database, a trends analysis of
Trends Analysis                        MSBs was performed which helped inform the
–Migratory                             recommendations made in the CEA regarding miti-
Soaring Birds                          gation and management strategies for the highest
                                       risks to MSB VECs.
                  Supplementary Data Collection – Bats
                  Reconnaissance    •	 Limited data were available in the TRWPP for bats.
                  Site Visit and       A site visit and rapid assessment, including a litera-
                  Rapid Assess-        ture review, were therefore undertaken as part of
                  ment                 the CEA scope.
                  Supplementary Data Collection – Habitat and Other Species
                                    •	 The Dana BR area has been studied extensively;
                                       however, comparatively limited data on biodiversity
                                       were available (on aspects other than birds) for the
                                       WPP sites beyond the limited surveys undertaken
                                       by the developers for their ESIAs (some of which
                                       were not completed). A rapid assessment, includ-
                                       ing a literature review and limited field visit, was
                                       undertaken as part of the CEA scope.

                                                                                                         (continued on next page)




                                                                                                            CEA Phases | 13
TABLE 3. SUMMARY TABLE OF CEA PROCESS (concluded )


                                                                                                       STAKEHOLDER
    PHASE               ACTIVITY           SUMMARY                                                     ENGAGEMENTa

    Phase 3:            Bird, Bat, and Habitats and Other Species VECs
    CEA Frame-          CEA Frame-     •	 A six-step CEA framework was developed for birds         •	 Extensive multilateral consulta-
    work and            works –Methods    and adapted for the other VECs to identify priority         tion was undertaken through the
    Assessment                            VECs at the highest risk from cumulative effects of         AC and direct engagement with
                                          the WPPs and external stressors so that mitigation,         developers, the ERP, the MoENV,
    Also see:
                                          monitoring, and management measures could be                and other entities.
    Annex B Stake-                        identified. A key finding of the scoping phase was
                                                                                                   •	 The ERP, which was central to
    holder Engage-                        that bird VECs likely faced the highest risk of suc-
                                                                                                      phase 3, was formed under the
    ment                                  cessive WPP developments in the study area and
                                                                                                      umbrella of the AC. The contribu-
                                          that the principal potential impact on bird VECs was
                                                                                                      tion of the ERP was invaluable in
                                          the risk of fatal collisions with wind turbine rotors.
                                                                                                      reviewing and providing technical
                                          Given the limitations on comparative data for bats
                                                                                                      opinions on a continuing basis,
                                          and for habitats and other species, the frameworks
                                                                                                      which assisted in determining the
                                          for these VECs are simpler than the one for birds;
                                                                                                      priority bird VECs, the thresholds,
                                          those frameworks follow a four-step process.
                                                                                                      and the mitigation and manage-
                                       •	 The identification of priority VECs applied commonly        ment strategies.
                                          accepted concepts in risk assessment practice and
                                                                                                   •	 During this phase the develop-
                                          was designed to align with IFC’s Guidance Note (GN)
                                                                                                      ers were specifically engaged in
                                          6. It considered both the sensitivity of a receptor and/
                                                                                                      detail on the proposed MMP.
                                          or species and the likelihood of effect (LoE) on that
                                          receptor and/or species. The species with the highest •	 Specific consultation was under-
                                          risk ratings were then determined to be priority VECs.      taken with the MoENV, RSCN,
                                                                                                      and other relevant entities in re-
                                       •	 Using species specific measures of collision rate
                                                                                                      lation to informing the approach
                                          across all TRWPP and assessment of the likely effect
                                                                                                      to institutional arrangements
                                          of ‘external stressors’, it was possible to determine
                                                                                                      for implementing some of the
                                          a threshold for fatalities for each priority bird VEC.
                                                                                                      recommendations with regard to
                                          These thresholds were considered important as they
                                                                                                      the joint MMP.
                                          establish the point at which action should occur in
                                          an adaptive management response to operational           •	 Drafts of the CEA report were
                                          monitoring. Thresholds of fatalities were not deter-        shared with the AC and ERP for
                                          mined for priority bat VECs or VECs for habitat and         comment before finalization.
                                             other species. This decision was influenced by the
                                             lack of data along with consideration of the likely
                                             risk to these VECs.
                                           •	 Mitigation and monitoring measures were determined
                                              in consultation with the WPP developers. For birds,
                                              three types of measures are proposed: project-specific
                                              on-site mitigation and monitoring measures, intersite
                                              monitoring activities and adaptive management, and
                                              joint management and action plans. For bats and
                                              habitats and other species, recommendations are
                                              limited to monitoring for bats and consideration for
                                              project-specific ESIAs.
                        CEA Framework      •	 This report on the CEA has been prepared by com-
                        – Reporting           piling information on the background; CEA process;
                                              CEA framework methods and results for birds, bats,
                                              and habitats and other species VECs; and recom-
                                              mendations for the Joint MMP, institutional ar-
                                              rangements, and information management. A draft
                                              report was developed for a three-week comment
                                              period. A final report was then developed.

a
    See Annex B, Stakeholder Engagement.




14 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
2.2 PHASE 1 – SCOPING

2.2.1 APPROACH

IFC commissioned a two-month scoping assignment in January–
                                                                         PHASE 1     ACTIVITY                      TIME FRAME
February 2015 to assess the feasibility of a CEA12 for the
wind energy sector (and associated infrastructure) in the               Scoping      •	 Initial data review       January–
Tafila region and to propose a framework for its execution.                                                       February 2015
                                                                                     •	 Identification of data
Key findings of the scoping phase shaped the work plan for                              gaps

subsequent CEA phases.                                                               •	 Scoping assessment
                                                                                     •	 Identification of tem-
2.2.2 LITERATURE SEARCH                                                                 poral and geographic
                                                                                        boundaries and VECs
Published and gray literature was sourced and screened
for relevancy. Resources in the public domain and those that proved to be most relevant for the CEA appear in
Section 6, References.

The literature search focused on the following topics:
 •	 The ecology of MSBs using the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway and resident birds using the study area, and risks
    associated with WPPs

  •	 Potential bat species in the study area and their ecology and risks with respect to WPPs

  •	 Approaches to mitigation and monitoring of impacts on birds and bats

  •	 Published guidance on cumulative impacts assessment for the wind sector

  •	 Biodiversity surveys from WPPs in the study area

  •	 Relevant national regulations, international policy, and guidance

A multitude of laws, regulations, and guidance and/or requirements from development finance institutions were
used in shaping the scope, methodology, and process related to this CEA. (See Annex C, CEA Regulatory, Policy,
and Guidance Framework.) The recommendations of the CEA can support a project developer in achieving
compliance with such frameworks.

2.2.3 STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION AND ENGAGEMENT

The scoping phase included a series of meetings with developers, government departments, conservation organizations,
and other entities to seek views on the CEA approach and scope and to develop a shared understanding of requirements
for individual ESIAs in lieu of a CEA.

  •	 Ministerial Meetings: A series of meetings took place with the MoENV, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral
     Resources, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, and the Jordan Investment Commission.




  Note that during the scoping phase, the initiative was referred to as a Cumulative Impact Assessment. The name changed to
12 

Cumulative Effects Assessment after the six-step framework was developed in phase 3, which is described in Section 2.4. For ease of
reference, this report also uses CEA rather than CIA.




                                                                                                                 CEA Phases | 15
  •	 Developers Meeting: A multilateral meeting took place with the following entities: EDAMA,13 KOSPO, Abour,
     JWPC, and LAMSA.

  •	 Conservation Organizations, Civil Society Organizations, and Academia: A multilateral meeting took place
     with the following entities: the American University of Madaba, Jordan BirdWatch, BirdLife International
     Middle-East, and RSCN.

Annex B provides a detailed outline of stakeholder engagement activities throughout the CEA initiative.

Overall, there was positive support for the CEA concept and recognition of its value to the sustainable development
of Jordan’s renewable industry. A number of issues identified by stakeholders informed the CEA approach, including
the need for data confidentiality (see Table 4). Stakeholders also recommended that the CEA should assist in the
location and planning of future wind farms in and around the study area.

Three issues in particular required action to move the CEA process forward.



TABLE 4. KEY ISSUES IDENTIFIED BY STAKEHOLDERS DURING THE SCOPING PHASE


  ISSUE                       DESCRIPTION

 Data gaps                    For the three selected VEC groups (bird, bats, and habitats and other species), stakeholders acknowl-
                              edged a number of data gaps, with data on some VECs being of mixed quality. The quality and avail-
                              ability of bird data were dominant concerns of conservation organizations. For instance, although
                              there are limited data regarding raptor nesting sites in Jordan, they are known to be concentrated
                              along the Rift Valley margins.
 Inconsistencies in bird      There were inconsistencies in the methodologies used and proposed by stakeholders in Jordan for
 survey methodologies         conducting bird surveys at the wind farms. Issues included the lack of consensus on the level of survey
                              effort and the data collection techniques required. This resulted in issues between certain stakehold-
                              ers and developers. In addition, there was confusion related to the application of certain international
                              guidance that was not directly applicable to the Jordanian context. For example, many stakeholders
                              were referring to the Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) bird survey guidelines; however, these focus
                              on collecting representative flight activity data for resident, summer breeding, and wintering bird
                              populations rather than for species migrating through WPP sites. As a consequence, the guidance
                              is not fully applicable to collecting representative bird activity data for Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway
                              migrants using WPP sites.
 Supply of and demand for The number of ornithologists qualified through academia or through training and/or knowledge was
 qualified ornithologists insufficient to support the evolving wind power industry in Jordan. Given the proposed and planned
                          wind farm developments in Jordan and the Middle East and North Africa region, there will be a steady
                          demand for office- and field-based ornithological services. Stakeholders made it clear that current
                          capacity cannot fulfill the present or future demand.




As a consequence, one of the main recommendations of the scoping phase was to conduct a standardized bird survey
for at least one season during the spring migration, so that effects could be assessed cumulatively. The development
of the standardized bird survey was also relevant to the RSCN’s Guidelines for Wind Energy Development in



  Edama, an Arabic word meaning sustainability, is a Jordanian business association that seeks innovative solutions for energy and
13 

water independence and productivity, and their positive impact on the environment. It provides a platform for a large number of
public, private, and non-governmental organizations sector representatives to discuss the development of the energy and water sectors
in Jordan with an emphasis on renewable energy. See http://www.edama.jo.



16 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Jordan, which were in development during the CEA process. During the scoping phase, additional information was
collected on related initiatives in progress, including Jordan BirdWatch projects and the MEGA-Jordan database14
on archaeology.


      IDENTIFICATION OF TEMPORAL AND GEOGRAPHIC BOUNDARIES
2.2.4 

Defining the temporal and geographic boundaries was an iterative process that commenced during the Scoping
Phase. The differences between the initial and final definitions are noted as follows:

  •	 The WPP located farthest to the south of the study area (the Fujeij project) was not initially proposed in the
     geographic scope of the CEA. During phase 3 of the CEA (see below), the AC requested that the Fujeij project
     be included in some way, if possible. The project developer was contacted and kindly agreed to pool its bird
     survey data, although it is not considered a participating developer in the CEA.
  •	 The initial geographic scope included only a limited portion of the Dana BR and IBA. During the development
      of the six-step CEA framework, the study area was enlarged to take a precautionary approach and account
      for all bird species in the Dana BR and IBA.
  •	 The temporal boundaries were initially proposed to be the life of the project; however, this was later deemed
     unrealistic as the actual impacts on the VECs are not known. Instead, the temporal boundaries will be determined
     on the basis of monitoring, to take place during the first three years of project operations.

2.2.5 IDENTIFICATION AND PRIORITIZATION OF VECs

Priority VECs were selected through an iterative process in consultation with the stakeholders described above
and in Annex B. For each VEC group and/or potential impact, the following elements were discussed and were
reviewed in the literature:

  •	 Sensitivities

  •	 Available data sources

  •	 Activities and/or drivers other than wind projects

  •	 Data ownership and access

  •	 Anticipated key data gaps and how these may be filled

  •	 Key stakeholders

Priority VECs were selected on the basis of risks rather than predicted impact.15 VEC groups are described in Table
5, with a brief justification of those selected or screened out.




14  MEGA-Jordan is a geographic information system (GIS) built to inventory and manage archaeology sites in Jordan at a national level.
For each site it contains details such as condition, threats, and other monitoring updates. The web-based system, which is available
in both Arabic and English, will standardize and centralize data on sites throughout the kingdom.
15  The CEA does not predict the significance of impacts over a defined time period, as the potential impacts of the WPPs are not

definitively known and were estimated through predictive modeling.



                                                                                                                  CEA Phases | 17
TABLE 5. SUMMARY OF SCREENING ASSESSMENT FOR SELECTION OF VECs


 INITIAL LIST
 OF VECs AND
 POTENTIAL
 IMPACTS              SUMMARY OF JUSTIFICATION FOR SELECTION OR SCREENING OUT

Bird populations      •	 Potential for impact caused by collision with wind turbines and other infrastructure, such as power lines.
(migratory, resi-
                      •	 Potential for loss of, and displacement from, habitat used for breeding and feeding.
dent, or seasonally
resident species)     •	 This VEC was included in the CEA.
Bats                  •	 Potential for impact caused by collision with wind turbines or other type of impacts (barotrauma).
                      •	 This VEC was included in the CEA.
Wildlife habitat and •	 Potential for habitat fragmentation owing to construction of project-related access roads. Restoration of
vegetation com-         single-track roads should minimize any barrier effects.
munities and/or
                     •	 Habitat loss through land clearance for wind project and expanded access for herders. The land has a
other species
                        limited carrying capacity for animals. Although access to the area may be improved, grazing intensity is
                        unlikely to increase.
                      •	 This VEC was included in the CEA.
Visual amenity        •	 A number of communities may be able to see two or more wind projects, although there is uncertainty as
                         to whether these result in more significant cumulative visual impacts.
                      •	 This VEC was not included as the CEA was conducted before the ESIA and data regarding exact layouts
                         were not available. It was recommended that this assessment be conducted as part of the project-specific
                         ESIAs.
Shadow flicker        •	 Localized impact, with shadow flicker restricted to an area of up to 1,500 m of a wind project and therefore
and/or disturbance       a direct cumulative effect, is unlikely to occur when the WPPs are more than 3 km apart.
                      •	 In some cases the WPPs are closer together (with wind turbines 1.7 km apart), so there is likely to be a
                         limited cumulative effect in the area between them.
                      •	 However, in both cases there appear to be no permanent residents in these areas. With respect to semi-
                         nomadic Bedouin communities, stakeholder engagement and information boards could be erected to
                         make them aware of this potential impact.
                      •	 There was not considered to be sufficient evidence to warrant the inclusion of this VEC in the CEA.
Semi-nomadic          •	 Although herders will most likely be affected by noise and flicker (depending on the season and their tent
herders and/or           placement in the wind project area), the outcome of the consultation during the ESIA for the JWPC Tafila
displacement             WPP indicated that they were positive about the potential benefits from the presence of better access
                         roads and pads to place their tents on, as well as the general socioeconomic benefits to the area.
                      •	 These positive and negative impacts are restricted to a project. Assuming there is no displacement of the
                         semi-nomadic herders, these impacts are not considered to be cumulative.
                      •	 This assumption should be revisited once the JWPC Tafila WPP is operational and herders are in the area.
                         Overall, it was concluded that evidence was insufficient to warrant the inclusion of this VEC in the CEA.
Archaeology and/      •	 On the basis of the MEGA-Jordan database and discussions with stakeholders, the study area does not
or damage or deg-        appear to have any linear or extensive archaeological sites that could be affected by several wind projects or
radation                 any archaeologically significant sites where the setting would be compromised by the presence of multiple
                         projects. Any impacts on archaeology, if they occur at all, are considered to be local and not cumulative.
Quiet and peaceful    •	 Each developer will be required to consider noise impacts on the neighboring receptors and ensure that
environment and/         their development is designed to meet noise standards (as referenced in the World Bank Group’s General
or noise                 Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines and Wind Energy Guidelines) at the adjacent sensitive recep-
                         tors, such as residential houses and mosques.
                      •	 The KOSPO, Abour, and LAMSA WPPs appear to be farther from any sensitive receptor potentially affected
                         by the JWPC Tafila project, although they are upwind. Hence, the additional noise contribution will likely
                         be negligible or nonexistent; therefore it is considered unlikely that there will be any cumulative effect
                         resulting from noise.
                                                                                                                (continued on next page)



18 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 5. SUMMARY OF SCREENING ASSESSMENT FOR SELECTION OF VECs (continued )


 INITIAL LIST
 OF VECs AND
 POTENTIAL
 IMPACTS             SUMMARY OF JUSTIFICATION FOR SELECTION OR SCREENING OUT

Socioeconomic      •	 Stakeholders considered the overall impacts to be potentially positive, but a limited number of stakehold-
changes and/or        ers identified some potentially negative aspects, notably with respect to impacts on nature tourism in the
impacts on tourism    area. These impacts will vary between the construction and operational phases.
                     •	 Following a review of the potentially related socioeconomic impacts and the potentially affected commu-
                        nities, it was concluded that any impacts of this nature are likely to be limited, given the low employment
                        numbers. Socioeconomic impacts could be potentially positive if the developers undertake community
                        investment.
                     •	 With respect to impacts on tourism, there appears to be a limited amount of nature-based tourism and
                        bird-watching that takes place to the east side of the Dana BR and IBA. Data were not available to assess the
                        extent of this tourism in terms of revenues generated and the impact, if any, of the wind power projects. It
                        was recommended that information of this nature be gathered as part of the project-specific ESIAs.
                     •	 Some stakeholders also requested that the positive impact from the wind power projects be emphasized.
Road capacity and    •	 Although there could be a cumulative effect from several developments occurring at the same time, these
increased heavy         are likely to be short term as traffic is not associated with the operational phases of the project. As the
traffic                 projects will be developed in different time frames, they were not considered to have a cumulative impact
                        of this nature.




    PHASE 2 – SUPPLEMENTARY DATA COLLECTION AND CAPACITY BUILDING
2.3 


2.3.1 APPROACH
                                                             PHASE 2           ACTIVITY                         TIME FRAME
The CEA was conducted before ESIAs were
                                                             Supplemen-      •	 Standardized bird survey       February–June 2015
completed for three of the four participating
                                                             tary Data          and spring flight activity
WPPs. Although substantial bird data were                    Collection and     surveys
collected for multiple seasons and years for all             Capacity Build-
                                                                             •	 Collision risk modeling
                                                             ing
participating WPPs, only a limited amount of                                 •	 Database compilation
survey data were collected for bat, flora and                                  •	 Trends analysis
other fauna species, with the exception of the                                 •	 Reconnaissance site visit
JWPC’s Tafila WPP and information related to the                                  and rapid assessment
                                                                                  (bats, habitats and other
Dana BR. The scoping phase identified key data
                                                                                  species)
gaps and capacity issues. To help address these
                                                                               •	 Ornithological training
issues, IFC commissioned and led an integrated                                    and workshop
team to undertake supplementary data collection                                •	 AC established
and capacity-building activities as phase 2 of
the CEA. This section describes such activities
for each of the priority VECs.




                                                                                                                 CEA Phases | 19
2.3.2 CAPACITY BUILDING

Technical CEA Workshop—Birds and Bats
A multilateral workshop on birds and bats took place April 14–16, 2015. The workshop aimed to engage
participants on the CEA initiative and to gather support for standardizing methods used during the individual
WPP assessments and surveys. The workshop was facilitated by IFC and the CEA team. Annex B contains a list
of participants.

The workshop included a number of sessions, summarized below, culminating with a field visit to the JWPC Tafila
WPP, which was under construction at the time, and the Dana BR.

 •	 Session 1: ESIA and CIA—Key Differences and Considerations
 •	 Session 2: ESIA Scoping and Information Requirements
 •	 Session 3: Birds—Priority Bird Species and Survey Design Principles
 •	 Session 4: Bats—Priority Species and Survey Methods
 •	 Session 5: Birds Survey Methods
 •	 Session 6: Case Study—Migration Patterns in Spain
 •	 Session 7: Impact Assessment
 •	 Session 8: Lessons Learned: Griffon Vulture Case Studies (Spain)
 •	 Session 9: Mitigation and Monitoring
 •	 Session 10: Summary of CIA

Key discussion points raised in each session were recorded in the minutes of the workshop, and the conclusions of
the workshop identified the next steps in the CEA: completing the standardized bird survey methodology, obtaining
consultation on how to calculate the impacts of the TRWPP, and establishing a list of priority bird VECs.

In-field Ornithological Training
To provide flight activity data appropriate for the CRM, which was required for the CEA and to achieve consistency
between the WPPs, a three-week in-field ornithological training was provided at several of the participating CEA
WPP sites. The March 29–April 22, 2015, training was conducted for:

 •	 Ornithological surveyors employed to survey the TRWPP sites
 •	 Other stakeholders (RSCN, other consultants) who could either join future field surveys or use the information
    and techniques to improve monitoring protocols and guidance offered by their organizations

The training program was designed to provide participants with the skills and knowledge required to:

 •	 Plan and conduct the VP surveys used to collect data on collision-risk flight activity.
 •	 Fully understand the protocols, methods, and techniques associated with correctly recording flight observations
    during VP surveys.
 •	 Identify the species likely to be seen during VP monitoring at the WPP sites.
 •	 Avoid common pitfalls that lead to the recording of flight information unsuitable for collision risk
    modeling.



20 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
                                                     Bird surveyor at vantage point conducting monitoring during operations



These objectives were fulfilled using field-based, one-to-one teaching. Specifically, surveyors were shown how to:

 •	 Design surveys, in particular how to choose and evaluate an adequate number of appropriately positioned
    VPs for a survey site.
 •	 Methodically and consistently scan a survey site for flight activity.
 •	 Make use of landscape features and a sighting compass to improve the accuracy of mapping of flight routes
    and recording the heights of flying birds.
 •	 Correctly record, on appropriate field forms, flight data for primary and secondary target species
    and specifically for primary target species, record sample flight heights at 15-second intervals using a
    countdown timer.
 •	 Record survey conditions and survey effort.

The ability of surveyors to correctly identify target species is an essential prerequisite for providing accurate
species-specific measures of flight activity and collision risk. On-site field training coincided with the peak spring
migration period, when there were moderate to high levels of flight activity by most resident and migratory
species. During these training sessions, all surveyors were informally assessed on their bird identification skills
and, where appropriate, additional shadowing by experienced field surveyors was employed to further improve
these skills.

2.3.3 BIRDS – SUPPLEMENTARY ASSESSMENT

Standardized Bird Survey Methodology and Spring Flight Activity Surveys
When IFC began the CEA in January 2015, several seasons of bird surveys conducted during the spring and autumn
migration periods had already been undertaken at each of the WPPs. Not all of the surveys could provide flight activity



                                                                                                        CEA Phases | 21
data suitable for predicting species-specific collision rates using a CRM for MSBs, resident or summer breeding raptors,
and other potentially “collision-vulnerable” species. As part of the outcomes of the scoping phase and to address data
inconsistencies, a standardized methodology for undertaking bird surveys was prepared. The methodology could be
used to develop defensible collision impact and displacement assessments, while taking account of cost efficiencies.
See Annex F for a summary of the standardized bird survey methodology.

NRP designed and supervised the spring 2015 VP surveys for the three TRWPP sites where surveys were still
taking place, namely LAMSA, KOSPO, and Abour. Surveys were designed to provide data representative of the
flight activity over each of the WPP sites for the spring survey period, defined as March 1 to May 31, 2015. It
should be noted that the JWPC Tafila project and the Fujeij WPPs had already conducted extensive bird surveys
over multiple seasons and did not require additional data. CRMs conducted at these sites were also of high quality
and in a format that could be merged with the LAMSA, KOSPO, and Abour data.

Collision Risk Modeling
This CEA used the “Band” CRM (Ban, Madders, and Whitfield, 2007). This model is the most widely used model
for assessing the collision risk to birds in the wind power industry. The Band Model, which predicts the fatality
rates of birds due to collision with rotor blades at a wind farm development site, has two stages:

 •	 Stage 1 estimates the number of bird transits through the airspace swept by the rotors. This stage uses data on
    time spent at rotor height within the wind farm footprint derived from flight activity surveys at a development
    site and from data on turbine size, number, and layout.

 •	 Stage 2 calculates the probability of a bird colliding with a rotor when making a transit through this airspace. It
    uses turbine-specific information on rotor blade size, blade pitch, rotation period, and the anticipated proportion
    of time that turbines will be operational as well as species-specific information on the length and wingspan of the
    birds and their flight speed.




22 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Multiplying together the outputs of stages 1 and 2 provides an estimate of the number of collisions that would
occur per unit time, assuming that the birds exhibit no avoidance behavior.

It is widely accepted that flying birds, including raptors, can avoid wind turbines (and other tall artificial structures)
(Band, 2000). Birds may exercise avoidance by detecting the wind farm or turbine at relatively long distances (tens
to hundreds of meters) and modifying their flight paths to avoid the structures (commonly referred to as far-field or
macro avoidance). At closer proximity to turbines (less than approximately 10 m), birds may see an oncoming rotor
blade and undertake evasive action (commonly referred to as near-field or micro avoidance).

To provide a credible prediction of the number of collisions that might occur, the product from stages 1 and 2 of the
Band Model is adjusted down by an avoidance rate to take account of the assumed level of behavioral avoidance
shown by the species under consideration. There is considerable uncertainty regarding actual avoidance rates.
Typically, avoidance rates for raptors are assumed to be in the 95–99 percent range, meaning they successfully
avoid the turbines on 95–99 percent of the transits through the rotor swept area, which would lead to collision
if no avoidance action were undertaken (Scottish National Heritage, 2010). The actual avoidance rate for some
species could potentially be higher or lower than this range. This CEA applied a precautionary (low) value as an
avoidance rate.

Once adjusted for the avoidance rate, the CRM results provide an estimate of the number of collisions predicted
to occur over the time frame examined, typically a season or year, or for the intended lifetime of the wind farm.

In the CEA, CRM annual fatality estimates were obtained for each species at all WPP sites where CRM-suitable
data were collected. These rates were then used to estimate an overall predicted annual collision fatality rate for
each species for the WPP sites combined. These combined estimates were then used to calculate an LoE score that
was based on the annual collision risk per individual (Section 3.4.1, Part 1), to inform threshold setting for priority
bird VECs (Section 3.5.1, Part 1) and to inform adaptive management strategies by acting as a baseline measure
for assessing actual fatality rates from postconstruction monitoring.

Database Compilation and Trends Analysis
The CRM provides species-specific estimates of annual collision-related fatalities on the basis of recorded flight
behavior but does not explicitly allow an understanding of how flight activity varies between individuals (e.g.,
flocking), in different weather conditions, and at locations with different topographies. Each of these variables
has demonstrated effects on the flight behavior and potential collision risk to MSBs.

To allow a more robust assessment of the likely collision risks to MSBs, large amounts of flight activity baseline
survey data available from WPP sites16 covering multiple spring and autumn migration seasons in 2013 and 2014
were compiled into a common database (see Annex D) and analyzed (See Annex E).17 Such analysis was made
possible through the willingness of the developers to share these data with the CEA team.

Although it was not possible to merge all available data into the database because of differences in survey methods,
data were sufficient to assess the following trends:18

16  The data sets of one WPP were not entered in the database owing to differences in the survey data collection methods.
17  This yielded a large amount of data on MSBs from a relatively small area (approximately 150 km2).
18  Two statistical packages, STATISTICA 8.0 (Statsoft, 1998) and “R” (R Core Team 2014), were used to reveal flight activity patterns

and understand how flight activity varied in different weather conditions and relative to topographical features, in particular the Rift
Valley ridge.



                                                                                                                   CEA Phases | 23
  •	 Flocking behavior: All species do not migrate in the same way—some fly in flocks and others fly individually.
     The impact of a single collision of one individual is not comparable to tens or hundreds of collisions as a
     consequence of a migrating flock passing through.

  •	 Landscape (topography) and weather conditions: Flights and flying heights of MSBs are affected by the
     landscape and by wind and/or weather conditions, especially wind direction and/or strength.

The results and conclusions of the trends analysis informed the recommendations in the CEA (Section 3.6).

2.3.4 BATS – SUPPLEMENTARY RAPID ASSESSMENTS

Available Data
Only limited surveys were available for bats. Three of the five WPPs (Abour, JWPC Tafila, and Fujeij) carried out
specific bat surveys as part of their ESIA or other assessments. A bat monitoring survey was carried out during the
construction phase of JWPC Tafila, from April to October 2014. There have been no comprehensive bat surveys for
the Dana BR, other than an unpublished rapid assessment to determine bat diversity and activity in the reserve.19
Several research publications on bats, including a comprehensive review of bat species and their distribution in the
country (Benda et al. 2010), were reviewed during the CEA.

Survey methods ranged from point counts and line transects to visits to locations where bat species were expected
to occur, such as caves and water sources. Surveys used different instruments to record bat species and their
activity, including the Song Meter SM2BAT (Fujeij) and Anabat SD2 recorder (JWPC Tafila, LAMSA, KOSPO,
and Abour).

Supplemental Rapid Assessment
The CEA literature search (see Section 2.2.2) included a review of materials regarding bats. This was followed
by a reconnaissance visit and rapid assessment in September 2015 that covered three of the wind farms in the
TRWPP area: Abour, KOSPO, and LAMSA. This rapid assessment included a literature review and a rapid field
assessment that covered the biodiversity in those areas and was not restricted to bats.

      HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES—SUPPLEMENTARY RAPID ASSESSMENTS
2.3.5 

Available Data
Over the past 20 years, the Dana BR has been studied extensively as part of the baseline ecological surveys carried
out there during the first Global Environment Fund (GEF)–funded project in the reserve.20 All major taxa that exist
in the reserve were covered, including vascular plants, large and small mammals, reptiles and amphibians, and birds.
These assessments were followed by a series of ecological monitoring programs that spanned various time frames.
Some of these programs were species specific, while others were more generic and habitat oriented.

Outside the Dana BR, ecological surveys were limited either to scattered visits to some specific locations to check
the presence or absence of a certain taxon or part of the ESIAs for the proposed WPPs in the TRWPP area.




19  Amr et al. (unpublished). Z. S. Amr and a group of national experts, including RSCN, are in the process of publishing a national
assessment of the IUCN Red List for the mammals of Jordan. The extent of occurrence for the bat species were obtained from RSCN.
20  Integrating Conservation with Development in the Dana Wildlands (1994–1999). The first project funded by the World Bank and

the Global Environment Facility in Jordan, the Conservation of the Dana Wildlands and Institutional Strengthening of RSCN project,
supported improvements in the management of the Dana Wildlands Reserve.



24 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
All participating WPPs have carried out habitat, flora and fauna surveys to some degree, and assessments of their
respective sites. However, the surveys were brief and covered limited periods of certain seasons only. See Annex
A for biogeographic zones and vegetation types of the study area.

During the ESIAs, related studies (some of which are not complete) were carried out for the WPPs. The methods
used in the flora surveys included line transects and quadrats. Fauna surveys were used as route transects in
addition to some observational records.

Supplemental Rapid Assessment
The CEA included a rapid assessment of the habitats and other species in the WPP area, predominantly consisting
of a literature and available data review with very limited field visits. The CEA also included a literature and
data review of the entire study area. The assessment highlighted the contrast in diversity between the Dana BR
and the rest of the study area—which is probably due to the significant differences in topography of the area.
For example, about 800 plant species, 51 mammal species, and 33 reptiles and amphibians were recorded within
the reserve (MoENV, 2009), while only about 100 plant species, 8 mammal species, and 14 reptile species were
recorded in the area of the WPPs.

2.3.6 SUMMARY OF DATA USED TO CONDUCT THE CEA

Table 6 summarizes the existing and supplemental data for each VEC that were used to conduct the CEA.




TABLE 6. SUMMARY OF VEC INFORMATION AVAILABLE ON THE TRWPP STUDY AREA


 BIRDS                                               BATS                                 HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES

•	 Preconstruction baseline survey results from •	 Three limited bats surveys by •	 Ecological assessments and monitoring
   the WPP sites in the study area. These are          the individual WPPs (Abour,            of the Dana BR mainly carried out there
   almost entirely limited to VP flight activity       JWPC Tafila, and Fujeij) during        during the first GEF-funded project in
   surveys undertaken during the spring and            ESIA preparation and a bat             the reserve and ecological monitoring
   autumn migration periods between 2013 and           monitoring       survey     during     programs that spanned various time
   2015                                                the construction period at             frames
                                                       the JWPC Tafila WPP (April–
•	 CEA Spring 2015 standardized surveys                                                    •	 Preconstruction baseline survey results
                                                       October 2014)
                                                                                              from the TRWPP development sites.
•	 CRM results
                                                    •	 An unpublished rapid assessment        These included limited duration and
•	 Distribution, abundance, and breeding status        to determine bat diversity and         scope habitat, flora and fauna surveys
   reports for individual species or species groups    activity in the Dana BR; however,      and literature reviews for the WPP sites
   undertaken principally by RSCN and focused on       no comprehensive bat surveys
                                                                                           •	 RSCN data and available national data
   the Dana BR                                         for the reserve are available
                                                                                              including mapping of biogeographic
•	 BirdLife International MSB Sensitivity Map Tool •	 Amr (2012)                              zones and vegetation types including
   and other BirdLife datasets (including Flyway                                              RSCN (2008)
                                                    •	 Benda et al. (2010)
   Populations and Global Breeding Distribution
                                                                                           •	 RSCN (and other academic) experts
   Size Estimates)                                  •	 RSCN (and other academic)
                                                                                              with knowledge of habitats of Jordan
                                                       experts with knowledge of the
•	 Published literature (academic research results)                                           and indicative species of those habitats
                                                       bats of Jordan and the Middle
   and other various guidelines (such as the IUCN
                                                       East region                         •	 CEA supplemental rapid assessment
   Red List) (see References in Section 6)
                                                    •	 CEA       supplemental        rapid
•	 Ornithologists with expert knowledge of
                                                       assessment
   Jordan and the Middle East
•	 Database compilation and trends analysis (refer
   to Annexes D and E)




                                                                                                                  CEA Phases | 25
2.4 PHASE 3—CEA SIX-STEP FRAMEWORK
                                                                PHASE         ACTIVITY              TIME FRAME
AND ASSESSMENT
                                                                Phase 3: Six- •	 Develop the        July 2015–March 2016
2.4.1 APPROACH                                                  Step CEA         frameworks
                                                                Framework
A key output from the CEA initiative is the six-step                          •	 Apply the CEA
                                                                and
                                                                                 frameworks for
framework for assessing cumulative risks to birds from          Assessment
                                                                                 priority VECs
the WPPs and other external stressors in the study area.
                                                                             •	 Obtain continu-
Developed during this CEA process, the framework was                            ous review and
specifically designed to address how a CEA might be                             feedback from
                                                                                the ERP
applied to migratory and resident bird populations with
                                                                             •	 Consult regularly
respect to the wind energy sector. The CEA framework
                                                                                with the AC
for bats and that for habitats and other species is adapted
                                                                             •	 Develop CEA
from the one developed for birds; however, owing to data                        findings and
limitations, it is a simpler four-step process rather than                      report

a six-step process.

The framework is based on internationally accepted approaches to risk assessment practices to identify priority
VECs and aligns with IFC’s GN6, as follows:

 •	 Identify a list of species populations/habitat (i.e., receptors) in the study area (i.e., birds, bats, habitats and
    other species).

 •	 Determine a relevant unit of analysis (UoA) by which effects can be measured.

 •	 For each receptor/species population assess its relative importance in the TRWPP area.

 •	 Assign the vulnerability of each species population/habitat at a national, regional, or international scale,
    depending on the UoA.

 •	 Determine the likely sensitivity of each species population and/or habitat to potential cumulative effects at
    the TRWPP.

 •	 Determine the likelihood of effect (LoE) on species population and/or habitat from the cumulative risks presented
    by the WPPs in the study area (e.g., the likelihood of bird populations colliding with TRWPP turbine rotors).

 •	 Assign a risk rating (major, moderate, minor, or negligible) to each species population or habitat using an
    ecological risk assessment matrix to evaluate the sensitivity with the LoE scores for each species population/
    habitat.

 •	 Identify priority VECs—these are the ones with a major or moderate risk rating.

 •	 For priority bird VECs only, determine a “fatality threshold” appropriate to “maintaining and attaining long-
    term viability” of the species population.

 •	 Identify mitigation, monitoring, and management measures to address the cumulative risks.

 •	 Recommend institutional arrangements and information management proposals to support the implementation
    of the recommendations from the CEA.

The CEA frameworks are provided in detail in Section 3 for birds, in Section 4 for bats, and in Section 5 for habitats
and other species. Figure 5 provides an overview of the frameworks as applied to the selected VECs.




26 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
The development of the methodology and the implementation of these steps followed an iterative process that
incorporated key inputs at various stages from the ERP, the AC, and other stakeholders.

2.4.2 ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS

Summarized in Table 7 are key limitations for the technical CEA assessments of birds, bats, and habitats and other
species. Such limitations predominantly relate to knowledge and data gaps and deficiencies. Key gaps are noted
along with a brief account of how they were addressed during the CEA process.




                                                                                                CEA Phases | 27
FIGURE 5. OVERVIEW OF CEA PROCESS FOR SELECTED VECs – BIRDS, BATS, AND HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES


     CEA FRAMEWORK STEPS:                    CEA FRAMEWORK STEPS:                 CEA FRAMEWORK STEPS:
             BIRDS                                   BATS                       HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES



                  Step 1:                                Step 1:                               Step 1:
   Develop species population list and      Develop species list and identify       Develop habitat map, other
        identify unit of analysis                   unit of analysis              species list, and identify unit of
                                                                                               analysis




                  Step 2:                                Step 2:                              Step 2:
        Identify species sensitivity           Identify species sensitivity      Identify habitat and other species
                                                                                             sensitivity




                  Step 3:                                Step 3:                               Step 3:
   Conduct ecological risk assessment         Ecological risk assessment         Ecological risk assessment matrix
     and identify priority bird VECs         matrix and identify priority bat    and identify priority habitats and
                                                          VECs                          other species VECs




                 Step 4:
   Identify thresholds for fatalities for
          each priority bird VEC




                  Step 5:
   Identify mitigation and monitoring



                                                         Step 4:                              Step 4:
                                            Identify mitigation and monitor-     Identify mitigation and monitor-
                                             ing, and institutional arrange-      ing, and institutional arrange-
                                            ments and information manage-        ments and information manage-
                                                     ment methods                         ment methods
                 Step 6:
         Determine institutional
     arrangements and information
             management




28 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 7.CEA SUMMARY OF KNOWLEDGE AND/OR DATA GAPS AND DEFICIENCIES – BIRDS, BATS, AND HABITATS AND
        OTHER SPECIES VECs


KNOWLEDGE AND/OR DATA GAP AND
DEFICIENCY                                         HOW LIMITATION IS ADDRESSED WITHIN THE CEA

CEA Framework – Birds
Relevant to MSB populations:                       Flyway estimates were taken from BirdLife International. For each MSB these
                                                   estimates are the maximum seasonal count recorded at any of the principal
Lack of up-to-date Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway
                                                   bottleneck sites in the Middle East spanning at least a 20-year period up to
population estimates based on systematic
                                                   2004/05.
counts across the flyway using a standard
methodology.                                       To safeguard against potential errors associated with changes to the size of
                                                   flyway populations since they were established in 2004/05, MSB results related
                                                   to relative importance in step 2 and thresholds in step 4 were moderated by the
                                                   ERP and by reference to relevant research.
Relevant to year-round or summer resident          In the absence of this information, the ERP combined members’ collective
breeding VEC species populations:                  knowledge of each species. The ERP’s extensive field-based knowledge of the
                                                   birds within the Tafila region allowed a reasoned and informed approach to
Limited systematic and long-term survey
                                                   identifying birds most at risk from the cumulative effects in the study area in the
species-specific information on Middle
                                                   absence of systematic census results.
East, Jordan, or subnational population size,
distribution, and population trends.
Relevant to mortality rate from the CRM (CEA       Although populations are present at the study area during summer and winter
Step 3):                                           periods, the CRM estimates are based only on data from spring and autumn
                                                   migration periods, which may have biased the estimates. When a species
•	 Limited or no flight activity data were
                                                   population was known to be present during the nonsurvey periods, the CRM
   available from outside the spring and
                                                   estimates were reviewed by the ERP and in some cases adjusted upward as a
   autumn baseline monitoring periods (June–
                                                   precautionary measure on the basis of additional qualitative evidence.
   August and November–February).
                                                   The avoidance rate for raptors is typically 95–99 percent (i.e., raptors successfully
•	 Uncertainty about species-specific
                                                   avoid the turbines on 95–99 percent of transits through the rotor-swept airspace
   avoidance rates can lead to an over- or
                                                   which would lead to collision if no avoidance action were undertaken). To
   underestimate of the collision risk estimate.
                                                   safeguard against underestimating collision risk, a precautionary (low) avoidance
                                                   rate was assumed for each raptor assessed for collision risk in step 3 of the CEA.
Relevant to the priority bird VECs threshold-      Estimates of the magnitude of these effects were required to assess whether
setting process (CEA Step 4):                      each priority bird VEC could sustain additional mortality from the WPPs in the
                                                   study area and remain or become viable in the long term. The ERP provided very
Lack of quantitative information on external
                                                   approximate indicative numbers for annual fatalities likely from each source.
stressors—adverse impacts from other human
activities in Jordan and elsewhere along the
flyway; for example, illegal killing and power
line electrocution.
CEA Framework – Bats
Relevant to bat species population sizes and       After referring to national experts, it was agreed to avoid the use of population
estimates:                                         estimates for all bat species, and it was agreed to use the distribution of species
                                                   in the country as the main reference point for all bat species. To produce that, the
Lack of quantitative information about the
                                                   extent of occurrence for each species was calculated.
population sizes and estimates of the bat
species in the country.
CEA Framework – Habitats and Other Species
Relevant to habitat distribution in TRWPP and      After referring to national experts in ecology and zoology, including RSCN, it was
WPPs area:                                         decided to use the latest digital version of the biogeographical zone map (NBSAP,
                                                   2015) and the latest digitized vegetation types map (Albert and Bore, 2003). It
Several distribution maps for biogeographical
                                                   was agreed that although the precision and borders of the different zones and
zones and vegetation types have been referred
                                                   vegetation types are not accurate enough to produce solid conclusions without
to in national documents. These maps have
                                                   further field assessments, these maps were the best reference maps available at
been produced at different times using various
                                                   the time of writing the CEA report.
approaches.




                                                                                                                   CEA Phases | 29
3. CEA Framework—Birds




3.1 OVERVIEW OF CEA FRAMEWORK FOR BIRDS

The CEA framework for bird VECs has two objectives:

 •	 To determine which bird populations are at the highest risk from the potential cumulative effects of the TRWPP.
 •	 To identify and propose mitigation, monitoring, and other management measures for developers and other
    stakeholders to address those risks and recommend institutional arrangements that facilitate a joint approach
    to managing the risks.


The CEA framework for birds follows the six-step process:

 •	 Steps 1–3: The assessment part of the process. In step 1, a preliminary list of potentially at-risk populations is
    defined, and for each of these a relevant population scale (unit of analysis, UoA) on which to base an assessment
    is identified. In step 2, the sensitivity of each of these populations is evaluated and the least sensitive populations
    removed from the assessment process. Sensitivity comprises two components: vulnerability, a scoring of the
    conservation status at a scale relevant to the UoA; and relative importance, which is an estimate or judgment
    of the proportion of each population likely to use the study area. In step 3, the cumulative likelihood of
    effect (LoE) of the WPPs on each of the populations remaining in the process is estimated and those rated
    with the highest effect qualify as priority bird VECs. In this CEA, the LoE is measured and compared for
    each population principally using an estimate of the annual likelihood of collision per individual using WPP
    sites. The implementation of steps 1–3 incorporates key inputs at each stage from the ERP, the AC, and other
    stakeholders.
 •	 Step 4: Determines a threshold of fatalities for each priority bird VEC, setting the point at which further
    loss is considered a risk to long-term viability of the population. Threshold setting takes into account
    species-specific biological and demographic parameters, the cumulative risk associated with WPPs,
    and the likely effects of external stressors on the population defined by the UoA. External stressors
    are human-derived effects not associated with WPPs and include illegal killing and electrocution by
    power line.
 •	 Step 5: Identifies the measures recommended to form the Joint Mitigation and Monitoring Plan (MMP).
    Measures include on-site monitoring and mitigation activities; intersite monitoring activities, an adaptive
    management and response mechanism; and joint management and action plans focused on priority birds.
    The primary focus of monitoring and mitigation is to avoid fatalities of such birds and to accurately estimate
    their fatalities to facilitate compliance with thresholds and inform adaptive management responses. Measures
    to avoid fatalities include selectively shutting down turbines, identifying and responding to elevated-risk
    situations, and recording near-miss incidents, all of which trigger adaptive management responses.
 •	 Step 6: Building on step 5, recommends institutional arrangements and information-sharing mechanisms.

The purpose and details of each step in the CEA framework for birds appear in Figure 6.


30 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
FIGURE 6. TRWPP CEA BIRD FRAMEWORK (DETAILED PROCESS FLOWCHART)


   DATA AND EXPERT
  REVIEW PANEL (ERP)                                                                                                   SCOPED
       INPUTS                                      CEA BIRD FRAMEWORK STEPS                                             “OUT”


  •	 TRWPP Survey results      Step 1: Develop Species Population List and Identify Unit of Analysis
  •	 Dana and IBA List
  •	 BirdLife Soaring Birds   Part 1: Develop Species Population List
     Sensitivity Mapping      •	 Determine a preliminary list of species populations.
     Tool                     •	 Scope species populations in or out of the preliminary list on the basis of             Rarely
                                 survey data and expert review of each population in the TRWPP study area.              occurring
                                                                                                                        or locally
  •	 BirdLife flyway          Part 2: Determine Species Population Categories and Identify Unit of                     extinct bird
     population               Analysis                                                                                 populations
  •	 ERP estimates of         •	 Assign each population on Species Population List to one of four categories:
     national population           Category 1 MSBs
     size                          Category 2 Breeding and resident raptors
  •	 BirdLife global               Category 3 Other migrants and wintering
     breeding distribution         Category 4 Other residents and summer breeding
     size                     •	 Identify unit of analysis (UoA) for each species population category.

                                          Bird Populations Scoped in move to step 2


  •	 UoA from step 1                              Step 2: Identify Species Sensitivity
  •	 Percentage estimates
     of UoA overflying        Part 1: Score Relative Importance
     TRWPP sites & using      •	 Score relative importance for each species population in relation to UoA as
     TRWPP Study Area            high, moderate, low, or negligible.
  •	 BirdLife global          •	 Consider biome-restricted species.
     breeding distribution
     size estimates           Part 2: Score Vulnerability
                              •	 Score vulnerability for each species population in relation to UoA. High,
                                 moderate, low, or negligible.
                                                                                                                           Bird
  •	 Global IUCN Red List     Part 3: Assign Species Sensitivity                                                       populations
  •	 Arabian Regional Red     •	 Assign sensitivity (high, medium, low, or negligible) rating according to                 with
     List – Breeding popu-       relative importance versus vulnerability matrix.                                       negligible
     lations (Draft, 2013)                                                                                              sensitivity
  •	 Conservation of                      Bird Populations with High, Medium, and Low
     Migratory Species –                  Sensitivity move to step 3
     Category 2 List
                              Step 3: Create Ecological Risk Assessment Matrix and Identify Priority
                                                             Bird VECs

                              Part 1: Determine Likelihood of Effect
  •	 TRWPP CRM from           •	 Determine likelihood of effect (LoE) based on annual likelihood (in percent)
     selected TRWPP sites        per individual of colliding with TRWPP turbines.
  •	 Trends analysis of       •	 Use CRM to assess LoE for species population categories 1 and 2.
     more complete flight     •	 Use ERP assessment of collision risk per individual for species population.
     activity data set           categories 3 and 4, for which no CRM estimates are available.
     from TRWPP sites to      •	 Adjust LoE for specific species populations based on trends analysis.                   Species
     highlight species with                                                                                            populations
     potentially higher       Part 2: Assign Risk Rating for Each Species Population                                       with
     collision risks than     •	 Assign risk rating (major, moderate, negligible, low) according to sensitivity        negligible or
     indicated by the CRM        versus LoE matrix.                                                                      low risk
  •	 ERP assessment of
     collision risk           Part 3: Identify Priority Bird VECs of highest risk of impact
                              •	 Identify species with a major or moderate risk rating as priority bird VECs.

                                                  Priority Bird VECs move to Step 4

                                                                                                             (continued on next page)




                                                                                                  CEA Framework—Birds | 31
FIGURE 6. TRWPP CEA BIRD FRAMEWORK (DETAILED PROCESS FLOWCHART) (continued )


     DATA AND EXPERT
    REVIEW PANEL (ERP)                                                                                                      SCOPED
         INPUTS                                            CEA BIRD FRAMEWORK STEPS                                          “OUT”



                                         Step 4: Identify Thresholds for Fatalities for each Priority Bird VEC

                                       •	 Establish for each priority bird VEC a threshold of cumulative fatalities
                                          per year not to be exceeded.
                                       •	 Identify actions and adaptive management efforts to be taken in re-
                                          sponse should thresholds be exceeded.

                                       Part 1: Threshold-Setting Process
   •	 BirdLife Flyway                  •	 Review other approaches for setting thresholds.
      populations                      •	 Data search and review on bird populations and external stressors.
   •	 IUCN Red List                    •	 Review population size as determined by the relevant UoA.
      information                      •	 Identify additional mortality level that could impact the viability and/or
   •	 Species-specific biological         sustainability of the population.
      and demographic                     •	 Stage 1 Test – Potential Biological Removal (PBR)
      parameters, e.g., survival          •	 Stage 2 Test – Population Viability Analysis (PVA)
      rates, age of first              •	 Set thresholds based on ERP review informed by results of the PBR and
      breeding                            PVA analysis and other relevant information.
   •	 Estimated number of
      fatalities predicted at          Part 2: Decision Tree for Thresholds
      TRWPP sites                      •	 Review monitoring and mitigation measures, and define protocol for pe-
   •	 Information on other                riodic review of fatalities and consequences for mitigation measures.
      stressors, e.g., poisoning,      •	 Develop decision tree for the threshold system and the actions triggered
      electrocution, hunting              as a consequence of exceeding thresholds. This decision tree forms the
   •	 ERP assessments                     basis of the Adaptive Management Framework (step 5).



                                           Step 5: Identify Mitigation and Monitoring

  Develop Joint MMP, including
  •	 On-site: on-site mitigation and monitoring activities, including shutdown protocol
  •	 Intersite Monitoring and Adaptive Management Framework: coordinated intersite monitoring, including joint monitor-
     ing, considering the thresholds developed in step 4; description of collective actions recommended if thresholds for individual
     priority bird VECs are exceeded or an extreme event occurs that results in fatalities of a priority bird VEC beyond its threshold
     within a specific time frame or a high number of fatalities of more than one priority bird VEC within a defined time period
  •	 Joint Management and Action Plans: focused on priority bird VECs



                               Step 6: Institutional Arrangements and Information Management

  Outline recommendations for
  •	 Institutional and governance arrangements for the implementation and monitoring of the CEA recommendations
  •	 The MMP
  •	 Proposed information management and information-sharing activities




32 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
3.2 STEP 1—DEVELOP SPECIES POPULATION LIST AND IDENTIFY THE UNIT OF ANALYSIS

3.2.1 METHODS

 The purpose of step 1 is to identify all bird populations that could potentially be at risk from the cumulative
 effects within the study area and to determine a relevant UoA by which any effects should be measured.


Part 1: Develop a Species Population List
Throughout the CEA the term “species population” identifies population groups within a species that use the study
area. For example, a single species may be represented by both a population that migrates through the study area
and another population that is resident in the study area.

Developing the Preliminary List of Bird Populations
At the outset, a preliminary list of bird populations was collated from three sources of information:

 1.	Species populations recorded during the baseline surveys or identified as potentially occurring in a related report:
    At the WPP sites within the study area, baseline surveys were conducted over a three-year period between
    2013 and 2015, with each WPP site surveyed in at least one spring and one autumn season. Surveys prioritized
    the recording of detailed flight activity for species judged to be vulnerable to collision risk. In addition,
    occurrences of lower-risk species observed in flight over sites were recorded. Because the reasonably long period
    of preconstruction monitoring was conducted during seasons when the majority of species using the area are
    likely to be present, the number of species missing from the preliminary list is likely to be small. Species that
    may have been missed are likely to use the study area infrequently and/or be secretive and/or difficult to detect
    during surveys. For these reasons, the potential for this type of species to be identified as a priority bird VECs
    is likely to be low. Potential exceptions are species that may use the study area exclusively during a season or
    a time of day when no surveys were conducted.




                                                                                          Golden Eagle – Aquila chrysaetos




                                                                                          CEA Framework—Birds | 33
                                                                                           Lesser Kestrel – Falco naumanni


 2.	Species present on the Dana IBA list:
    As a precautionary measure, all species populations present on the Dana IBA list were included in the preliminary
    list.

 3.	MSB species populations identified from running the Soaring Bird Sensitivity Map tool for the study area
    plus a 20 km buffer.

The Soaring Bird Sensitivity Map tool allows users to define an area of interest and then returns a list of MSB
species populations potentially occurring in the defined area, on the basis of a range of relevant datasets. The tool
was run for the study area, buffered to 20 km, and the output list of species added to the preliminary list.

Screening of the Preliminary List
The ERP screened the preliminary list (see below). It was reviewed against studies and reports to identify species
populations that were:

 •	 Likely only to occur rarely as vagrants in the study area because either a migratory species did not use the Rift
    Valley/Red Sea flyway as its principal migration route or the distribution of a nonmigratory species did not include
    the study area.
 •	 Originally listed as occurring in the Dana IBA but currently known to be locally extinct in the study area.
 •	 Included in the bird survey reports of the individual WPPs as potentially present, but with no evidence to
    confirm that they were recorded.

Species populations fulfilling one or more of the above criteria were scoped out of the CEA process. Species
populations not scoped out at this stage were assumed to be bird populations potentially at risk from the effects
of TRWPP developments. This group of bird populations is referred to as the Species Population List and assessed
for species sensitivity in step 2. For the Species Population List, see Annex G.



34 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Part 2: Determine Species Population Categories and Identify the Unit of Analysis
Defining Species Population Categories
Recognizing that different species groups (e.g., large soaring birds and passerines) and different species ecologies (e.g.,
migrant and resident populations) in the Species Population List have different risk profiles in relation to effects from
wind farms, species populations were classified into four categories as shown in Figure 7.



FIGURE 7. SPECIES POPULATION LIST CATEGORIES

                                • MSB populations that migrate through the Rift Valley/Red Sea ﬂyway, according to the BirdLife-UNDP
      Category 1:                 Migratory Soaring Birds Project
   Migratory soaring            • MSB populations that could migrate through the WPP sites
   bird populations             • Populations di erentiated from other migrant populations (category 3) for their demonstrated or
                                  likely high vulnerability to collision with wind turbines



     Category 2:                • Raptor (birds of prey) populations that are resident or summer breeding
 Resident and summer            • Populations that may use the study area but do not migrate through the area
    breeding raptor             • Populations di erentiated from other resident populations (category 4) for their demonstrated or
      populations                 likely high vulnerabilty to collision with wind turbines



     Category 3:                • Populations that are not in categories 1 or 2 and do not breed in the study area but may migrate
  Other migrants and              through or winter in the area
 wintering populations




     Category 4:                • Populations that are not in categories 1 or 2 and that potentially occur as resident or summer breeding
   Other resident and             populations
   summer breeding              • Populations that may use the study area but do not migrate through the area
     populations

Note: Category 2 raptors are diurnal raptors. Owls were assigned to category 4.




Identify the Unit of Analysis
The risk to bird populations on the Species Population List from the cumulative effects of WPPs within the study
area varies, due in part to (i) the proportion of birds using the study area relative to a relevant reference population
of which they are part and (ii) the conservation status of the population. In the CEA these factors are given the
terms relative importance and vulnerability, respectively, and combine to give a measure of the species sensitivity
(see step 2). Ideally the reference population UoA should be biogeographically determined; however, this was not
possible because the origin of migratory birds using the study area is unknown, as is the biogeographical extent
of resident and breeding populations (with the exception of the griffon vulture; (see box Understanding the Unit
of Analysis for Griffon Vulture below). In the absence of this type of information, the UoA is defined at scales
appropriate to spatially relevant conservation units (e.g., flyway, national, and global populations) and are at
the same time relevant to the group characteristics of birds in each of the four categories. Based on review of the
technical literature, availability of data, and the professional experience of the CEA team, UoAs were identified
for the four categories as shown in Table 8.




                                                                                                         CEA Framework—Birds | 35
TABLE 8. UNIT OF ANALYSIS FOR EACH SPECIES POPULATION CATEGORY


 CATEGORIES OF
 SPECIES POPULATIONS UNIT OF ANALYSIS                             COMMENTARY

 Category 1:                       Birdlife Rift Valley/Red       •	 Flyway estimates were taken from the BirdLife International document
                                   Sea Flyway population             (Porter 2005).
 Migratory soaring bird
 populations                                                      •	 The flyway estimate for a species population is defined as “the maximum
                                                                     seasonal count recorded at any of the monitored bottleneck sites”
                                                                     (Porter 2005).
 Category 2:                       National population            •	 With the exception of the Griffon vulture, census-based national
                                   (ERP estimate)                    population estimates were not available for these species populations.
 Resident and summer
 breeding raptor                   Biogeographic popula- •	 Minimum national population estimates relied on the judgment of the
 populations                       tion estimate for griffon ERP based on their collective knowledge of each species.
                                   vulture
 Category 3:                       BirdLife global resident/      •	 For migrant populations and wintering populations, there was little or
                                   breeding distribution             no information on the origin of individuals occurring in the study area
 Other migrants and/or
                                   size                              and—beyond presence and/or absence—no usable information about the
 wintering populations
                                                                     number of birds likely to be present. As a consequence, BirdLife’s global
                                                                     breeding distribution sizea was used for each category 3 population to
                                                                     give a broad indication of the relative importance in step 2.
 Category 4:                       National population            •	 Census-based national population estimates were not available for
                                   (ERP estimate)                    these species populations.
 Other residents and
 summer breeding                                                  •	 Minimum national population estimates relied on the judgment of the
 populations                                                         ERP, based on their collective knowledge of each species.

a. Taken from Birdlife species fact sheets on http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/species/.




   Understanding the Unit of Analysis for the Griffon Vulture

   Unlike other species populations in the CEA, the south Jordan/Israel griffon vulture population is well studied and reasonably

   clearly defined. These studies have identified a griffon vulture population that uses breeding sites that extend from the Dana BR

   in the east, westward into the Judean and Negev desert in southern Israel. In addition, tagging studies demonstrate extensive

   adult foraging and chick provisioning ranges of this population. This understanding of the breeding distribution and movements

   of this population would reduce the relevancy of estimates of relative importance (step 2), threshold levels and external stressor

   effects (step 4) if these components of the CEA were measured against a UoA defined as the national population size. As a

   consequence, the CEA uses a biogeographically informed measure for the griffon vulture population size as its UoA.



3.2.2 RESULTS

The Preliminary List contained 196 species populations comprising 167 different species, of which 29 had 2
potential populations relevant to the study area.

After screening the Preliminary List, 25 species populations were removed. The Species Population List therefore
comprised 171 species populations (Table 9). These were the populations regarded within the CEA as potentially
at risk from the TRWPP and were therefore included within the scope of step 2. For the Species Population List
and the list of 25 excluded species populations and the rationale for exclusion, see Annex G.



36 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 9. SUMMARY RESULTS OF STEP 1


     SPECIES          SPECIES POPULATIONS
 POPULATIONS ON         SCREENED OUT AT                                                            FINAL SPECIES
 PRELIMINARY LIST             STEP 1      SPECIES POPULATION CATEGORIES                           POPULATION LIST

                                                Category 1:                                             24
                                                MSB populations
                                                Category 2:                                             10
                                                Resident and summer breeding raptor populations
         196                     25             Category 3:                                             74
                                                Other migrants and/or wintering populations
                                                Category 4:                                             63
                                                Other resident and summer breeding populations
                                                Total                                                   171




3.3 STEP 2—IDENTIFY SPECIES SENSITIVITY
3.3.1 METHODS

 The purpose of this step is to determine the species population sensitivity based on the relative importance of
 the study area to the population and its vulnerability at a national, regional, or international scale, depending
 on the UoA.


Part 1: Relative Importance Scoring
For each bird population, the relative importance proportional to the UoA was identified. The following section
describes the process for identifying relative importance for the four species population categories.

Category 1: Migratory Soaring Bird Populations – Relative Importance
The relative importance for each MSB species population was defined as an estimate of the proportion of the
Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway population migrating through WPPs within the study area. Owing to the practical
difficulties of monitoring the entire flyway, the flyway population estimate for a species is given as the maximum
seasonal count recorded at any of the Middle East bottleneck sites during the period of documented migration
monitoring (Porter, 2005). To provide a comparable maximum seasonal count for birds overflying WPP sites,
a seasonal survey at a single WPP was taken to be equivalent to a seasonal survey at a bottleneck location (a
“watch-point survey”). Seasonal count estimates for individual WPPs were calculated using VP survey data. The
highest count at any of the WPPs in any of the survey seasons was then compared with the flyway population
estimate, as follows:

                                           Maximum seasonal count from single WPP site
    Relative importance (%) =
                                 Maximum seasonal count from Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway bottleneck site 
                                              (i.e., flyway estimate from Porter [2005])

MSB “Broad Front” Migrant Exceptions
For some category 1 MSB populations, migration bottleneck counts have only limited relevance to the total number
of birds using the flyway because these species often migrate singly or in small groups that are widely scattered



                                                                                        CEA Framework—Birds | 37
across the width of the flyway corridor. They are also less averse to crossing areas of sea and so concentrate less
at bottlenecks than do many of the larger raptor species.

For these MSB “broad front” migrants, the proportion of the flyway population relevant to the study area was
determined slightly differently. If the maximum seasonal total for broad-front migrant species was below or
approximately the same as the flyway estimate, it was assigned a low relative importance rating. If the maximum
seasonal count was above the flyway estimate, the species was assigned a precautionary score of moderate for
relative importance. The ERP corroborated this decision.


TABLE 10. RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING FOR CATEGORY 1 MSB POPULATIONS


     MAXIMUM ESTIMATED PERCENTAGE OF FLYWAY
  POPULATION PASSING OVER WPP S IN THE STUDY AREA
  (BASED ON HIGHEST SEASONAL COUNT AT ANY OF THE
              FIVE WIND FARM SITES), %                                  RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORE

                              ≤1                                                    Negligible
                          > 1 and ≤ 5                                                  Low
                          > 5 and ≤ 10                                              Moderate
                              > 10                                                    High



The relative importance for category 1 species populations was scored as negligible, low, moderate, or high using
the criteria listed in Table 10.

Category 2: Resident and Summer Breeding Raptor Populations—Relative Importance
The relative importance of resident and summer breeding populations was defined as the proportion of the
national population using the study area. Census-based national population estimates and detailed species




                                                                                          Griffon Vulture – Gyps fulvus




38 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
distributions do not exist for most species populations in this category in Jordan. To address this knowledge
gap, the ERP provided minimum estimates of the national breeding population size, using expert opinion, and
assigned an estimate of the proportion of the national population using the study area to one of four percentile
ranges (Table 11, see column 1). Ranges were set with the intention that they would be appropriate for the
level of accuracy provided by the ERP. Each proportional range was then assigned to one of four classes: high,
moderate, low, or negligible.


          RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING FOR CATEGORY 2—RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS
TABLE 11. 


  ERP ESTIMATE OF MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE OF NATIONAL
     POPULATION LIKELY TO BE USING STUDY AREA, %                                  RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORE

                                  ≤1                                                            Negligible
                              > 1 and ≤ 5                                                          Low
                              > 5 and ≤ 10                                                      Moderate
                                  > 10                                                             High




For the griffon vulture, it was possible to define and estimate the size of a population whose breeding and foraging
activities focused on southern Israel and southwest Jordan, using existing research (for example, Spiegel et al.
2015) and expert opinion (see box Understanding the Unit of Analysis for Griffon Vulture). This estimate was
used instead of the national population to assess the relative importance of griffon vultures using the study area.

Biome-Restricted Considerations
Biomes are regions of the planet characterized by their vegetation (e.g., forests, grasslands, deserts) and controlled
by their climate, latitude, geography, and topography. Birds, like other animals and plants, are to varying degrees
adapted to specific biomes. Some species are so specialized in their adaptations to a biome’s characteristics that
they are not able to survive outside it. These “biome-restricted” species are also vulnerable to changes within their
biome by reason of their restricted adaptations.21 In line with this, the ERP recommended that biome-restricted
species present within the Dana IBA22 and occurring on the category 2 list (i.e., resident or summer breeding species
populations) should have their relative importance scores adjusted to one level above the score determined (e.g.,
from negligible to low) by estimating the proportion of the national population using the study area. Relative
importance scores were adjusted accordingly.

Category 3: Other Migrants and/or Wintering Populations—Relative Importance
For migrant and wintering populations, there is little or no information on the origin of individuals occurring at
WPP sites and no usable information beyond the presence or absence of the number of birds in the study area. As
a consequence, an estimate of relative importance for category 3 populations was derived from BirdLife estimates
of global resident and/or breeding distribution size23 (km2). This necessarily crude approach was based on the
reasoning that global breeding distribution size would give a broad indication of the relative importance of a
migratory or wintering species occurring in the study area, in that populations with small distributions would get

21  BirdLife International, at http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/sowb/casestudy/70.
22  “Biome restricted species occurring in the Dana IBA, Jordan.” Spreadsheet from BirdLife Middle East.
23  http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/species/.




                                                                                                  CEA Framework—Birds | 39
higher relative importance scores because their populations are likely to be more irreplaceable than populations
with larger distributions.

The range size of global breeding distributions (Table 12, see column 1) was informed by the range of population
distribution sizes documented by BirdLife,24 with the exception of “restricted-range” species. For terrestrial vertebrates,
a restricted-range species is one that has a global extent of occurrence of less than 50,000 km2, as defined by IFC’s
GN6. Such species received a high relative importance score.


          RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING FOR CATEGORY 3 RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS
TABLE 12. 


           BIRDLIFE GLOBAL RESIDENT AND/OR BREEDING
                    DISTRIBUTION RANGE (KM2)                                                   RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORE

                                 > 10,000,000                                                           Negligible
                       > 1,000,000 and ≤ 10,000,000                                                       Low
                          > 50,000 and ≤ 1,000,000                                                      Moderate
                                   ≤ 50,000a                                                              High

Notes: See species fact sheets at http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/species.
A number of guidance sources identify 50,000 km2 as the upper limit for a “range-restricted” species.




Category 4: Other Resident and Summer Breeding Populations—Relative Importance
The relative importance for category 4 populations was determined using the same approach applied to determine relative
importance for category 2 populations. The ERP provided a minimum estimate of the national breeding population
size using expert opinion and assigned an estimate of the proportion of the national population using the study area
to one of four ranges (Table 13, see column 1). Ranges were set to be appropriate to the level of accuracy that the
ERP provided. Each proportional range was then assigned to one of four classes: high, moderate, low, or negligible.


           ELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING FOR CATEGORY 4 OTHER RESIDENTS AND/OR SUMMER BREEDING BIRD
TABLE 13. R
              POPULATIONS


  ERP ESTIMATE OF MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE OF NATIONAL
     POPULATION LIKELY TO BE USING STUDY AREA, %                                               RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORE

                                       ≤1                                                               Negligible
                                   > 1 and ≤ 5                                                            Low
                                  > 5 and ≤ 10                                                          Moderate
                                       > 10                                                               High



Biome-Restricted Considerations
As with category 2 populations, any biome-restricted species in category 4 occurring in the Dana IBA had their
relative importance scores adjusted to one level above the score determined (e.g., from negligible to low) by
estimating the proportion of the national population that was using the study area.


24    http://www.birdlife.org/datazone/species.



40 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Part 2: Vulnerability Scoring
For each species population, vulnerability was scored using international and/or regional guidance on conservation
status appropriate to its UoA and evidence of its vulnerability to wind farms. International guidance was applied to
migrant and wintering species populations (categories 1 and 3) and regional guidance to the resident and summer
breeding species populations (categories 2 and 4). Guidance used to assess vulnerability is summarized below. The
criteria used to score vulnerability are summarized in Table 14.

  •	 IUCN Global Red List of Threatened Species:25 The IUCN Red List is globally recognized as the most
     comprehensive approach to assessing the conservation status of species, including birds. Individual species


TABLE 14. VULNERABILITY SCORING FOR EACH SPECIES POPULATION CATEGORY

                                                        CATEGORY 2:                  CATEGORY 3:                 CATEGORY 4:
                                                        RESIDENT AND                 OTHER MIGRANTS              OTHER RESIDENT AND
                   CATEGORY 1:                          SUMMER BREEDING              AND/OR WINTERING            SUMMER BREEDING
                   MSB POPULATIONS                      RAPTOR POPULATIONS POPULATIONS                           POPULATIONS

 Vulnerability      •	 IUCN Global Red List of          •	 IUCN Arabian Regional •	 IUCN Global Red List         •	 IUCN Arabian Regional
 Guidance /            Threatened Species                  Red List for breeding    of Threatened Species           Red List for breeding
 Metrics                                                   bird populations                                         bird populations
                    •	 Birdlife Species Vulnerability
                       Index (SVI)                      •	 Birdlife SVI
                    •	 Convention on the
                       Conservation of Migratory
                       Species of Wild Animals (CMS)
                       Category 2 Species
                                                            Vulnerability Scoring
 Negligible         •	 LC on IUCN Global Red List       •	 LC on IUCN Regional       •	 LC on IUCN Global        •	 LC on IUCN Regional
                       and SVI of 6 or below               Red List and SVI of 6        Red List                    Red List
                                                           or below
 Low                •	 VU or NT on IUCN Global          •	 VU or NT on IUCN          •	 NT on IUCN Global        •	 NT on IUCN Regional
                       Red List and SVI of 6 or            Regional Red List and        Red List                    Red List
                       below; or                           SVI of 6 or below; or
                    •	 LC on IUCN Global Red List       •	 LC on IUCN Global
                       and SVI of 7 or 8; or               Red List and SVI of 7
                                                           or 8
                    •	 CMS Category 2 Species and
                       SVI of 6 or below
 Moderate           •	 VU or NT on IUCN “Global”        •	 VU or NT on IUCN          •	 VU on IUCN Global        •	 VU on IUCN Regional
                       Red List and SVI of 7 or 8; or      Regional Red List and        Red List                    Red List
                                                           SVI of 7 or 8; or
                    •	 LC on IUCN Global Red List
                       and SVI of 9 or 10; or           •	 LC on IUCN Global Red
                                                           List and SVI of 9 or 10
                    •	 CMS Category 2 Species and
                       SVI of 7 or 8
 High               •	 CR or EN on IUCN Global Red •	 CR or EN on IUCN               •	 CR or EN on IUCN         •	 CR or EN on IUCN
                       List; or                       Regional Red List; or             Global Red List             Regional Red List
                    •	 VU or NT on the IUCN Global •	 VU or NT on the IUCN
                       Red List and SVI of 9 or 10; or Global Red List and
                                                       SVI of 9 or 10
                    •	 CMS Category 2 Species and
                       SVI 9 or 10

Notes: LC = Least Concern; NT = Near Threatened; VU = Vulnerable, EN = Endangered, CR = Critically Endangered.


25    www.iucnredlist.org.



                                                                                                            CEA Framework—Birds | 41
                                                                        are assigned an extinction risk category: least
                                                                        concern (LC); near threatened (NT); vulnerable
                                                                        (VU); endangered (EN); critically endangered (CR).
                                                                        These risk ratings are one of the components used
                                                                        to assess vulnerability for migratory and wintering
                                                                        populations (categories 1 and 3) as they provide the
                                                                        most spatially relevant conservation status category
                                                                        for these populations.
                                                                   •	 Convention on the Conservation of Migratory
                                                                   Species of Wild Animals (CMS), Category 2 Species:
                                                                   The Convention26 (also known as the Bonn Convention)
                                                                   recognizes that the regional threat level to migratory
                                                                   raptors is not always captured by the IUCN Global
                                                                   Red List extinction risk categories. To address this
                                                                   issue, the “Memorandum of Understanding on the
                                                                   Conservation of Migratory Birds of Prey in Africa
                                                                   and Eurasia”27 identifies species considered to have
                        Egyptian Vulture – Neophron percnopterus   unfavorable conservation status at the regional level in
                                                                   Africa and Eurasia (see Annex 3 on category 2 species
      in the Memorandum of Understanding). This information was used in the CEA to better reflect the regional
      threat to migratory raptors occurring at the WPPs in the study area. In the CEA, MSB populations (category
      1) that are on the Annex 3 list of category 2 species of the Memorandum of Understanding were treated in
      the same way as a species with a Vulnerable Global IUCN Red List category rating (thereby overruling their
      Global Red List category of Least Concern, if so classed). The only exception to this rule was steppe eagles.
      This species appears on the Annex 3 category 2 list of the Memorandum of Understanding but has recently
      been recategorized on the Global IUCN Red List as Endangered. In this case, therefore, the CEA used the global
      category to assess the vulnerability of this species in the CEA.

  •	 BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI): This index scores MSBs and other raptors on the basis of their
     vulnerability to the adverse effects of wind energy developments and power lines. Scores are informed
     by scientific literature and other relevant evidence relating to species behavior and documented effects at
     existing developments. The index uses a 10-point scale, with species at the highest vulnerability scoring 10.
     MSBs (category 1) and resident and summer breeding raptors (category 2) were assessed using this index.
     The relevant SVI score was determined using the output from the BirdLife-UNDP Soaring Bird Sensitivity
     Map tool.28

  •	 IUCN Regional Red List of breeding bird populations of the Arabian Peninsula: This IUCN Regional Red List
     (Symes et al., 2015) was used to score vulnerability for resident and breeding bird populations (i.e., categories
     2 and 4). It provides regional extinction risk categories for species that breed in Arabia and therefore gives a
     more geographically applicable assessment of vulnerability than the IUCN Global Red List.



26  www.cms.int.
27  http://www.cms.int/raptors/en. Accessed September 2015.
28  http://www.migratorysoaringbirds.undp.birdlife.org/en/sensitivity-map.




42 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Part 3: Assign Species Sensitivity
A matrix (Table 15) was used to determine sensitivity for each species population in step 2 using their relative
importance and vulnerability scores.


TABLE 15. SPECIES SENSITIVITY MATRIX


                                                      RELATIVE IMPORTANCE
 VULNERABILITY
                             High                 Moderate                   Low                     Negligible
          High               High                    High                  Medium                      Low
     Moderate                High                  Medium                    Low                     Negligible
          Low              Medium                    Low                     Low                     Negligible
     Negligible              Low                  Negligible              Negligible                 Negligible



3.3.2 RESULTS

From 171 species populations assessed for sensitivity in step 2, 130 were scored as negligible and scoped out,
leaving 41 to be assessed for LoE in step 3. Table 16 summarizes the findings of step 2. Annex H provides full
details of the species sensitivity results for each of the 171 species populations.


TABLE 16. SUMMARY RESULTS OF STEP 2


                                                    FINAL SPECIES      POPULATIONS SCOPED              SPECIES
                                                     POPULATION        OUT AT END OF STEP 2          POPULATIONS
                                                  LIST FROM STEP 1         (NEGLIGIBLE               SCOPED INTO
         SPECIES POPULATION CATEGORIES              (SEE ANNEX G)         SENSITIVITY)                  STEP 3

Category 1:                                                 24                      4                       20
MSB populations
Category 2:                                                  10                        1                     9
Resident and summer breeding raptor populations
Category 3:                                                 74                     74                        0

Other migrants and/or wintering populations
Category 4:                                                 63                      51                       12
Other resident and summer breeding populations
Totals                                                      171                    130                      41



    STEP 3 – ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT AND IDENTIFY PRIORITY BIRD VECs
3.4 
3.4.1 METHODS

 The purpose of this step is to identify priority bird VECs from the 41 candidate species populations scoped
 into step 3. Priority bird VECs are identified by evaluating the species sensitivity output from step 2 with the
 LoE output from this step, which is based on the annual likelihood of an individual colliding with TRWPP
 turbines for each of the candidate species populations.




                                                                                           CEA Framework—Birds | 43
Part 1: 	 Determine Likelihood of Effect
LoE assesses WPP-related effects on species populations scoped into step 3. Collision with turbine blades is
assumed to be the primary risk associated with WPPs for these populations. Recognizing this, the LoE was
based on species-specific estimates of the annual likelihood of collision per individual bird for all WPP sites
included in the CEA. Other demonstrated effects on birds from wind energy developments, specifically any
direct habitat loss from building turbines and wind farm infrastructure and any effects of displacement and
disturbance, were considered likely to have only small or negligible effects on populations because of their
small effects on migration routes and the availability of large expanses of similar habitat adjacent to the WPP
sites. The specific methods for determining the LoE for each species population category are detailed in the
following subsections.

Category 1: MSB Populations and Category 2: Resident and Summer Breeding Raptor Populations
Collision with turbine blades is assumed to be the only potentially significant adverse effect for both migrating
and resident raptor populations within each WPP site.

The LoE was determined using three factors:

 1.	An estimate of the annual probability of collision per individual for all WPPs included in the CEA was
    calculated by summing species-specific CRM estimates from the WPPs in the study area to obtain a number
    of predicted fatalities per year for all five sites combined. For category 1 MSB populations this number
    was divided by an estimate of the number of individuals migrating through the WPP sites. For category 2
    resident and summer breeding raptor populations the summed CRM estimate was divided by the number
    of individuals estimated to be using WPP sites for foraging or other activities. Estimates of the number of
    MSB individuals were derived from analysis of spring 2015 baseline monitoring results. The number of
    resident or summer breeding individuals using WPPs was estimated by expert ornithological opinion (see
    Annex I for a more detailed explanation of how the LoE was calculated).

 2.	The results of the trends analysis using preconstruction survey data from the five WPPs were merged into a
    single database to enable the team to assess trends (see Annexes D and E).

 3.	A review by the ERP and ornithologists on the CEA team.

For each species population, the annual probability of an individual colliding with TRWPP turbines was assigned
to categories (negligible, low, medium, and high) on the basis of the range of values in Table 17. Recognizing
uncertainty surrounding the attribution of a single value to any collision risk estimate (Madders and Whitfield,
2006), these results were compared with the broader trends analysis (see Annex E). Where the trends analysis



TABLE 17. LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT SCORING—CATEGORIES 1 AND 2 OF SPECIES POPULATIONS


    ANNUAL LIKELIHOOD (PER INDIVIDUAL) OF COLLIDING WITH
     TRWPP TURBINE ROTORS, BEFORE ANY ADJUSTMENTS (%)                                 LoE SCORE

                                ≤ 0.05                                                 Negligible
                            > 0.05 and ≤ 0.1                                              Low
                              > 0.1 and ≤ 1                                             Medium
                                   >1                                                    High




44 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
indicated that the annual probability of an individual colliding with TRWPP turbines may be higher than the
calculated CRM results suggested, the LoE was increased by one level (e.g., from negligible to low) as a precautionary
measure. The LoE rating was reviewed by the ERP and CEA team ornithologists. If the ERP provided additional
information indicating that the CRM and trends analysis may not have adequately reflected the collision risk
to a population, the LoE rating was adjusted. For example, the CRM results and trends analysis were based on
very few data from the winter period, so if additional evidence provided by the ERP suggested the presence of
resident raptor species during this period, the LoE category would be adjusted upwards.

Category 3: Other Migrants and/or Wintering Populations and Category 4: Other Resident and Summer
Breeding Populations
For categories 3 and 4 species populations, no survey data were available for calculating CRM outputs. To obtain
an assessment of the LoE similar to that for the categories 1 and 2 species, the ERP—guided in particular by those
with extensive field experience of these populations within the study area—was asked to assess the annual likelihood
per individual of colliding with TRWPP turbine rotors. To guide this assessment, the ERP first considered the likely
number of individuals present in the study area, the number of months that the species was likely to be present,
the proportion of flying time spent at turbine height, and the likelihood of a bird flying at turbine height avoiding
collision. On the basis of these judgments, the ERP made an informed, qualitative assessment, assigning an annual
likelihood per individual of collision for each species to one of four categories (negligible, low, medium, or high).

Part 2: Assign Risk Rating for Each Species Population
The matrix in Table 18 was applied to each species population scoped into step 3. It evaluated the species sensitivity
score from step 2 with the LoE score from step 3 to determine a final risk rating, categorized as negligible, minor,
moderate, or major.



TABLE 18. RISK RATING MATRIX


                                                          LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT
 SPECIES SENSITIVITY
                                  High                  Medium                   Low                 Negligible
High                              Major                  Major                Moderate                 Minor
Medium                            Major                Moderate                 Minor                Negligible
Low                             Moderate                 Minor                  Minor                Negligible




Part 3: 	 Identifying Priority Bird VECs
Priority bird VECs were those species populations that were assigned major or moderate risk rating scores when
their species sensitivity and LoE category scores were applied to the matrix in Table 18. Species populations with
either a negligible or minor risk rating were not considered priority bird VECs. However, monitoring and mitigation
protocols require postconstruction carcass searches around turbines for all species populations (see step 5), thus
allowing for an iterative review of risks to all species populations that occur at WPPs in the study area.


3.4.2 RESULTS

Of the 41 species populations assessed in step 3, the CEA process identified 13 priority bird VECs: 4 MSB
populations (category 1), 7 resident and/or summer breeding raptor populations (category 2), and 2 other resident



                                                                                         CEA Framework—Birds | 45
 FIGURE 8.SCOPING OUT OF SPECIES POPULATIONS IN STEPS 1                                               and summer breeding populations (category 4).
                                      TO 3 OF THE CEA                                                  Figure 8 illustrates the scoping out of bird species
                                                                                                       populations during steps 1 to 3 of the CEA process,
                                90                                                                     from the initial 171 populations to the final 13,
                                                                  Likelihood      Thresholds
                                                  Sensitivity
                                                                   of e ect        required            listed in Table 19. Annex J provides complete
                                80                                                                     details of the LoE and final risk rating results.
                                                                                                       These 13 species populations are assessed as being
                                70
                                                                                                       at the highest risk from the cumulative effects of
                                                                                                       the WPPs in the study area. In step 4, each priority
Number of species populations




                                60
                                                                                                       bird VEC population is assessed to determine the
                                                                                                       number of TRWPP-related fatalities that can be
                                50
                                                                                                       sustained without compromising its long-term
                                                                                                       population viability.
                                40

                                                                                                           STEP 4 – IDENTIFY THRESHOLDS
                                                                                                       3.5 
                                30
                                                                                                           FOR FATALITIES FOR EACH
                                                                                                           PRIORITY BIRD VEC
                                20
                                                                                                       3.5.1 METHODS
                                10
                                                                                                       The purpose of step 4 is to determine for each
                                0
                                                                                                       priority bird VEC a threshold of TRWPP-related
                                Step 1              Step 2          Step 3              Step 4         fatalities that should not be exceeded to avoid
                                                                                                       having an impact on the viability and sustainability
                                     Cat. 1 MSB populations      Cat. 2 Resident and breeding
                                                                 raptor populations                    of the species population. The threshold represents
                                     Cat. 3 Other migrants       Cat. 4 Other residents and            the “limits of acceptable change” that establish
                                     and wintering populations   breeding populations                  the trigger for adaptive management measures.



 TABLE 19. PRIORITY BIRD VECs

                                     SPECIES POPULATION CATEGORY                          SPECIES NAME                    SPECIES SCIENTIFIC NAME
            Category 1:                                                             Steppe eagle                      Aquila nipalensis

            MSB populations                                                         Egyptian vulture                  Neophron percnopterus
                                                                                    Eastern imperial eagle            Aquila heliaca
                                                                                    Booted eagle                      Hieraaetus pennatus
            Category 2:                                                             Short-toed snake-eagle            Circaetus gallicus

            Resident and summer breeding raptor populations                         Griffon vulture                   Gyps fulvus
                                                                                    Golden eagle                      Aquila chrysaetos
                                                                                    Verreaux’s eagle                  Aquila verreauxii
                                                                                    Bonelli’s eagle                   Aquila fasciata
                                                                                    Long-legged buzzard               Buteo rufinus
                                                                                    Lesser kestrel                    Falco naumanni
            Category 3:                                                             No priority bird VECs

            Other migrant and wintering populations
            Category 4:                                                             Syrian Serin                      Serinus syriacus

            Other resident and summer breeding populations                          European goldfinch                Carduelis carduelis




46 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Step 4 has two parts: Part 1 identifies, for each priority bird VEC, a threshold number of TRWPP-related fatalities
appropriate for maintaining or attaining the long-term viability of the population. Part 2 explains the threshold system
and the actions triggered as a consequence of passing thresholds. These actions are summarized as a decision tree
in Figure 9. The decision tree forms the basis of the adaptive management framework, described in detail in step 5.

Part 1: 	 Threshold-Setting Process
The threshold-setting process was guided by related concepts within European and U.S. legal frameworks, specifically
criteria underpinning “Favourable Conservation Status” (EC Habitats Directive, Council Directive 92/43/EEC)
and “Optimal Sustainable Population” (pursuant to 16 USCS § 1362).


FIGURE 9. DECISION TREE FOR PRIORITY BIRD VECs



                                Priority Bird VEC




                                                                          Unit of Analysis
                               Limit of Threshold                             (Step 1)
                             (national, regional etc.)



                                                                                                    PRIMARY THRESHOLD
   Species                                                                  Small Populations
  Population                 Review Population Size                                                      Zero Fatality
    Data                                                                                               Threshold Target


                         Population Biological Removal
                                  (PBR) Test                  Cannot
                                                              Sustain                                   PREEMPTIVE
                                                               Any                                    MONITORING AND
                                                             Additional                                 MITIGATION
   External              Compare PBR with Combined           Mortality                                   MEASURES
                                                                            PRIMARY
   Stressors               CRM TRWPP and External                          THRESHOLD                   Priority Bird VEC
     Data               Stressors to determine if Priority
                                                                           Zero Fatality              Shutdown Protocol
                        Bird VEC Can Sustain Additional
                                    Mortality                               Threshold                        Near
                                                                              Target                 Misses/Elevated-Risk
                                                                                                          Situations

                 Can Potentially                                                                        Extreme Events
                Sustain Additional                                                                   Shutdown Protocol for
  Cumulative
                    Mortality                                                                          Nonpriority VECs
  CRM Data
                                                                                                 If Primary
                                                                            PRIMARY              Thresholds
                          Population Viability Analysis                    THRESHOLD
                                     (PVA)                                Annual Fatality           ADAPTIVE RESPONSE
                                                                            Threshold                   STRATEGY
                                                                              Target                Adaptive Management
                                                                           Informed by               Protocol with Clear
                                                                               PVA                    Escalation Process


                                                                                                       Potential to Revise
                                                                                                    Threshold Targets and
                                                                                                   Mitigation and Monitoring
                                                                                                           Measures




                                                                                                CEA Framework—Birds | 47
                                                                          Approaches applied elsewhere in the wind sector
                                                                          for setting bird fatality thresholds were reviewed to
                                                                          evaluate their validity and appropriateness for assessing
                                                                          priority bird VEC thresholds at WPPs in the study
                                                                          area. Informed by this, a threshold-setting process
                                                                          was developed for this CEA. Thresholds were assessed
                                                                          for each priority bird VEC relative to the population
                                                                          size determined by their UoA. For example, for the
                                                                          MSB population of Eastern imperial eagle (category
                                                                          1), the fatality threshold was assessed against the
                                                                          Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway estimate, whereas for
                                                                          the resident breeding population of Bonelli’s eagle
                                                                          (category 2), the threshold was assessed against an
                                                                          estimate of the national population (see Table 8 in
                                                                          Section 3.2.1 for UoA for each species population
                   Wind power project in the construction phase           category).

Threshold-setting process
 1.	 Small populations: For each priority bird VEC, the estimated number of individuals in the UoA was reviewed.
     Where the minimum population size estimate for a species was small (20 individuals or less), it was assumed
     that any mortality from the TRWPP would adversely affect its population viability and a zero fatality threshold
     target was applied. To take a precautionary approach, this was the case even when the study area was not
     known to be an especially important habitat for such species.

  2.	 Larger populations: For each priority bird VEC where the UoA population was greater than 20 individuals, the
      annual number of fatalities that could be sustained without compromising long-term viability was determined
      using a simple “potential biological removal” (PBR) analysis (see Box). This annual fatality estimate was
      then compared with the combined annual number of fatalities predicted from collision risk estimates at
      WPPs in the study area and from the effects of principal external stressors on the population, in particular
      illegal killing, power-line electrocution, and the taking of live birds.29 (For more detail, see Annex K.) When
      these two fatality estimates combined exceeded the PBR level, an annual threshold of zero fatality threshold
      target was applied. When the PBR level was not exceeded, the ERP and CEA team ornithologists used their
      knowledge of the conservation status of the population to assess whether the result was (a) sufficiently close
      to the PBR to imply no WPP-related mortality was possible without an adverse effect on the population
      or (b) sufficiently below the PBR level to indicate that some WPP-related mortality was possible without
      an effect on population viability.30 When the results of this effort were best described by (a), a zero fatality


29  Information on the number of fatalities from external stressors is scarce for both the study area and Jordan as a whole, and
typically relates to “incidental” reports of fatalities and their apparent causes. To address this information gap and make it possible
to incorporate external stressors into an assessment of the viability of each population, the ERP identified principal stressors for
the priority bird VECs and then gave approximate range estimates of the annual number of fatalities attributable to each stressor
individually and all external stressors combined. Range estimates for annual fatalities were < 1, ≥ 1 and < 5, ≥ 5 and < 10, ≥ 10. (For
details on procedures used, see Annex K).
30  It is important that the PBR level is understood to be a crisis point for the population and not a threshold that can be adopted to

maintain a viable population or to recover a declining population. The number of annual deaths that can be incurred by a population
while maintaining its viability will be some way below the number of deaths predicted by the PBR level and cannot be predicted by
this simple analysis.



48 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
   threshold target was applied to the species. When
   it was best described by (b), a more complex
   population viability analysis (PVA) was conducted         Potential Biological Removal (PBR) and
   to inform the setting of an appropriate annual            Population Viability Analysis (PVA)
   fatality threshold target.
                                                             Potential Biological Removal analysis is a simple, robust, and
 3.	 Populations where wind farm–related mortality
                                                             precautionary test developed for situations in which information
     may be possible without affecting viability: For
                                                             on species population biology is limited (see Wade, 1998; Neil and
     priority bird VEC populations where expert review
     informed by PBR analysis concluded that some            Lebreton, 2005; Dillingham and Fletcher, 2011). It uses species-

     additional mortality may be possible, a more            specific biological and demographic parameters, specifically adult
     complex PVA was available to assess future              survival rate and year of first breeding, to calculate an annual rate
     population trends under different scenarios for
                                                             of human-caused mortality that if realized would likely result in a
     wind farm and external stressor mortality. For
                                                             nonviable population in the long term.
   these species, annual fatality threshold targets
   (i.e., greater than zero birds per year) were set,        Population Viability Analysis is a more sophisticated modeling
   using the judgment of the ERP informed by the
                                                             procedure that makes use of a wider range of species-specific
   results of the PVA analysis.
                                                             biological and demographic parameters to model future population
Primary Threshold Targets                                    trends and therefore inform judgments about future population
 •	 Zero Fatality Threshold Targets                          viability. The PBR and PVA methods have both been used to assess
    Priority bird VEC populations that were assigned
                                                             the effects of wind energy developments on birds. For example,
    a zero fatality threshold target are subject to
                                                             PBR levels have been used to assess the effect of collision risk
    monitoring, mitigation plans and adaptive
    management designed to minimize the contact              on red kite (Milvus milvus) populations at wind farms in Germany

    of these species with WPPs in the study area,            (Bellebaum et al., 2013); PVA has been used to assess the effects
    and conservation actions designed to reduce the          of wind energy developments on breeding Egyptian populations
    number of fatalities from other stressors. For
                                                             (Carrete et al., 2009) and to assess the impact of offshore wind
    these priority bird VECs, an adaptive management
                                                             farms on birds (Maclean, Frederikson, and Rehfisch, 2007; Wildfowl
    response is triggered when there is an elevated-
    risk situation or a near-miss incident (page 50          and Wetlands Trust (Consulting) Limited, 2012).

    – Adaptive Management) or if a fatality occurs.

 •	 Annual Fatality Threshold Targets
    Priority bird VECs assigned an annual fatality
    threshold target are subject to the same monitoring and mitigation plans and adaptive management as zero
    fatality threshold populations. For these priority bird VECs, an adaptive management response is triggered
    when periodic review of the results of postconstruction carcass searches shows that the annual fatality threshold
    target has been exceeded.

Other Threshold Targets
 •	 Extreme Events Threshold Targets
    In addition to thresholds set for priority bird VECs, thresholds are required to alleviate the risk of multifatality
    events to a small number of populations that are not priority bird VECs. This is particularly relevant to WPPs in
    the study area because of the potential for flocks of specific nonpriority MSBs to occur in the area. For practical



                                                                                              CEA Framework—Birds | 49
                                                                            Bedouin grazing livestock under wind turbines



    reasons, such as the need for a quick decision in the field to avoid this type of extreme event, thresholds should
    be set to a standard flock size (regardless of species) and should be broadly informed by PBR levels of flocking
    species and estimates of external stressor fatality rates.

Adaptive Management
Adaptive management is triggered when target thresholds are exceeded and when new evidence acquired over
time shows an increased or decreased risk to a priority bird VEC or an increased risk to a nonpriority population.
Increased risk to priority birds requires that mitigation and management measures be revised to uphold thresholds
and promote the long-term viability of the population. For priority bird VECs that exhibit a decreased risk over
time, their primary threshold target may be reassessed, and revised or reassigned to reflect the reduced risk to
their long-term population viability. Nonpriority populations that exhibit evidence of increased risk may be
assigned as priority bird VECs, may have an appropriate threshold determined and may be subject to associated
adaptive management response strategies. Adaptive management is a key component of threshold setting within
the CEA as it provides a mechanism for dealing with the uncertainty associated with determining priority bird
populations and with predicting thresholds for priority bird VECs.

Adaptive management strategies should follow a set of clear sequential actions, specifically:

 1.	Conduct a review to determine the primary reasons why a threshold was exceeded.

 2.	Review the effectiveness of existing mitigation in light of the findings and determine whether a revised mitigation
    strategy is required.



50 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
 3.	If needed, define a revised threshold target or limit of acceptable change.

 4.	Define the actions that will be taken if the new threshold or limit of acceptable change is exceeded.

This process is iterative, and the breaching of successive thresholds should be matched by an increase in the
measures to protect and promote the viability of priority bird VEC populations.

Adaptive management responses are not limited to exceeded thresholds. Adaptive management may also be
triggered in response to other events:

 •	 Evidence of an increased risk to a population from other non-TRWPP sources that indirectly affects the
    threshold for TRWPP-related fatalities. For example, evidence of increased persecution during the operational
    phase of the WPPs may lead to reassigning a priority bird VEC with an annual fatality threshold target to a
    zero fatality threshold target.

 •	 An elevated risk situation, in which a temporary increase in the level of risk to priority birds in the vicinity of
    turbines occurs as a consequence of changes in human behavior or environmental conditions. For example,
    increased activity of sheep grazing around turbines may result in an observed increase in vultures in the area,
    triggering an increase in monitoring effort and engagement with livestock owners.

 •	 A near-miss incident, in which no fatality occurred but monitoring and mitigation protocols failed to alleviate
    the risk of collision; for example, where a request to shut down a turbine in response to an approaching priority
    bird was not completed before the bird flew through the rotor-swept area, leading to a review and revision of
    monitoring and mitigation protocols.

Part 2: Decision Tree for Thresholds
Shown in Figure 9, the decision tree explains the threshold system and actions triggered as a consequence of passing
a threshold. In addition, the decision tree and proposed thresholds from step 4 provide the basis for developing
mitigation and monitoring protocols, the adaptive management framework, and joint management and action
plans for developers and other stakeholders (see step 5), as well as potential institutional arrangements (see step 6).

3.5.2 RESULTS

All 13 priority bird VECs were assigned to a zero fatality threshold target as a result of applying the threshold-
setting protocol in step 4. Table 20 gives input data and results of the PBR analysis. Tables 21–33 summarize the
outcomes of steps 1–3, the results of the threshold-setting process and a threshold target for each species.

Biological and demographic parameters required to conduct threshold-setting analyses were taken from existing
species-specific studies for each priority bird VEC. Parameters derived from studies of populations within the
Middle East region were used where they existed; otherwise the results of studies from the most appropriate
population outside the region were used. Using surrogate parameters from different populations of the same
species should provide reasonably similar parameter values, as was the case here. The two populations are
similar in other aspects of their biology, e.g., migratory, nonmigratory populations. For the long-legged buzzard,
steppe eagle, booted eagle, and short-toed snake-eagle, no species-specific parameter values were available so
typical values for raptors of similar mass were used to give an indication of a likely threshold. Adult survival
and age of first breeding are related to body mass in raptors (Newton, 1979; Newton, McGrady, and Oli,
2016); therefore, using surrogate species with similar mass should allow approximate predictions about the
amount of mortality these priority bird VEC populations can sustain.



                                                                                         CEA Framework—Birds | 51
52 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA




                                                        OTENTIAL BIOLOGICAL REMOVAL ANALYSIS: INPUT DATA AND RESULTS FOR PRIORITY BIRD VECs, CATEGORY 1, MSBs, AND CATEGORY 2,
                                             TABLE 20. P
                                                                                    RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTORS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            REGIONAL RATING FOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DEMOGRAPHIC PARAMETERS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IUCN CONSERVATION
                                                                                                                   SPECIES SCIENTIFIC




                                                                                                                                                                ESTIMATE SOURCE
                                                                                                                                            UNIT OF ANALYSIS




                                                                                                                                                                                                              ESTIMATE (NO. OF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FACTOR USED IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STATUS (GLOBAL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ANNUAL NO. OF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANNUAL ADULT
                                                                                         SPECIES NAME




                                                                                                                                                                                               INDIVIDUALS)
                                                                                                                                                                                  POPULATION




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POPULATION




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AGE AT FIRST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CATEGORY 2)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CATEGORY 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RATING FOR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FATALITIES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RECOVERY
                                                        CATEGORY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ESTIMATE,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PBR LEVEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BREEDING




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SURVIVAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SOURCE
                                                                                                            NAME




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (%)
                                                                                  Egyptian vulture Neophron                             Flyway                 Porter,                                        1,200                                                                     EN                                                        Sanz-Aguilar et al., 2015          5                     93%                                 0.1                                           5.2
                                                                                                   percnopterus                         population             2005                                                                                                                                                                               (Spain)
                                                 Category 1. MSB Bird




                                                                                  Steppe eaglea         Aquila                          Flyway                 Porter,                              76,600                                                                              EN                                                        Katzner et al., 2006              4                      92%                                 0.1                                          395
                                                     Populations




                                                                                                        nipalensis                      population             2005                                                                                                                                                                               (Kazakhstan)
                                                                                  Eastern imperial      Aquila heliaca                  Flyway                 Porter,                                                556                                                               VU                                                        Katzner et al., 2006              4                      92%                                 0.1                                           2.9
                                                                                  eagle                                                 population             2005                                                                                                                                                                               (Kazakhstan)


                                                                                  Booted eagleb         Hieraaetus                      Flyway                 Porter,                                  2,000                                                                            LC                                                       Newton, Davis, and                 4                     96%                                    1                                            79
                                                                                                        pennatus                        population             2005                                                                                                                                                                               Davis, 1989

                                                                                  Short-toed            Circaetus                       National               Expert                                                100                                                                VU                                                        Newton, Davis, and                 4                     96%                                 0.1                                          0.4
                                                                                  Snake-eagleb          gallicus                        population             review                                                                                                                                                                             Davis, 1989
                                                                                  Griffon vulture       Gyps fulvus                     Biogeo-                Expert                                                       86                                                          EN                                                        Gouar et al., 2008                 4                     97%                                 0.1                                           0.3
                                                 Category 2. Resident or Summer
                                                  Breeding Raptor Populations




                                                                                                                                        graphic                reviewc                                                                                                                                                                            (France)
                                                                                                                                        population
                                                                                  Golden eagle          Aquila                          National               Expert                                                              2                                                    EN                                                        No PBR analysis conducted. National population size estimate: small.
                                                                                                        chrysaetos                      population             review
                                                                                  Verreaux’s eagle      Aquila                          National               Expert                                                              2                                                    EN                                                        No PBR analysis conducted. National population size estimate: small.
                                                                                                        verreauxii                      population             review
                                                                                  Bonelli’s eagle       Aquila fasciata National                               Expert                                                            22                                                      LC                                                       Hernández-Matías et                4                     91%                                    1                                           1.2
                                                                                                                        population                             review                                                                                                                                                                             al., 2011 (France)
                                                                                  Long-legged           Buteo rufinus                   National               Expert                                              200                                                                   LC                                                       Kenward et al., 2000               3                     90%                                    1                                             14
                                                                                  buzzardd                                              population             review                                                                                                                                                                             (UK)
                                                                                  Lesser kestrel        Falco                           National               Expert                                              200                                                                  NT                                                        Hiraldo et al., 1996               2                     71%                                 0.3                                            8.7
                                                                                                        naumanni                        population             review                                                                                                                                                                             (Spain)

                                             a
                                                 No species-specific biological or demographic parameters available. Analysis uses an estimate of adult survival rate and age of first breeding for the Eastern imperial eagle (Katzner et al., 2006).
                                             b
                                                 No species-specific biological or demographic parameters available. Analysis uses an estimate of adult survival rate and age of first breeding for the red kite (Milvus milvus) (Newton, Davis, and Davis, 1989).
                                             c
                                                  ased on unpublished data from Israeli research (“International Workshop on the Future of Vultures in the Middle East,” 19–21 October 2011. Organized by the National Parks and BirdLife Israel at Kib-
                                                 B
                                                 butz Kfar Blum).
                                             d
                                                 No species-specific biological or demographic parameters available. Analysis uses an estimate of adult survival rate and age of first breeding for Eurasian (Buteo buteo) (Kenward et al., 2000).
           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 1 MSB POPULATION) – EGYPTIAN VULTURE (NEOPHRON PERCNOPTERUS):
TABLE 21. P
          REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4 IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of flyway population migrating through WPPs in the study area                       5.6
CEA relative importance category score                                                     Moderate
BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                        10
IUCN global conservation status                                                                EN
CEA vulnerability category score                                                              High
Sensitivity category score                                                                    High

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                           0 .1
LoE category score, based on annual collision risk per individual                             Low
LoE category adjustment, based on trends analysis and expert review                             0
LoE category score adjusted                                                                   Low
Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                          Moderate

                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                           5.2
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)              ≥1 and <5
    (i) Power line electrocution/collision (annual fatality estimate)                       ≥1 and <5
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                         ≥1 and <5
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                       ≥1 and <5
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                       0 .0 7
Additional supporting information
Primary Threshold Target                                                                  Zero Fatality




                                                                                  CEA Framework—Birds | 53
           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 1 MSB POPULATION)—STEPPE EAGLE (AQUILA NIPALENSIS): REVIEW OF CEA
TABLE 22. P
            STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4 IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                             STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

 % estimate of flyway population migrating through WPPs in the study area                                                          0 .4
 CEA relative importance category score                                                                                        Negligible
 BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                                            9
 IUCN global conservation status                                                                                                   EN
 CEA vulnerability category score                                                                                                 High
 Sensitivity category score                                                                                                       Low

                                                     STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

 Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from collision risk model estimates                                             0 .1
 LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                                                 Low
 LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                                                 2
 LoE category score adjusted                                                                                                      High
 Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                                             Moderate

                                                            STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

 PBR level (annual fatality estimate)a                                                                                            395
 Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                                                    >1 0
      (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                                                     >1 0
      (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                                              >1 0
      (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                                            >1 0
 CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                                                            1
 Additional supporting information                                                                                             see below
 Primary Threshold Target                                                                                                     Zero Fatality

a. No species-specific biological or demographic parameters available. PBR is based on parameters typical of large raptors.




A primary threshold of zero fatalities is recommended despite an apparent low collision risk estimate and a
theoretically high PBR level if based on the flyway estimate (Porter, 2005). This decision was informed by the
following species-specific uncertainties not accounted for in steps 2 or 3, and additional external stressor effects
not accounted for by the three principal external stressor components used in step 4 to provide a standard measure
of cumulative non–wind farm effects.

 i.	 Records of Steppe Eagles in the study area and more widely in the south of Jordan during the winter period
     suggest that this species may be present as an early migrant and/or wintering in this area. The evidence for early
     migrant activity is corroborated by analysis of steppe eagle migration data at Eilat, Israel, that has identified
     a trend for increasingly early migration passage of this species (Zduniak et al., 2010). The preconstruction
     monitoring for all but one of the WPPs in the study area was not conducted during the late winter; consequently
     the overall number of individuals present may be higher than those recorded in the data available for the CEA.
     In addition, lower temperatures during the winter period are suboptimal for thermal development. Soaring
     raptors, including Steppe Eagles, which principally use thermals to aid flight on migration, may therefore
     make more use of near-ground turbulence in these cooler conditions. As a consequence, soaring raptors may
     fly at collision risk height for proportionately more time in winter than during the warmer spring and autumn



54 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
      periods when the majority of flight data for calculating CRM estimates were collected (Mallon, Bildstein, and
      Katzner, 2015).

  ii.	 The PBR level for this species is likely to have substantially overestimated the annual number of individuals
       that if removed would result in a nonviable population in the long term. This is because more recent evidence
       suggests a significant decline in the Steppe Eagle flyway population since the figure used for the flyway estimate
       was recorded. Specifically, analysis of spring passage totals for Steppe Eagles at Eilat, Israel between 1977
       and 2008 (Mallon, Bildstein, and Katzner, 2015) indicated a significant decrease in adults and juveniles, with
       totals reduced by at least 50 percent between the 1980s and mid-1990s. For long-lived species with a low
       reproductive rate such as large raptors, this potential rate of decline leads to a high level of uncertainty and
       risk about the number of human-derived fatalities that can be sustained by the population.

  iii.	A potentially substantial risk to the steppe eagle flyway population from power line–related electrocution
       (see references in BirdLife International, 2016a) in areas beyond the flyway (Levin and Kurkin, 2013) raises
       the possibility that the annual number of fatalities due to this type of risk may have a substantial effect on
       the steppe eagle flyway population.

  iv.	Other external stressors relevant to steppe eagle mortality have recently been demonstrated as a potential
      threat to the species. Specifically, the veterinary drug diclofenac responsible for large-scale declines in Gyps
      vultures in South Asia has recently been implicated in the death of steppe eagles (Sharma et al., 2014). The
      findings suggest that, as facultative scavengers potentially present in areas where diclofenac may be used
      as a veterinary drug,31 steppe eagle populations may be exposed to and consequently adversely affected by
      diclofenac residues in carcasses. The population-level effects on the steppe eagle population as a consequence
      of diclofenac ingestion are unknown, unpredictable, but potentially substantial as multiple fatalities can occur
      at a single carcass.


           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 1, MSB POPULATION) – EASTERN IMPERIAL EAGLE (AQUILA HELIACA):
TABLE 23. P
           REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4 IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                      STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

 % estimate of flyway population migrating through WPPs in the study area                                        38.5
 CEA relative importance category score                                                                          High
 BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                           9
 IUCN global conservation status                                                                                  VU
 CEA vulnerability category score                                                                                High
 Sensitivity category score                                                                                      High

                                               STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

 Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                                             0 .1
 LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                              Medium
 LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                                0
 LoE category score adjusted                                                                                   Medium
 Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                              Major
                                                                                                          (continued on next page)


  See information in BirdLife International. 2016b. Species factsheet: Gyps coprotheres. Downloaded from http://www.birdlife.org
31 

on January 27, 2016.



                                                                                                CEA Framework—Birds | 55
           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 1, MSB POPULATION) – EASTERN IMPERIAL EAGLE (AQUILA HELIACA):
TABLE 23. P
          REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4 IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS (continued )


                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                2.9
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                ≥5 and <1 0
    (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                  ≥5 and <1 0
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                              ≥1 and <5
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                            ≥1 and <5
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                            0 .11
Additional supporting information
Primary Threshold Target                                                                     Zero Fatality



           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 1, MSB POPULATION) – BOOTED EAGLE (HIERAAETUS PENNATUS): REVIEW
TABLE 24. P
          OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4 IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of flyway population migrating through WPPs in the study area                              1.6
CEA relative importance category score                                                               Low
BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                9
IUCN global conservation status                                                                       LC
CEA vulnerability category score                                                                    High
Sensitivity category score                                                                        Medium

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from collision risk model estimates                 0 .1
LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                     Low
LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                     1
Likelihood of Effect category score adjusted                                                      Medium
Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                Moderate

                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                  79
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                    ≥1 and <5
    (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                      ≥1 and <5
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                               ≥1 and <5
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                             ≥1 and <5
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                              0 .0 5
Additional supporting information                                                                 see below
Primary Threshold Target                                                                      Zero Fatality



A primary threshold of zero fatalities is recommended despite an apparent low collision risk estimate and
in theory, a moderately high PBR level, if based on the flyway estimate (Porter, 2005). This decision was
informed by the following species-specific uncertainties not accounted for in steps 2 or 3, and additional
external stressor effects not accounted for by the three principal external stressor components used in step 4
to provide a standard measure of cumulative non–wind farm effects.



56 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
    i.	 Many of the fatality risks for the flyway population of booted eagles are poorly known and difficult to quantify,
        meriting a generally cautious approach.

    ii.	 BirdLife International highlights power line electrocution as a major mortality factor that is threatening the
         booted eagle populations using the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway with extinction, regionally or at a larger scale
         (BirdLife International, 2015).

    iii.	Habitat degradation, direct persecution, and human disturbance have caused declines in booted eagle populations
         in Europe (BirdLife International 2016c). It is likely that some if not all of these threats are present in parts
         of the Asian breeding range and African wintering range potentially occupied by individuals from the flyway
         population. The adverse effects of these threats were not included in the ERP assessment of fatalities due
         to the principal external stressors. As a result, the annual fatality estimate provided of between ≥ 1 and < 5
         booted eagles may be a substantial underestimate of the actual annual mortality rate.




           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 2, RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS) – SHORT-
TABLE 25. P
               TOED SNAKE-EAGLE (CIRCAETUS GALLICUS): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4
               IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                                 STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

    % estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                          >1 0
    CEA relative importance category score                                                                  High
    BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                   7
    IUCN regional conservation status                                                                        VU
    CEA vulnerability category score                                                                      Medium
    Sensitivity category score                                                                              High

                                                         STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

    Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                                    15.9
    LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                        High
    LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                        0
    Likelihood of Effect category score adjusted                                                            High
    Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                      Major

                                                                STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

    PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                     0 .4
    Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                       ≥5 and <1 0
        (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                          ≥1 and <5
        (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                   ≥1 and <5
        (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                ≥5 and <1 0
    CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                                 0 .42a
    Additional supporting information
    Primary Threshold Target                                                                            Zero Fatality

a
    Assuming half of flights through rotors relate to the resident population.




                                                                                            CEA Framework—Birds | 57
           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 2 RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS)—GRIFFON
TABLE 26. P
              VULTURE (GYPS FULVUS): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4 IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                             STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

    % estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                                                     >1 0
    CEA relative importance category score                                                                                             High
    BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                                              10
    IUCN regional conservation status                                                                                                   EN
    CEA vulnerability category score                                                                                                   High
    Sensitivity category score                                                                                                         High

                                                      STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

    Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                                                                 17
    LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                                                   High
    LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                                                   0
    LoE category score adjusted                                                                                                        High
    Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                                                 Major

                                                            STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

    PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                                                0 .3
    Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                                                      >1 0
        (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                                                     ≥1 and <5
        (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                                             ≥5 but <1 0
        (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                                           ≥5 but <1 0
    CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                                                             2.5
    Additional supporting information
    Unpublished PVA analysis from Israeli study of the South Israel–Jordan population predicts population declines over the period
    2015–2055. a
    Primary Threshold Target                                                                                                      Zero Fatality

a
 “International Workshop on the Future of Vultures in the Middle East,” 19–21 October 2011. Organized by the National Parks and Birdlife Israel at Kib-
butz Kfar Blum.




58 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
          PRIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 2, RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS): GOLDEN EAGLE
TABLE 27. 
          (AQUILA CHRYSAETOS)—REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1–3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4, IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                                      >1 0
CEA relative importance category score                                                                              High
BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                               9
IUCN regional conservation status                                                                                    EN
CEA vulnerability category score                                                                                    High
Sensitivity category score                                                                                          High

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                                                 0 .4
LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                                  Medium
LoEcategory adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                                     0
LoE category score adjusted                                                                                       Medium
Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                                  Major

                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                               no PBR
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (I)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                                    ≥1 and <5
    (I) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                                      ≥1 and <5
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                               ≥1 and <5
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                             ≥1 and <5
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                                             0 .02
Additional supporting information
A zero fatality threshold target is recommended. The national population of Golden Eagles is estimated at approximately two indi-
viduals. Consequently, any number of fatalities annually will adversely affect the viability of the population within Jordan.
Primary Threshold Target                                                                                       Zero Fatality




                                                                                                  CEA Framework—Birds | 59
           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 2, RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS)—
TABLE 28. P
          VERREAUX’S EAGLE (AQUILA VERREAUXII): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4,
          IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                                        >1 0
CEA relative importance category score                                                                                High
BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                                10
IUCN regional conservation status                                                                                      EN
CEA vulnerability category score                                                                                      High
Sensitivity category score                                                                                           High

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates
LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                                      Low
LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                                      0
LoE category score adjusted                                                                                           Low
Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                                  Moderate

                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                                no PBR
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                                     ≥1 and <5
    (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                                       ≥1 and <5
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                                ≥1 and <5
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                              ≥1 and <5
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                                             no CRM
Additional supporting information
A zero fatality threshold target is recommended. The national population of Verreaux’s eagle is estimated at approximately two
individuals. Consequently, any number of fatalities annually will adversely affect the viability of the population within Jordan.
Primary Threshold Target                                                                                         Zero Fatality




60 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 2, RESIDENT OR SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS)—
TABLE 29. P
          BONELLI’S EAGLE (AQUILA FASCIATA): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4, IDENTIFYING
          THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                 >1 0
CEA relative importance category score                                                         High
BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                           9
IUCN regional conservation status                                                                LC
CEA vulnerability category score                                                              Medium
Sensitivity category score                                                                     High

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                             0 .3
LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                              Medium
LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                0
LoE category score adjusted                                                                  Medium
Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                              Major

                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                             1.2
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)               ≥5 and <1 0
    (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                 ≥1 and <5
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                          ≥5 and <1 0
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                            <1
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                         0 .0 1
Additional supporting information
Primary Threshold Target                                                                   Zero Fatality




                                                                                  CEA Framework—Birds | 61
          PRIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 2, RESIDENT OR SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS)—LONG-LEGGED
TABLE 30. 
          BUZZARD (BUTEO RUFINUS): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4, IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                >1 0
CEA relative importance category score                                                         Low
BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                         7
IUCN regional conservation status                                                               LC
CEA vulnerability category score                                                               Low
Sensitivity category score                                                                     Low

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                           36.9
LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                              High
LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                              0
LoE category score adjusted                                                                   High
Final Risk category rating for Priority Bird VECs                                           Moderate

                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                            14
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                 >1 0
    (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                ≥1 and <5
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                         ≥5 and <1 0
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                          >1 0
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                         1.5
Additional supporting information
Primary Threshold Target                                                                  Zero Fatality




62 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
          PRIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 2 RESIDENT OR SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS)—LESSER KESTREL
TABLE 31. 
            (FALCO NAUMANNI): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4, IDENTIFYING THRESHOLDS


                                                               STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

 % estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                                    >1 and ≤5
 CEA relative importance category score                                                                               High
 BirdLife Species Vulnerability Index (SVI) (wind farms and power lines)                                                6
 IUCN regional conservation status                                                                                     NT
 CEA vulnerability category score                                                                                     Low
 Sensitivity category score                                                                                         Medium

                                                       STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

 Annual likelihood (%) of collision per individual from CRM estimates                                                  21.7
 LoE category score based on annual collision risk per individual                                                     High
 LoE category adjustment based on trends analysis and expert review                                                     0
 Likelihood of Effect category score adjusted                                                                         High
 Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                                   Major

                                                              STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

 PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                                  8.7
 Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                                    ≥5 and <1 0
      (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                                         <1
      (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                               ≥1 and <5
      (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                            ≥5 and <1 0
 CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                                              2.2a
 Additional supporting information
 Additional potential sources of mortality highlighted but not quantified by the ERP include indirect effects of pesticides affecting
 prey availability and disturbance to breeding sites (see also Liven-Schulman, Leshem, and Yom-Tov, 2004).
 Primary Threshold Target                                                                                        Zero Fatality

a. Assuming half of flights through rotors relate to the resident population.




                                                                                                     CEA Framework—Birds | 63
           RIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 4 OTHER RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING POPULATIONS)—SYRIAN
TABLE 32. P
          SERIN (SERINUS SYRIACUS): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4, IDENTIFYING
          THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                         >1 0
CEA relative importance category score                                                                 High
IUCN regional conservation status                                                                       EN
CEA vulnerability category score                                                                       High
Sensitivity category score                                                                             High

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Abundance at WPPs in the study area                                                                  common
Approximate number of months present                                                                     5
% of total flying time that the species likely to be flying at turbine height                           1–1 0
Likelihood of Effect category score adjusted                                                           Low
Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                    Moderate



                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                  no PBR
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                          >1 0
    (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                             <1
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                     >1 0
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                   >1 0
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                               no CRM
Additional information                                                                               see below
Primary Threshold Target                                                                           Zero Fatality




No PBR analysis was conducted for the Syrian Serin, and no flight data were available on which to base a collision
risk estimate. In general, small passerines are not regarded as particularly sensitive to collision mortality at wind
farms unless they perform elaborate aerial displays and are breeding within the wind farm footprint. This finch
species does engage in complex flight behaviors but is not believed to breed within WPP development sites owing to
a lack of suitable habitat. However, the Syrian Serin is known to occur in the vicinity of and within WPP sites during
the postbreeding and early winter period (Khoury, 1998). There is therefore potential for birds to be displaced and/
or disturbed as a consequence of activities associated with the construction and operation of turbines and the use
of wind farm infrastructure. This, combined with evidence described below identifying additional pressures on the
species within Jordan, implies that any additional TRWPP-related adverse effects incurred by the resident and/or
breeding population should be minimized to ensure the long-term viability of the population. As a consequence, a
zero fatality threshold target is suggested for Syrian Serin.

The following is noted:

 i.	 The known core Jordan breeding population, predominantly located within the Dana BR, has apparently
     declined by about 20 percent to 500 breeding pairs, and its area of occupancy has declined by 25 percent
     since 1996 (Khoury, 2000), suggesting that the population is under environmental stress (likely habitat loss



64 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
    and/or degradation). As a result, the population is less likely to sustain additional mortality from WPPs in
    the study area.
 ii.	 Overgrazing and indirect effects of drought conditions leading to reduced food availability could adversely
      affect the health of the Syrian Serin population in the study area (BirdLife International, 2016d).
 iii.	According to BirdLife International, the Syrian Serin is a biome-restricted species. Habitat degradation within
      its biome is likely to exert pressure on suitable habitat and potentially reduce the population carrying capacity
      of the area.
 iv.	Trapping of birds is an additional pressure on the population in Jordan.

Unlike raptor priority bird VECs, the Syrian Serin has relatively higher reproductive rates and can recover from
population declines more quickly when adverse environmental or human-related effects abate or are rectified.
The zero fatality threshold target for the Syrian Serin is therefore primarily intended as an adaptive management
response trigger to appraise and enhance population health away from WPP sites rather than a trigger for turbine
shutdown. Nonetheless, if the zero fatality threshold is exceeded for this species, adaptive management strategies
to avoid further collisions should always be considered and implemented.




          PRIORITY BIRD VEC (CATEGORY 4, OTHER RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING POPULATIONS)—EUROPEAN
TABLE 33. 
          GOLDFINCH (CARDUELIS CARDUELIS): REVIEW OF CEA STEPS 1 TO 3 AND RESULTS OF STEP 4, IDENTIFYING
          THRESHOLDS


                                                        STEP 2 (SENSITIVITY)

% estimate of national breeding population using the study area                                           >1 0
CEA relative importance category score                                                                   High
IUCN regional conservation status                                                                         EN
CEA vulnerability category score                                                                         High
Sensitivity category score                                                                               High

                                                  STEP 3 (LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT)

Abundance at WPPs in the study area                                                                   uncommon
Approximately number of months present                                                                     6
% of total flying time that the species likely to be flying at turbine height                            1–1 0
Likelihood of Effect category score adjusted                                                             Low
Final Risk Category Rating for Priority Bird VECs                                                     Moderate

                                                       STEP 4 (THRESHOLDS)

PBR level (annual fatality estimate)                                                                    no PBR
Cumulative non–wind farm effects based on (i)–(iii) (annual fatality estimate)                            >1 0
    (i) Power line electrocution and/or collision (annual fatality estimate)                              <1
    (ii) Illegal killing (annual fatality estimate)                                                       >1 0
    (iii) Collection of live birds of prey (annual fatality estimate)                                     >1 0
CRM estimate (annual fatality estimate)                                                                no CRM
Additional supporting information                                                                     see below
Primary Threshold Target                                                                             Zero Fatality




                                                                                         CEA Framework—Birds | 65
No PBR analysis was conducted for the European goldfinch, and no flight data were available on which to base
a collision risk estimate. In general, small passerines are not seen as particularly sensitive to collision mortality at
wind farms unless they perform elaborate aerial displays and are breeding within the wind farm footprint. This finch
species does engage in these complex flight behaviors, but its breeding status within WPP sites is unknown. Although
this species does not have traits that are likely to result in collision having an adverse effect on population viability,
a primary zero fatality threshold target is suggested. This is a precautionary measure based on evidence that the
principal adverse effect documented for this species within Jordan relates to high live-trapping pressure that has
resulted in a perceived decline of 50–70 percent of the population since 2000. It has been suggested that the situation
may be worse than these figures suggest, with the breeding population in the Arabian Peninsula approaching the
IUCN Critically Endangered category (Symes et al., 2015).

Unlike raptor priority bird VECs, the European goldfinch has relatively high reproductive rates and can recover
from population declines more quickly when adverse environmental or human related effects abate or are rectified.
The zero fatality threshold target for the European goldfinch is primarily intended as an adaptive management
response trigger to appraise and enhance population health away from WPPs rather than a trigger for turbine
shutdown. Nonetheless, if the zero fatality threshold is exceeded for this species, adaptive management strategies
to avoid further collision should be considered and implemented.


3.6 STEP 5 – IDENTIFYING MITIGATION AND MONITORING

3.6.1 METHODS

 The purpose of this step is to identify the potential joint mitigation and monitoring measures for developers
 and other stakeholders to consider. The joint program focuses on the 13 priority bird VECs determined by
 steps 1 to 3 of the CEA to be at highest risk from the cumulative effects of the TRWPP.


The Joint MMP is structured around three areas:

 •	 On-Site Mitigation and Monitoring Measures, including a protocol for shutdown on demand.

 •	 Inter-Site Monitoring and Adaptive Management, through coordinated monitoring, including joint
    monitoring considering the thresholds and decision tree developed in step 4 (see Figure 9), and a description
    of collective actions recommended if thresholds are exceeded or an extreme event results in high fatalities
    well beyond a threshold target.

 •	 Joint Management and Action Plan for developers and other actors and/or stakeholders focused on priority
    bird VECs as determined by the CEA process.

3.6.2 RESULTS

As part of the CEA, an MMP is proposed, to be implemented by the developers with recommended actions for
other stakeholders (Table 34). This joint plan is designed to complement the project-specific ESMMPs developed
for individual WPPs. Whereas each ESMMP contains commitments relevant to the individual WPP sites, the joint
CEA MMP contains actions that require collaboration between the developers to be carried out together. The joint
CEA MMP focuses on the highest-risk issues—the potential cumulative effects on birds—with some measures also
being applicable in the CEA for priority bats (see Section 4). The joint approach presents cost-saving opportunities
for developers.



66 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 34. PROPOSED MMP—PRIORITY BIRD VECsa


         RECOMMENDATION                                                                                                                                                    KEY AIMS AND                      PROPOSED RESPONSIBLE   TIME FRAME FOR                     OTHER INVOLVED
  NO.    MEASURE                   EXPLANATORY NOTES                                                                                                                       OBJECTIVES                        ENTITY                 IMPLEMENTATION                     ENTITIES

                                                                                                     WORKSTREAM 1: ON-SITE MITIGATION and MONITORING MEASURES
   1.1   Protocol development      Before the start of on-site mitigation and monitoring activities, detailed and clear protocols should be defined for all rel-           To provide consistent             Developers             Approved protocols three           Protocols should be reviewed
         and design                evant components detailed in recommendations 1.2–1.5 and integrated into the project-specific ESMMP. Protocols should                   methods for monitoring                                   months prior to operations         and agreed with IFC.
                                   be designed by an ornithologist experienced in assessing bird risk at wind farm developments. They should be based on                   and mitigation that provide
                                   good practice guidelines for the wind energy industry and informed by preconstruction survey results and any other rel-                 results that are temporally
                                   evant information.                                                                                                                      and spatially comparable
   1.2   In-flight monitoring of   In-flight monitoring is a bird surveillance program that is designed to monitor activity and track the flight paths of priority         To avoid collisions of priority   Developers             Workstream 1 of this MMP           Lenders: Operational moni-
         priority birds            birds relative to operational wind turbines. Birds are monitored by trained and experienced bird field observers. The prin-             birds with wind turbines by                              will be in effect for an initial   toring will form part of the
                                   cipal aim of in-flight monitoring is to avoid collisions of priority birds with turbine blades. To achieve this, field observers        identifying flight activity                              three-year period and will be      ESMMP for a wind project.
                                   identify flight paths that are likely to result in collision and prevent collision by initiating a temporary shutdown of one or         and elevated-risk situations                             evaluated after this time to       Lenders will monitor the ad-
                                   more turbines (see 1.3) until the birds are no longer at risk. Additional aims are to (i) record levels of flight activity and flight   likely to result in collision                            assess its effectiveness and       equacy of implementation and
                                   paths of priority birds and (ii) document evidence relating to all elevated-risk situations in which individual birds may be at         and using this information                               determine ongoing needs. See       outcomes.
                                   risk of collision in the future if behavior patterns persist.                                                                           to inform appropriate the                                recommendation 1.7 of this         MoENV: The MoENV has a
                                                                                                                                                                           temporary shutdown of                                    MMP for a description of the       regulatory audit function to
                                                                                                                                                                           individual turbines.                                     adaptive management review         verify that ESMMP measures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    process during this initial        within the project ESIAs are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    three-year period.                 implemented.
                                   Guidance relating to the implementation of in-flight monitoring:
                                   Priority Bird Focus: Monitoring is recommended to focus on priority bird VECs. If there is doubt about identifying a prior-
                                   ity bird VEC during monitoring, the observed bird should be treated as a priority bird VEC as a precautionary measure. The
                                   opportunity should be taken to also record other species.
                                   Vantage Points: Suitable VPs should be established at strategic locations at each wind farm site. The numbers and loca-
                                   tion of VPs will be informed by the size of the site, topography, turbine number and layout, and the known activity pat-
                                   terns of priority bird VECs at the site.
                                   Field Observers: Field observers/surveyors should use VPs but be “mobile,” i.e., move around the site on the basis of their
                                   observations and judgment, especially with respect to griffon vulture movements, which will likely follow livestock. The
                                   number of field observers depends on the wind farm size, topography, number of turbines, and turbine layout, and may
                                   vary between the migration and nonmigration seasons. Field observers should also consider the presence of Bedouin
                                   flocks of sheep within and near the wind farm area; presence of either could result in greater presence of certain priority
                                   bird species (e.g., griffon vultures)—see 1.6 and 3.2 on the monitoring of griffon vultures relative to livestock movements.
                                   Survey Effort/Schedule: A survey schedule should be designed before the start of monitoring. The monitoring effort should
                                   be adaptive, as described in 1.7. During the spring (i.e., late February to mid-May) and autumn (i.e., late August to mid-Novem-
                                   ber) migration seasons, field observers should be on site undertaking daily in-flight monitoring. As many of the priority birds
                                   are resident or summer breeders in the study area, in-flight monitoring is also recommended outside the migration seasons.
                                   A similar level of effort to that undertaken during the migration season is recommended during the summer months, when
                                   these priority birds may forage in the area. The level of effort of monitoring may be lower during the winter period.
                                   Survey Times: The timing of survey windows during a day should be open to the judgment of the field team coordinator.
                                   Survey windows should be targeted to occur at likely periods of peak activity, based on knowledge of temporal and diurnal
                                   flight activity patterns of migratory and nonmigratory priority bird VECs in the study area, environmental conditions, and
                                   feedback from previous survey sessions.
                                   Training: Field observer training should principally focus on (i) identification of priority birds; (ii) priority bird behaviors;
                                   (iii) guidance on survey protocols and recording of flight activity information, and (iv) turbine shutdown request protocols
                                   (see 1.3). It is likely that external bird specialist field observers will be required on site as part of the migration season moni-
                                   toring program. Trained wind farm staff could augment the monitoring teams during the migration season and undertake
                                   the role of field observer during the summer and winter seasons outside the migration seasons, as long as appropriate
                                   training is provided. Identifying bird species in flight requires skill and considerable practice. When more than one wind
                                   farm is operational, there may be an opportunity for developers to consider a joint program of training field observers,
                                   which could form part of the Joint Management and Action Plan (i.e., under Recommendations Workstream 3).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (continued on next page)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CEA Framework—Birds | 67
TABLE 34. PROPOSED MMP—PRIORITY BIRD VECsa (continued )


          RECOMMENDATION                                                                                                                                              KEY AIMS AND                       PROPOSED RESPONSIBLE   TIME FRAME FOR                        OTHER INVOLVED
   NO.    MEASURE                   EXPLANATORY NOTES                                                                                                                 OBJECTIVES                         ENTITY                 IMPLEMENTATION                        ENTITIES

                                    Recording Elevated-Risk Situations: As there is a zero threshold for all of the priority birds, developers should record
                                    elevated-risk situations in which a shutdown is not immediately required (see 1.3) but bird activity or changes in environ-
                                    mental conditions could result in a future fatality if they persist. Recording these situations will enable developers to act
                                    before the bird is in imminent danger and make necessary adjustments to the in-flight monitoring and/or undertake other
                                    adaptive management measures to reduce the risk of collision (see also 1.7). For the purpose of this MMP, elevated-risk situ-
                                    ations are defined as those circumstances in which increased priority bird activity is observed in the vicinity of one or more
                                    turbines and/or where environmental or ecological conditions elevate the risk of priority bird collision. This may occur as a
                                    consequence of local changes in human activity (e.g., grazing of livestock around turbines that attracts vultures); specific
                                    environmental conditions (e.g. precipitation or low cloud resulting in increased priority bird activity at turbine height);
                                    ecological conditions (e.g., improved foraging habitat and/or increased prey availability leading to an area around turbines
                                    becoming a favored foraging area for priority bird populations, and/other changes in the landscape (e.g., waste disposal
                                    sites attracting birds to wind farm).
   1.3    Observer-led       Observer-led shutdown on demand is an established method for mitigating the risk to birds of colliding with rotating wind                To avoid collisions of priority    Developers             The shutdown on-demand pro-
          Shutdown On-Demand turbine blades. It involves a coordinated team of field observers identifying situations in which birds are at risk of colliding         birds with wind turbines                                  tocols of Workstream 1 will be
          for Priority Birds with turbines and initiating a temporary shutdown of one or more turbines. Typically shutdown requests are made by                       by initiating and achieving                               in effect for an initial three-year
                             members of the field team or the field team coordinator to the wind farm operator using a communication device (e.g.,                    timely shutdown of one or                                 period and will be evaluated
                             mobile phones, two-way radios). The same means of communication is then also used by field observers to assist shut-                     more turbines in response                                 after this time to assess their
                             down decision making.                                                                                                                    to birds observed on a likely                             effectiveness and determine
                                                                                                                                                                      collision flight path                                     ongoing needs. See 1.7 for a
                                    Observer-led Shutdown On-demand Protocols for Priority Birds: Shutdown protocols should be developed for wind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                description of the adaptive
                                    farms on the basis of flight activity information for priority birds from preconstruction surveys and other relevant sources.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                management review process
                                    Protocols should include (i) conditions for shutdown and resumption of operation, (ii) mode of communications between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                during this initial three-year
                                    field observers and wind farm operator, (iii) time frame required to initiate shutdown, and (vi) aspects to record in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                period.
                                    event a shutdown occurs (e.g., wind farm operations response time). Rapid communication is critical to the success of
                                    shutdown mitigation. It can be a matter of minutes from shutdown to restart. Shutdown records should be reviewed by
                                    the developer (see 2.3) to see if there is a pattern or issues with specific turbines.
                                    Conditions for Shutdown
                                    When one or more individuals of a priority bird VEC is observed, the field observer should consider shutdown of specific
                                    turbines on the basis of their judgment considering the following parameters:
                                    •	 height at which bird is flying (i.e., turbine risk height)
                                    •	 likely flight path, flight pattern, and behavior of bird
                                    •	 distance from bird to turbine (i.e., distance within which a priority bird could be at risk)
   1.4    Carcass Search Surveys Carcass search programs use well-established methods for assessing fatalities at operational wind farms. They involve                To monitor and quantify            Developers             Initial three-year program.
                                 regular systematic searches of the ground surface around the base of turbines. The defined search distance from the                  collision fatalities of priority                          Evaluated at the end of three
                                 turbine base is dictated by the distance that birds are thrown from the turbine after being struck and is based on the               birds and other bird species                              years to assess its effective-
                                 results of existing studies to determine fatality distribution around turbines, extrapolated to the specific dimensions of the       so compliance with CEA                                    ness, identify possible im-
                                 turbines at the site.                                                                                                                fatality thresholds for prior-                            provements, and recommend
                                                                                                                                                                      ity birds can be assessed and                             protocols and survey effort for
                                    General Guidance on Carcass Search Surveys for the TWRPP Sites
                                                                                                                                                                      fatality rates of nonpriority                             carcass search surveys beyond
                                    Carcass Search Surveys should be adapted, as needed, in response to the results of the calibration tests (see 1.5).               species can be monitored                                  the initial three year program.
                                    During the Spring and Autumn Migration Seasons: The whole wind farm (i.e., area around all turbines plus buffer
                                    around turbine) should be searched for carcasses within a one-week period. The search program should aim to schedule a
                                    repeat survey of each turbine within seven days of the previous survey.
                                    Outside the Spring and Autumn Migration Seasons (i.e., during summer and winter): The area around all wind farm
                                    turbines (i.e., area of all turbines plus buffer around turbine) should be searched for carcasses during each two-week
                                    period. The search program should aim to schedule a repeat survey of a turbine within 14 days of the preceding survey.
                                    •	 The search distance around each turbine is recommended to be a radius equivalent to the height of a turbine blade plus
                                       25 m.

                                    •	 The rationale for reduced effort outside migration season is that there are likely to be fewer carcasses during this period,
                                       given the reduced amount of bird flight activity.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (continued on next page)


68 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 34. PROPOSED MMP—PRIORITY BIRD VECsa (continued )


          RECOMMENDATION                                                                                                                                                   KEY AIMS AND                     PROPOSED RESPONSIBLE   TIME FRAME FOR                      OTHER INVOLVED
  NO.     MEASURE                   EXPLANATORY NOTES                                                                                                                      OBJECTIVES                       ENTITY                 IMPLEMENTATION                      ENTITIES

                                    •	 Results from carcass search surveys should be recorded on standardized forms and include the date, time, and search
                                       duration at each turbine as well as species and location details of any carcasses found.

                                    It is critical that a qualified ornithologist is involved to aid with the identification of carcasses, especially as only remnants
                                    of a bird may be available (e.g., feathers).
   1.5    Calibration Tests for  Calibration tests (or “correction factors”) for carcass searches (1.4) are recommended as standard good practice for wind                 To calibrate the results         Developers             Initial three-year program
          Carcass Search Surveys farm developments. These correction factors are required because of differences between actual and observed numbers                       of the carcass searches                                 as a component of carcass
                                 of fatalities. Two tests are recommended for the TWRPP study area—searcher efficiency trials and carcass removal trials.                  and determine a correc-                                 search program. Conducted at
                                                                                                                                                                           tion factor to account for                              six-month intervals. Evaluated
                                    If designed correctly, both trials can be conducted using the same carcasses. The type of carcass used should, within prac-
                                                                                                                                                                           potential numbers of missed                             at the end of three years to
                                    tical constraints, be as similar as possible to the type of expected fatalities—otherwise the estimate of carcasses removed
                                                                                                                                                                           fatalities due to searcher ef-                          assess its effectiveness in cali-
                                    can be substantially biased. It is recommended that game birds (e.g., chickens) not be used for the tests; options for other
                                                                                                                                                                           ficiency factors and removal                            brating carcass search results
                                    species could be discussed with the RSCN.
                                                                                                                                                                           of carcasses from the site                              and identify ongoing needs.
                                    The number and distribution of carcasses depends on a number of parameters, including the types of habitats and land                   (e.g., by dogs and/or other
                                    uses within the site and topography. Generally, a bird consultant /ornithologist experienced in assessing bird risk at wind            scavengers)
                                    farms should plan and oversee the calibration tests and prescribe recommendations on the basis of the results. Both tests
                                    should be conducted in an area adjacent to and with similar characteristics as the wind farm site to avoid attracting prior-
                                    ity bird VECs to turbines.
                                    Searcher Efficiency Trial: This trial tests the ability of searchers to detect carcasses on the ground. Marked carcasses are
                                    positioned across the trial plot by an experienced consultant without the knowledge of the searchers. Searchers examine
                                    the trial plot as if they were conducting carcass searches for wind turbine fatalities, and the number of carcasses they find
                                    is compared with the number of carcasses placed, to estimate the proportion of carcasses likely to be missed during the
                                    actual carcass search surveys.
                                    Carcass Removal Trial: This trial tests the rate of carcass scavenging in the vicinity of wind farm sites. In these trials
                                    marked carcasses are distributed across the trial plot and monitored until they disappear. The average carcass removal
                                    time is then used to correct fatality estimates. At TRWPP sites a key factor affecting carcass persistence is the removal
                                    of carcasses by dogs belonging to Bedouins using the area. Therefore, it is recommended that carcass removal trials in
                                    particular be designed to quantify the removal rate with and without the presence of Bedouin. Given that Bedouin use the
                                    TWRPP sites on a seasonal basis, it is recommended to conduct this trial biannually.
   1.6    Baseline Understand-      The presence of livestock, which may include weak and/or injured animals, is known to directly increase attraction of certain          To reduce the attraction of     Developers              Initial three-year program
          ing of Pastoral Move-     priority birds (e.g., griffon vultures). Building on the findings of the in-flight monitoring (1.2) and the engagement (3.2), devel-   certain priority birds (e.g.,                           running alongside the in-flight
          ments                     opers should seek to                                                                                                                   griffon vultures) to the wind                           monitoring and carcass search
                                                                                                                                                                           farm area and therefore                                 programs
                                    i.	 Develop an understanding of the pastoral/livestock movements around and within their sites during the different
                                                                                                                                                                           reduce the likelihood of colli-
                                        seasons.
                                                                                                                                                                           sions occurring
                                    ii.	Review and identify measures to encourage and/or incentivize owners and/or shepherds to inform the wind farm about
                                        presence of carcasses.
                                    It is recommended that developers periodically review with their in-flight monitoring team any noticeable trends in the                To inform shutdown on
                                    presence of griffon vultures within the site or the vicinity of the site and/or study area, as well as observations of livestock       demand and the on-site
                                    movements (1.2).                                                                                                                       flight activity monitoring
                                                                                                                                                                           design on the basis of knowl-
                                                                                                                                                                           edge of livestock presence
                                                                                                                                                                           within the TRWPP area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (continued on next page)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CEA Framework—Birds | 69
TABLE 34. PROPOSED MMP—PRIORITY BIRD VECsa (continued )


          RECOMMENDATION                                                                                                                                            KEY AIMS AND                   PROPOSED RESPONSIBLE   TIME FRAME FOR                   OTHER INVOLVED
   NO.    MEASURE                  EXPLANATORY NOTES                                                                                                                OBJECTIVES                     ENTITY                 IMPLEMENTATION                   ENTITIES

   1.7    Adaptive Management Adaptive management will be based on a series of reviews to take place in different time frames, including an immediate To ensure that lessons                       Developers                                              Lenders: Notification to
                              response in the event of a fatality of a priority bird VEC.                                                                 learned are incorporated                                                                         lenders should occur between
                                                                                                                                                          into protocols and that the                                                                      one to three days after detec-
                              •	 Monthly review of carcass search results: Based on the standardized carcass search forms, a monthly report of car-
                                                                                                                                                          project-specific ESMMP is                                                                        tion of a fatality. See 2.1 for
                                 casses and type of bird species will be compiled.
                                                                                                                                                          designed to minimize risks                                                                       other reporting requirements.
                              •	 Biannual reviews of in-field findings: Results from in-flight monitoring, elevated-risk situations, near-miss incidents, to priority bird VECs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MoENV: See 2.1 for other re-
                                 monthly carcass search results, and incident reports (see below) should be compiled to evaluate and improve the effec-
                                                                                                                                                          Priority bird fatalities and/                                                                    porting requirements.
                                 tiveness of monitoring and protocols, identify collision risk hotspots, evaluate adaptive management options and, where
                                                                                                                                                          or exceeding of a fatality
                                 appropriate, implement those that are practical and most likely to be effective in reducing identified collision risks.
                                                                                                                                                          threshold could represent
                                 Adaptive management responses emerging from the biannual review may include adaptions to monitoring and/or pro-
                                                                                                                                                          an incident of noncompli-
                                 tocols but may also include other actions to take in the landscape, such as further engagement with Bedouin and/or the
                                                                                                                                                          ance with IFC Performance
                                 MoENV on other non-WPP landscape factors that might pose enhanced risks to birds (e.g., an increase in the number of
                                                                                                                                                          Standard 6.
                                 waste management sites).
                                   •	 Immediate action in the event of a fatality of a priority bird: In this situation, the following should take place:
                                        •	 The incident should immediately be escalated to management, and an investigation of the likely cause of the fatal-
                                           ity should take place. The investigation should review the implementation of in-flight monitoring and shutdown
                                           protocols, near-miss incidents, and the potential correlation with environmental factors and/or elevated-risk situ-
                                           ations, among other factors. The investigation should be carried out by the developer’s consultant and/or external
                                           ornithologists.
                                        •	 Once the investigation is completed, findings should be reviewed with site management and the developer-con-
                                           tracted ornithological specialist.
                                        •	 Corrective and/or remedial actions should be identified in relation to in-flight monitoring, shutdown protocols, and/
                                           or the need to address other elevated risks.
                                        •	 An incident report should be developed and shared with the MoENV, lenders, and the Internal Committee (see
                                           Workstream 2).
                                   It should be noted that surpassing a threshold does not necessarily mean the shutdown of a turbine or turbines.
                                   The first action should be investigation into the in-flight monitoring and adjustment of it to reduce the risk
                                   of future collision events /fatalities. Where a threshold is exceeded, it is likely that compensatory measures will be
                                   required to offset the loss to biodiversity. Such measures would need to be discussed with lenders and other relevant enti-
                                   ties/regulators.
                                   •	 Biannual reviews of protocols and integration into the project-specific ESMMP: On the basis of the biannual
                                      reviews, protocols (see 1.2–1.5) should be reviewed to ensure that they incorporate lessons learned and are designed to
                                      minimize risks to priority birds. Updated protocols should be integrated as part of the project’s overarching ESMMP.
                                   All of the above actions should be completed by a competent developer-contracted ornithological specialist and/or external
                                   specialist with substantial regional experience.
   1.8    Recommendations for      Recommendations for project-specific ESIA studies are as follows:                                                                Avoidance of risk of colli-    Developers             During ESIA and/or planning of
          ESIA Studies – Birds                                                                                                                                      sion in the micro-siting and                          the layout of the wind farm
                                   •	 Focus impact assessment and mitigation and monitoring measures for birds on avoiding collisions and reducing risks to
                                                                                                                                                                    layout of wind farms
                                      priority birds.
                                   •	 Use the results of CEA and preconstruction survey data to inform the micro-siting and layout of the wind farm to avoid/
                                      reduce collision risks (along with other technical data and community issues such as land titles).
                                   •	 Building on the regional and social context (Section 1.8 and Annex A) of this CEA, the ESIAs should research further the
                                      social baseline context and specifically, land ownership and use of the WPP site and vicinity. This should include develop-
                                      ing a greater understanding of pastoral movements (1.6).
                                   •	 On-site transmission lines at the wind farm should be buried. Developers should encourage NEPCO to design any
                                      transmission lines between the wind farm and the (offsite) substation to be in line with the avian and bat collision and
                                      electrocution protection measures presented in the World Bank Group’s Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines
                                      for Electric Power Transmission and Distribution (2007).b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (continued on next page)




70 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 34. PROPOSED MMP—PRIORITY BIRD VECsa (continued )


          RECOMMENDATION                                                                                                                                               KEY AIMS AND                       PROPOSED RESPONSIBLE             TIME FRAME FOR                    OTHER INVOLVED
  NO.     MEASURE                  EXPLANATORY NOTES                                                                                                                   OBJECTIVES                         ENTITY                           IMPLEMENTATION                    ENTITIES

                                                                                                   WORKSTREAM 2: INTER-SITE MONITORING ACTIVITIES and ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT
   2.1    Establishment and Op- It is recommended that an Internal Committee of developers be established to oversee a Central Data Center where                       To improve knowledge of            Developers – Internal            It is recommended that an
          eration of an Internal data from the wind farms would be shared (see 2.2). The Internal Committee would be composed of representatives from                  priority bird activity across      Committee would convene to       Internal Committee be estab-
          Committee              each of the participating WPPs in the TWRPP study area.                                                                               TRWPP sites and enable             discuss the cumulative impact    lished when two of the wind
                                                                                                                                                                       cumulative effects to be           and adaptive response.           farms are operational.
                                   It is recommended that the Internal Committee meet quarterly. The Internal Committee would review immediate inci-
                                                                                                                                                                       monitored and adaptive
                                   dent reporting, as well as monthly and biannual reporting (see 2.2) to assess cumulative issues and provide recommenda-
                                                                                                                                                                       management responses to
                                   tions in relation to adaptive management responses and trends to inform planning of forward mitigation and monitoring,
                                                                                                                                                                       be determined
                                   considering the whole of the study area. Reporting requirements that would be centralized in the Central Data Center are
                                   described under the next measure.
                                   Biannual (two per year) meetings of the Internal Committee and the MoENV are recommended to review reporting
                                   outcomes and adaptive management response proposals. These meetings could also be a forum to discuss progress and
                                   outcomes of Joint Management Plans (see Workstream 3).
                                   The Internal Committee would require the participation of competent developer-contracted ornithological specialists and/or
                                   external specialists with substantial regional experience. It is also recommended that the Internal Committee maintain a dialogue
                                   with relevant conservation organizations to build relationships and provide a channel for input by external experts.
   2.2    Data Sharing, Central-   The reviews described in 1.7 and 2.1 will be collated into the reports (see below) and submitted to a Central Data Center ac-                                          Developers – to produce and      Data sharing to commence
          ized Reporting, and      cessible by all developers, which would be used for identifying any cumulative trends (see 2.1). The following reporting into the                                      share reports with Internal      once at least two wind farms
          Intersite Adaptive       Central Data Center, is recommended:                                                                                                                                   Committee                        are operational. Initially data
          Management               •	 Monthly review of carcass search results (see 1.7)                                                                                                                  MoENV – regulatory function      sharing should be agreed for a
                                                                                                                                                                                                          and review of submitted data     period of three years.
                                   •	 Biannual reporting of in-field findingsc and adaptive management responses, if any (see 1.7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          and/or biannual meeting with
                                   •	 Incident reports of fatalities (see 1.7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Central Data Center to discuss
                                   •	 Updated protocols and/or updated ESMMP, as needed (see 1.7)                                                                                                         findings and any adaptive man-
                                   The MoENV has a regulatory function to audit whether ESMMP measures within the ESIA are implemented. Therefore, it is                                                  agement responses required
                                   recommended that the Internal Committee (2.1) submit biannual reports (i.e., in December and June) and any incident report                                             Lenders – oversight function
                                   on fatality of priority birds to the MoENV and lenders.                                                                                                                to review biannual reports and
                                   Where fatalities have been recorded through incident reports, the Internal Committee should evaluate adaptive management                                               to discuss findings and any
                                   options and consider implementing those that are most likely to be effective in minimizing impacts across the study area.                                              adaptive management respons-
                                   The number and distribution of all fatalities should also be used, along with in-flight monitoring information, to evaluate and                                        es required
                                   improve the effectiveness of monitoring and to identify collision-risk hot spots.
                                   Where elevated-risk situations identified in the landscape are beyond the ability of one WPP developer to address on its own
                                   (e.g., waste disposal sites attracting birds to wind farm), the Internal Committee through the Stakeholder Forum (3.2) is en-
                                   couraged to engage with other entities/stakeholders to encourage remedial and/or control measures and/or solutions.
                                   Last, the Internal Committee would also conduct an annual review of the priority bird list to ensure that it is based on the
                                   most current data available. For example, a change in a species’ status on the IUCN Red List or additional data on external
                                   stressors might result in a species being added to or removed from the priority bird list.
                                                                                                                    WORKSTREAM 3: JOINT MANAGEMENT and ACTION PLAN
                                                                                                        Developer Lead and/or Contribution (with Some Other Entities Involvement):
   3.1    Development of a CSR     •	 It is recommended that the developers contribute to a CSR fund in order to finance the planning and implementation of            CSR fund is to implement the       Developer Lead—fund used to procure a third-party consultant to establish, set up, and support
          Fund                        the Joint Management and Action Plan recommendations—such as 3.1(a) and 3.2.                                                     CEA Joint Management and           the implementation of the Joint Management and Action Plan
                                                                                                                                                                       Actions Plans for developers
                                   •	 These joint measures would afford an opportunity to the developers to manage issues in the landscape which attract                                                  Third-party consultant—establish a timed plan
                                                                                                                                                                       and address other environ-
                                      priority birds and assist in managing the cumulative risks of WPP sites to priority bird VECs. There may also be financial
                                                                                                                                                                       mental and social issues           Time frame for the establishment of a Joint Management and Action Plan likely determined on
                                      economies of scale with the developers working together in this way to address certain risks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          the basis of when wind farms are operational
                                                                                                                                                                       In line with the precaution-
                                   •	 It is recommended the CSR fund is used to procure a third-party consultant to establish, set up, and support the imple-
                                                                                                                                                                       ary principle, to help offset      Offset measures considered only if a periodic review of fatalities at TRWPP sites concludes
                                      mentation of the Joint Management and Action Plan.
                                                                                                                                                                       potential effects of wind          that an exceeded threshold is likely to result in a net loss of biodiversity
                                   •	 It is recommended that a biodiversity offset (3.1(a)) be considered as part of a joint initiative to be funded by the CSR        farm fatalities of prior-
                                      fund—such an offset would be agreed to and financed by the developers but likely to be implemented by the RSCN and/or another    ity birds if exceedance of a
                                      conservation organization.                                                                                                       threshold is likely to result in
                                                                                                                                                                       a net loss of biodiversity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (continued on next page)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CEA Framework—Birds | 71
TABLE 34. PROPOSED MMP—PRIORITY BIRD VECsa (continued )


          RECOMMENDATION                                                                                                                                             KEY AIMS AND                  PROPOSED RESPONSIBLE   TIME FRAME FOR   OTHER INVOLVED
   NO.    MEASURE                EXPLANATORY NOTES                                                                                                                   OBJECTIVES                    ENTITY                 IMPLEMENTATION   ENTITIES

          3.1(a) Biodiversity    A “biodiversity offset” is a compensatory measure undertaken by a developer, usually implemented off site, to mitigate
          Offsets                significant residual impacts on biodiversity (in this case, on birds). It is a last resort that is undertaken after all forms of
                                 on-site avoidance and mitigation have been pursued. Biodiversity offsets are on-the-ground benefits that would accrue to
                                 the affected biodiversity (e.g., birds) over time and therefore offset the impacts of the project. As such they are an impor-
                                 tant measure for achieving no net loss of biodiversity when all other mitigation measures have been exhausted.
                                 The thresholds in this report (Section 3.5,2) are designed to ensure that there is no net loss of priority bird VECs. They were
                                 developed taking a precautionary approach, as data on the breeding numbers of each priority bird were not available.
                                 Therefore, according to the modeling performed as part of this assessment and based on data available at that time, if
                                 a threshold is exceeded due to collision with a WPP in the study area, then the no net loss requirement for priority bird
                                 VECs will not be met. In these circumstances, in addition to adaptive management (as described in 1.7), biodiversity offsets
                                 should be considered.
                                 Biodiversity offsets would be targeted at breeding priority birds and focus on schemes to improve the health of these
                                 populations. Offset schemes would need to be undertaken in areas away from and unaffected by WPP sites (so as to
                                 not attract birds to the WPPs); they might, for example, be population recovery actions for priority species, achieved
                                 by improving reproductive output as a consequence of restoring degraded foraging habitat. In this example, increased
                                 productivity and survival resulting from improving habitat would offset losses at WPP sites. Biodiversity options should be
                                 considered in consultation with relevant stakeholders. Given the high-risk environment, it is recommended that develop-
                                 ers take into account the costs involved in implementing biodiversity offsets during long-term project planning as they
                                 may be needed during the lifetime of WPPs.
                                 If an offset were to be considered one of the first steps would be the following:
                                 •	 Joint Survey of Breeding Status of Priority Birds: Understanding the extent to which priority birds are breeding in
                                    areas relevant to the WPP sites in the study area would help with two aspects: (i) to obtain further information which
                                    might refine the thresholds, and (ii) to identify areas of importance to priority birds that are off-site, which would aid
                                    in the identification of a relevant biodiversity offset activity. The initial survey would identify breeding areas relevant to
                                    WPP sites, and annual monitoring efforts would be minimal (several days or years). The survey would need to be carried
                                    out in cooperation with RSCN.
   3.2    Establishment and      •	 WPPs would be required to collaborate to ensure International Lender compliance and to manage social risks to their              To build greater trust with
          Operation of a TRWPP      project by establishing and implementing an engagement process with stakeholders. It is therefore recommended that               stakeholders in the TRWPP
          Stakeholder Forum         the developers consider supporting the establishment of a TRWPP Stakeholder Forum, which could be used as the key                area
                                    communication mechanism with local and national level stakeholders.
                                 •	 The forum would enable routine, transparent, and coordinated engagement with Bedouin, local communities, and/
                                    or livestock owners who use the TRWPP area for grazing. It could be a mechanism to help build trust and support an
                                    ongoing dialogue to help manage related issues within the landscape (at wind farms and in the surrounding area) which
                                    may attract priority birds and therefore increase the potential for collisions to occur.
                                 •	 Engagement should be undertaken with livestock owners and/or shepherds to gather information and discourage
                                    leaving carcasses of livestock within the area of the wind farm and/or to encourage the owners and/or shepherds to
                                    inform the wind farm when a livestock carcass is present (see 1.5).
                                 •	 Regular meetings of stakeholder forums could be established, on a monthly, bimonthly, or quarterly basis.
                                 •	 This forum could also be used by law enforcement stakeholders (i.e., RSCN, the MoENV, and Jordan’s Royal Department
                                    for Environmental Conservation) and local stakeholders (e.g., civil society organizations, public figures such as tribal
                                    leaders, and schools) to take action on illegal hunting.
                                 •	 Presenting the collective image of WPP sites in the Tafila region to the public and specifically to local communities may
                                    encourage a sense of ownership of and support for the projects.
                                 •	 The forum should be developed in conjunction with key local stakeholders (namely the mayor and community leaders
                                    such as tribal leaders) and the local MoENV governorate officer (part of the Environment Protection Directorates and
                                    Offices in governorates in the TRWPP study area).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (continued on next page)




72 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 34. PROPOSED MMP—PRIORITY BIRD VECsa (continued )


                 RECOMMENDATION                                                                                                                                                                      KEY AIMS AND                        PROPOSED RESPONSIBLE             TIME FRAME FOR                         OTHER INVOLVED
      NO.        MEASURE                         EXPLANATORY NOTES                                                                                                                                   OBJECTIVES                          ENTITY                           IMPLEMENTATION                         ENTITIES

                                                                                                                                                         Recommendations for other entities
       3.3       Education Program               • A program of education in relation to the effects of illegal hunting of priority birds (i.e., illegal killing and capture of live                 To help offset potential            Relevant conservation organizations in Jordan, including the RSCN
                 with Bedouin, Local               birds) is recommended by the CEA in order to address one of the external stressors to these species.                                              effects of wind farm fa-
                 Communities, and                                                                                                                                                                    talities of priority birds by
                                                 • This is a key CEA recommendation that if implemented could positively influence the health of priority bird species
                 Other Stakeholders on                                                                                                                                                               reducing illegal killing and
                                                   populations using the study area. There is a consensus among experts in Jordan that the collection of live animals and
                 Illegal Hunting                                                                                                                                                                     taking of live birds
                                                   the poaching of birds of prey are major threats to those species in Jordan in general and in southern Jordan specifically.
       3.4       Encouragement of                Efforts should be made to raise awareness among relevant governmental departments and commercial companies of the                                   Developers                          Developers encouraged during their standard project engagements and/or development pro-
                 Transmission Line Pro-          demonstrated adverse effects of unsafe transmission lines on large birds of prey. This could include advising power com-                                                                cesses to do this awareness raising when appropriate.
                 tection Measures to             panies on safe pylon and power line design and the measures that could be taken to minimize fatalities after construction
                 Prevent Electrocution           (i.e., in line with the avian and bat collision and electrocution protection measures presented in the World Bank Group’s
                 and Collision                   Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines for Electric Power Transmission and Distribution [2007]).
       3.5       Improvement of Legal            Improvements to the legal framework are recommended and may comprise the following actions:                                                         To improve protection for           The MoENV is the key party to pursue this action.
                 Framework for the                                                                                                                                                                   priority bird VECs (and other
                                                 • Reviewing the existing regulatory framework for the approval and operation of wind energy projects in Jordan
                 Protection for Priority                                                                                                                                                             vulnerable bird populations
                 Birds                           • Identifying known and potential weaknesses and/or omissions relevant to the safeguarding of bird populations, as well                             in Jordan)
                                                   as good practice from elsewhere
                                                 • Drafting and developing improved guidance and legislative implements
                                                 Consideration should also be given to
                                                 • Improvements in the capacity of regulatory authorities to monitor effects on priority birds and enforce threshold
                                                   breaches
                                                 • Development of guidance and actions to improve the current status of certain priority bird populations (e.g., develop-
                                                   ment of a Griffon Vulture National Action Plan)

Protocol for shutdown on demand for extreme events involving a collision risk to flocks of specific nonpriority MSBs: Flight activity surveys reviewed for the CEA have recorded very occasional large flocks (e.g., >1,000 individuals) of nonpriority MSBs, in particular, honey buzzard, steppe buzzard, white stork, black stork, and
common crane. Available data suggest that the potential for a large nonpriority MSB to be at direct risk of collision with WPP turbines in the study area is very low. Nonetheless, following a precautionary approach, the CEA suggests that developers implement a shutdown on-demand protocol for specific nonpriority MSB flocks, triggered
when a predetermined flock size is at risk of colliding with WPP turbines in the study area to safeguard against collision events involving multiple birds. As with priority birds, shutdown protocols that trigger a request to shut down one or more turbines should be comprehensive, unambiguous, and precautionary and allow the field ob-
server to take decisive action based on knowledge of the protocols and their experience and judgment. Potential shutdown requests should be principally guided by the flying height, the predicted flight path of the bird(s) potentially at risk, and the number of individuals in the flock.
a
 Establishing vulture feeding stations (“vulture restaurants”) was considered as a suggested action within the Joint MPP but is not currently included. This decision was based on the very limited use of two vulture feeding station trial sites in the Dana BR that were established as part of the JWPC Tafila WPP, and the likelihood that numer-
ous vulture restaurants in the Negev desert to the southwest may be diverting griffon vulture activity away from the TRWPP sites. However, the distribution and foraging areas of this species will vary over time and likely result in periods of greater activity at TRWPP sites.
b
    http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/66b56e00488657eeb36af36a6515bb18/Final%2B-%2BElectric%2BTransmission%2Band%2BDistribution.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&id=1323162154847.
c
    Reporting of in-flight monitoring results should include the date and time of observation, species name, number of individuals, flying height, flight direction in degrees when first detected, and identification of the nearest turbine.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CEA Framework—Birds | 73
The measures were developed and presented in a standard format for an Environmental Mitigation and Monitoring
Plan. They are based on good practice in the wind energy sector and focused on the priority bird VECs. The
MMP includes recommendations for actions to take if a fatality of a priority birds VEC should occur or if other
threshold targets should be exceeded. Surpassing a threshold does not necessarily mean the shutdown of a turbine
or turbines. The first action should be to investigate in-flight monitoring and adjust it to reduce the risk of future
collision events and/or fatalities.

    STEP 6 – INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
3.7 

3.7.1 METHODS

 This step recommends management and institutional arrangements to implement the Joint MMP. It provides a
 recommended framework for enhanced partnerships between developers, government, and other key stakeholders
 in relation to the priority bird VECs (and other priority VECs) and supports awareness and capacity building
 at a national level, including developing local capacity to assess and manage bird risk in the wind energy sector.

The management program to implement the Joint MMP for birds should outline the following aspects:

 •	 Developer and other stakeholder recommended actions, roles, and responsibilities

 •	 Institutional roles in and responsibilities for monitoring of the program and a centralized independent resource
    group focused on conducting governance of fatality monitoring, reviewing cumulative losses, and overseeing
    the Adaptive Management Framework

 •	 Communications required to implement the joint program and specifically the escalation procedure should
    a threshold be breached

 •	 A time-phased structure for implementing joint MMP actions, recognizing that wind projects will come online
    progressively over a period of time

 •	 Information sharing and management recommendations

3.7.2 RESULTS

The joint MMP (step 5 results) makes recommendations with regard to institutional arrangements and information
sharing between the WPP developers. The key recommendations are as follows:

 •	 Central Data Center: Establishment of the Central Data Center to share and collate data that would be
    accessible to all developers and managed by the Internal Committee (MMP recommendations 2.1 and 2.2).

 •	 Internal Committee: Establishment and operation of an Internal Committee by developers (MMP recommendation
    2.2) to share and review data, review reports provided, and provide recommendations relating to

    •	 Adaptive management responses—a core part of which is the response process that must be triggered
       if a fatality of a priority bird occurs or an unexpected event occurs

    •	 Mitigation and monitoring planning informed by identified trends in bird activity arising from the periodic
       review of TRWPP postconstruction monitoring results

    •	 Landscape issues that are contributing to priority bird fatalities




74 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
 •	 Liaison and Sharing of Data with the MoENV: Sharing of data by the Internal Committee with the MoENV. The
    MoENV has a regulatory function to audit that ESMMP measures within the project ESIAs are implemented.
    Therefore, it is recommended that the Internal Committee submit biannually (i.e., December and June) to the
    MoENV a six-month summary of in-flight monitoring, monthly reports on carcass searches and any incident
    reports on fatalities of priority birds. It is recommended that the Internal Committee and the MoENV undertake
    a semi-annual review meeting to discuss adaptive management.

 •	 The purpose of Internal Committee engagement with the MoENV is to provide a mechanism for compliance
    and an external audit-type function of the cumulative environmental issues with respect to wind energy
    developments and specifically those identified by the CEA.

3.8 SUMMARY OF OUTCOMES OF BIRDS CEA

The CEA framework for birds has confirmed that despite being reasonably close to the migration bottleneck
sites around the Red Sea coast, the location of the WPP sites within the study area do not typically have high
concentrations of MSBs migrating through during either the spring or the autumn migration periods.




                                                                                     CEA Framework—Birds | 75
Throughout the process, a central element has been stakeholder engagement activities, including the establishment
of an AC as a platform for bilateral and multilateral engagement and an experienced in-country ERP for continued
technical review and input. The ERP especially was engaged through in-person, technical review meetings on the
completion of each one of the steps in the CEA framework. Engagement activities were a cornerstone of each
phase of the CEA process.

From an initial list of 171 species populations, steps 1 to 3 of the CEA process identified 13 priority bird VECs
at highest risk in the study area. With two exceptions, priority bird VECs were raptors comprising four MSB
populations (steppe eagle, Egyptian vulture, Eastern imperial eagle, and booted eagle) that use the Rift Valley/
Red Sea flyway and are present in the study area during their spring and autumn migration periods, and seven
resident or summer breeding raptor populations (short-toed snake-eagle, griffon vulture, golden eagle, Verreaux’s
eagle, Bonelli’s eagle, long-legged buzzard, and lesser kestrel) that may use the study area during and outside their
respective breeding periods. In addition, two passerine species—the Syrian Serin, and the Eurasian goldfinch—were
identified as at highest risk.

Each of these 13 priority bird VECs populations was assessed to determine an annual threshold of fatalities that
each could sustain without affecting their long-term viability using biological and demographic parameters relevant
to the population and estimates of fatalities resulting from external stressor effects. All were assessed as requiring
a zero fatality threshold target. In addition to thresholds set for priority bird VECs, an extreme events threshold
target was recommended to alleviate the risk of multiple-fatality events to a small number of nonpriority MSB
populations with a tendency to migrate in large flocks in the vicinity of WPP sites in the study area.

The principal mitigation in the CEA framework for birds is a program of on-site postconstruction monitoring
aimed at (i) avoiding collision of species populations subject to threshold targets by detecting individuals that are
likely to enter the rotor-swept area at any of the WPP sites, and following an observer-led shutdown on-demand
protocol to shut down turbines for the length of time that the individuals are at risk of collision; and (ii) quantifying
postconstruction fatality rates at WPP sites by conducting a time-structured program of carcass searches in the
vicinity of turbines, calibrated for carcasses that may have been missed by search teams or removed by scavengers.
Carcass search feedback provides the principal information for identifying exceeded thresholds.

Adaptive management is informed by regular review of postconstruction monitoring results and will respond to
a variety of scenarios including, but not limited to, exceeded priority bird/extreme event thresholds, near-miss
incidents, elevated-risk situations, pastoral/livestock movements, and deficiencies in monitoring protocols. Exceeded
thresholds will trigger immediate review and adaptive management response.

The iterative review process of the CEA is also designed to allow adaptive management responses to changes in
relative importance, vulnerability, likelihood of effect and overall risk to species populations during the lifetime
of WPPs. These changes may be identified through postconstruction on-site flight activity monitoring and carcass
search results as well as changes in species conservation status and new information on the effects of external
stressors. As a consequence, additional priority bird VECs may be added to or removed from the current list
on the basis of expert ornithological review of new information from these sources. With time, and as data
in Jordan or elsewhere become available, the results and recommendations in this report may be identified as
too precautionary and unnecessarily conservative. If that is the case, updated information will be reviewed in
consultation with ornithological experts to determine the most appropriate course of action.




76 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
                                                                                               Dana Biosphere Reserve




In addition to outcomes specifically relating to postconstruction monitoring and mitigation, the CEA for birds
provides guidance and information to inform WPP-specific ESIAs; for example, the use of guidance on key
monitoring and mitigation issues and CEA survey results to inform the micro-siting of turbines and wind farm
layout to preempt and reduce bird collision risks for WPPs at the preconstruction stage.

To facilitate an integrated monitoring, mitigation, and adaptive management strategy across WPPs, the CEA for
birds has developed and recommends a range of measures aimed at coordinating intersite monitoring and adaptive
management, including mechanisms for data sharing, collective reviewing of data, centralized reporting, and developing
joint management and action plans.




                                                                                        CEA Framework—Birds | 77
4. CEA Framework—Bats




4.1 OVERVIEW OF CEA FRAMEWORK FOR BATS

The objectives of the CEA framework for bats are as follows:

      •	 To determine which bat species are at the highest risk from the cumulative effects of wind farm development
      •	 To identify potential joint mitigation and monitoring measures to be undertaken by developers if priority bat
         VECs are identified
The CEA framework for bats is adapted from the one developed for birds and is summarized in Figure 10. It is a
four-step rather than a six-step process due to data limitations: Step 4 in the CEA framework for birds has not been
carried out and steps 5 and 6 have been merged. This CEA is being conducted before ESIAs were completed for
three of the four participating WPPs. Whereas substantial bird survey data were available from each of the WPPs,
only a limited amount of bat survey data were collected, with the exception of JWPC’s Tafila WPP, the only WPP
in operation. For this reason, the results of the CEA for bats are largely to inform the project-specific ESIAs and
operational monitoring. Thresholds may be developed, if needed, at a future point when additional data are available.

    STEP 1. DEVELOP SPECIES LIST AND IDENTIFY UNIT OF ANALYSIS
4.2 

4.2.1 METHODS

      The purpose of step 1 is to identify all bat species that could be at risk from the cumulative effects of the
      TRWPP and to determine a relevant UoA by which any effects should be measured.


Part 1: Develop List of Bat Species in Study Area
A national list of bat species was created by going through relevant literature. From this national list, a list of
bat species for the study area was compiled. This list included the following:

      •	 Species that were recorded in the study area, based on literature

      •	 Species that were recorded in the study area, based on surveys that were carried out in the WPPs

      •	 Species that were recorded in habitats similar to the ones present at the study area

Part 2: Identify the Unit of Analysis
The main reference point for all bat species is the distribution of the species in the country. No population
estimates were available for bat species in Jordan because the records are not based on comprehensive surveys.
The absence of confirmed figures of the population size of any of the species recorded in the study area or
national figures for Jordan presented a challenge to the assessment. The UoA was therefore considered to be
the extent of occurrence (EOO) for each species of the national list identified as occurring within the study
area.32 EOO is defined as “the area contained within the shortest continuous imaginary boundary which can


  Z. S. Amr along with a group of national experts, including the RSCN, are in the process of publishing a national assessment of
32 

the IUCN Red List for the mammals of Jordan. The EOOs for the bat species were obtained from the RSCN (Amr et al., in press).


78 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
FIGURE 10. TRWPP CEA BAT FRAMEWORK


                                                                                        BAT SPECIES SCOPED OUT
                             CEA BAT FRAMEWORK STEPS:                                         (STEPS 1 TO 3)

                Step 1: Develop Species List and Identify Unit of Analysis

 Part 1: Develop List of Bat Species in Study Area – Bat Species Scoped In
                                                                                              Bat Species Scoped Out
 Part 2: Identify the Unit of Analysis (UoA)

                Bat Species Scoped In move to Step 2


                            Step 2: Identify Species Sensitivity

 Part 1: Relative Importance Scoring
 Part 2: Vulnerability Scoring                                                                Species with Negligible
                                                                                             Sensitivity do not move to
 Part 3: Assign Species Sensitivity (High, Medium, Low, Negligible)                                     Step 3

                     Bat Species with High, Medium,
                      Low Sensitivity move to Step 3


       Step 3: Ecological Risk Assessment Matrix and Identify Priority Bat VECs

 Part 1: Determine Likelihood of Effect (LoE)
 Part 2: Assign Risk Rating for Each Species (Major, Medium, Minor, Low)
 Part 3: Identify Priority Bat VECs of highest risk of impact                                Bat Species with Negligible
                                                                                              or Low risk rating will not
 •	 Species with a Major or Moderate risk rating will be considered Priority Bat VECs        be considered Priority Bat
                                                                                                        VECs

                  Bats with Major or Moderate move
                       to Step 4 as Priority Bat VECs


   Step 4: Identify Mitigation and Monitoring and Institutional Arrangements and
                          Information Management Methods




be drawn to encompass all the known, inferred or projected sites of present occurrence of a taxon, excluding
cases of vagrancy” (Amr 2012).

4.2.2 RESULTS

Part 1: Develop List of Bat Species in Study Area
Species that were recorded in the study area based on literature
The national list of bat species of Jordan, based on literature and as compiled by Amr (IUCN Standards and
Petitions Subcommittee, 2010), includes 26 species, as shown in Table 35.

Species Recorded in Study Area on the Basis of Surveys in the WPPs
On the basis of surveys conducted at WPPs, two more species were recorded in the study area that were not on
the national list of species of Jordan (Table 35):



                                                                                         CEA Framework—Bats | 79
TABLE 35. NATIONAL LIST OF BAT SPECIES OF JORDANa


        NO.    COMMON NAME                        SCIENTIFIC NAME                     NO.     COMMON NAME                SCIENTIFIC NAME

    1          Egyptian fruit bat                Rousettus aegyptiacus               14       European free-tailed bat   Tadarida teniotis
    2          Blasius’s horseshoe bat           Rhinolophus blasii                  15       Schreiber’s bent-winged    Meniopterus pallidus
                                                                                              bat
    3          Geoffroy’s horseshoe bat          Rhinolophus clivosus                16       Asian barbastelle          Barbastella leucomelas
    4          Mediterranean horseshoe           Rhinolophus euryale                 17       Botta’s serotine bat       Eptesicus bottae
               bat
    5          Lesser horseshoe bat              Rhinolophus hipposideros            18       Desert pipistrelle         Hypsugo ariel
    6          Greater horseshoe bat             Rhinolophus ferrumequinum           19       Lesser mouse-eared bat     Myotis blythii
    7          Mehely’s horseshoe bat            Rhinolophus mehelyi                 20       Long-fingered bat          Myotis capaccinii
    8          Trident leaf-nosed bat            Asellia tridens                     21       Notch-eared bat            Myotis emarginatus
    9          Lesser mouse-tailed bat           Rhinopoma cystops (hardwickii)      22       Natterer’s bat             Myotis nattereri
    10         Greater mouse-tailed bat          Rhinopoma microphyllum              23       Hemprich’s long-eared      Otonycteris hemprichii
                                                                                              bat
    11         Egyptian tomb bat                 Taphozous perforatus                24       Kuhl’s pipistrelle         Pipistrellus kuhlii
    12         Naked-bellied tomb bat            Taphozous nudiventris               25       Common pipistrelle         Pipistrellus pipistrellus
    13         Egyptian slit-faced bat           Nycteris thebaica                   26       Northeast African long-    Plecotus christii
                                                                                              eared bat

a
    The scientific names used for the bat species followed the taxonomic checklist presented in Wilson et al. (2005).




      •	 Serotine bat (Eptesicus seritinus)—In available literature this species was not previously recorded in Jordan.
         It was referenced as being recorded during the construction monitoring at the JWPC Tafila WPP. However,
         after reviewing this reference with the author of the survey report (EcoConsult, 2014), it was confirmed that
         this species had most likely been misidentified and that the correct species was Botta’s serotine bat (Eptesicus
         bottae). Therefore, the serotine bat species was not included in the list of bat species occurring in the study
         area. Botta’s serotine bat was included.

      •	 Ruppell’s pipistrelle (Pipistrellus rueppellii)—In the available literature, this species was not previously
         recorded in Jordan. It was referenced as being recorded during the construction monitoring at the JWPC
         Tafila WPP. After reviewing this reference with the author of the survey report,33 it was confirmed this is a
         new species record for Jordan that is still to be published. Therefore, this species was included in the list of
         bat species occurring in the TRWPP area.

Species Recorded in Habitats Similar to Those in Study Area
Two species (Egyptian tomb bat and naked-bellied tomb bat) that did not occur within the study area but were
recorded in similar habitats were added to the list of bat species in the study area (Benda et al., 2010).

List of Bat Species in Study Area
From the national list and on the basis of the localities of the records available at the national level, a list of the
18 species recorded in the study area was produced, as shown in Table 36.



33      EcoConsult. 2014. Bats Monitoring for the Tafileh Windfarm Project, September 2014. Prepared by Z.S. Amr.



80 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 36. LIST OF BAT SPECIES IN STUDY AREA


 COMMON NAME                       SCIENTIFIC NAME             NOTES ON REASON FOR INCLUSION

Egyptian fruit bat                 Rousettus aegyptiacus       Arid to moist tropical and subtropical biomes
                                                               In the study area, it occurs in Wadi Feynan

Blasius’s horseshoe bat            Rhinolophus blasii          Small caves
                                                               In the study area, it occurs in Wadi Feynan

Geoffroy’s horseshoe bat           Rhinolophus clivosus        Deserts and dry habitats
                                                               Occurs in Dana, Fidan, and Finan

Trident leaf-nosed bat             Asellia tridens             Migratory, adapted to desert habitats, east of Dana

Lesser mouse-tailed bat            Rhinopoma cystops (hard-    Occurs in Wadi Fidan, Wadi Dana
                                   wickii)

Egyptian tomb bat                  Taphozous perforates        Not recorded in the study area but recorded in adjacent areas
                                                               with similar habitat phenology to the north of TRWPP area

Naked-bellied tomb bat             Taphozous nudiventris       Not recorded in the study area but recorded in adjacent areas
                                                               with similar habitat phenology to the north of TRWPP area

Egyptian slit-faced Bat            Nycteris thebaica           Occurs in Wadi Fidan

European free-tailed bat           Tadarida teniotis           Widespread in all habitats

Asian barbastelle                  Barbastella leucomelas      Recently recorded in Jordan in a few locations

Botta’s serotine bat               Eptesicus bottae            Jordan Rift Valley and Southern Highlands

Desert pipistrelle                 Hypsugo ariel               Southern Highlands

Natterer’s bat                     Myotis nattereri            Mountainous north and south

Hemprich’s long-eared bat          Otonycteris hemprichii      Mountains, arid habitats.

Ruppell’s pipistrelle              Pipistrellus rueppellii     In the available literature, not recorded in Jordan; mentioned
                                                               as recorded at the JWPC during construction monitoring
                                                               (EcoConsult, 2014); after contacting report author, confirmed
                                                               as a new record for the country that has not been published yet

Kuhl’s pipistrelle                 Pipistrellus kuhlii         Most common species in Jordan, recorded in the TRWPP area

Common pipistrelle                 Pipistrellus pipistrellus   Highlands and along arid rift valley

Northeast African long-eared bat Plecotus christii             Sandstone and arid regions




Part 2: Identify the Unit of Analysis
As explained above, the EOO in Jordan for each of the bat species listed in Table 36 was used as the UoA. EOOs
for all bat species were obtained from RSCN. RSCN is in the process of publishing the national IUCN Red List
of mammals of Jordan.

4.3 STEP 2. IDENTIFY SPECIES SENSITIVITY

4.3.1 METHODS

 The purpose of this step is to determine the likely sensitivity of each bat species to potential effects of the
 TRWPP. The sensitivity is determined from the relative importance attributed to the TRWPP area for each
 species population and the vulnerability of the species at a regional or international scale.



                                                                                                  CEA Framework—Bats | 81
Part 1: Relative Importance Scoring
For each bat species, the relative importance in relation to the UoA was identified. This was done by calculating
the percentage of the surface area of the EOO of the species that is inside the study area with respect to the total
area of the EOO in the country:

   Portion of EOO (km2) within TRWPP study area / EOO (km2) in Jordan × 100 = Relative Importance (%)

The relative importance for the species was scored as negligible, low, moderate, or high using the criteria in Table 37.




           ELATIVE IMPORTANCE CRITERIA FOR BAT SPECIES
TABLE 37. R


  PERCENTAGE OF EOO (IN KM2) THAT FALLS WITHIN
            TRWPP STUDY AREA (%)                                                       RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORE

                                  ≤1                                                                  Negligible

                              1 > and ≤ 5                                                                 Low

                             > 5 and ≤ 10                                                             Moderate

                                 > 10                                                                    High




Part 2: Vulnerability Scoring
For each bat species, vulnerability was scored using international and/or regional guidance relating to the conservation
status and vulnerability of the species, as shown in Table 38. No national scale was used in the scoring, as a National
Red List of the Mammals of Jordan is under development and no other national references were available. The
following guidance was used:

 •	 IUCN Global/Regional Red List of Threatened Species for the scoring for all species. An IUCN Global Red
    List assessment is available for all species; the IUCN Regional Red List Assessment was used when available.
    The highest category in any of the two assessments was taken into consideration during the vulnerability
    scoring.



TABLE 38. VULNERABILITY SCORING


 VULNERABILITY SCORE                        IUCN GLOBAL/REGIONAL RED LIST OF THREATENED SPECIES

 Negligible                                 •	 Species that are LC on IUCN Global/Regional Red Lists

 Low                                        •	 Species that are NT or DD on IUCN Global/Regional

 Moderate                                   •	 Species that are VU on IUCN “Global/Regional” Red List

 High                                       •	 Species that are CR or EN on IUCN Global/Regional Red List

Note: LC = Least Concern, NT = Near Threatened, DD = Data Deficient, VU = Vulnerable, EN = Endangered, CR = Critically Endangered.




82 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Part 3: Assign Species Sensitivity
The matrix in Table 39 was used to assign the species sensitivity using the relative importance and vulnerability
scores for each species population.

Bat species with a negligible sensitivity did not move forward into step 3 and were scoped out of the CEA process.



TABLE 39. SPECIES SENSITIVITY MATRIX


                                                         RELATIVE IMPORTANCE
   VULNERABILITY                                      Moderate                 Low                  Negligible
                                  High
         High                     High                  High                  Medium                   Low
       Moderate                   High                Medium                   Low                  Negligible
          Low                   Medium                  Low                    Low                  Negligible
       Negligible                 Low                 Negligible             Negligible             Negligible




4.3.2 RESULTS

The sensitivity (part 3) of each species scoped in to step 3 was determined on the basis of its relative importance
(part 1) and vulnerability (part 2), applying the method explained above. The results of the process are provided
in Table 40.

It was not possible to score the EOO in the study area for two species on the list: the Egyptian tomb bat and the
naked-bellied tomb bat. These were scored as zero relative importance as they had not been recorded previously
inside the study area.

         ummary of Sensitivity and Species Populations Progressing to Step 3
Step 2. S
Of the 18 species on the list of bat species in the study area, 9 with a negligible score were scoped out of the CEA.
The following nine species were scoped in and proceeded to step 3:

 •	 Egyptian fruit bat (Rousettus aegyptiacus)

 •	 Blasius’s horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus blasii)

 •	 Geoffroy’s horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus clivosus)

 •	 Trident leaf-nosed bat (Asellia tridens)

 •	 Egyptian slit-faced bat (Nycteris thebaica)

 •	 Asian barbastelle (Barbastella leucomelas)

 •	 Desert pipistrelle (Hypsugo ariel)

 •	 Ruppell’s pipistrelle (Pipistrellus rueppellii)

 •	 Northeast African long-eared bat (Plecotus christii)




                                                                                          CEA Framework—Bats | 83
TABLE 40. SPECIES RELATIVE IMPORTANCE, VULNERABILITY, AND SPECIES SENSITIVITY


                                                                                                                                                                           PART 3: SPECIES
                                  PART 1: RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING                                       PART 2: VULNERABILITY SCORING                                       SENSITIVITY


                                              PORTION                                                                                                                     SENSITIVITY PER
                                               OF EOO                                                                                                                      SPECIES (BASED
                                                IN THE      SHARE                                                                        IUCN                                   ON MATRIX
                                               TRWPP           OF                             IUCN           IUCN REGIONAL             RED LIST                                 OF RELATIVE
                SPECIES          EOO IN         STUDY       EOO IN       RELATIVE           GLOBAL           (EUROPEAN-E/            CATEGORY                               IMPORTANCE
 SPECIES        SCIENTIFIC COUNTRY              AREA        TRWPP IMPORTANCE               RED LIST      MEDITERRANEAN-M) USED FOR VULNERABILITY                                   AND
 NAME           NAME              (KM2)          (KM2)         (%)         SCORE          CATEGORY RED LIST CATEGORY                   SCORING            SCORE           VULNERABILITY)

 Egyptian       Rousettus           7,537         682          9.1        Moderate              LC                   NT                    NT               Low                    Low
 fruit bat      aegyptiacus

 Blasius’s      Rhinolophus        4,657          392          8.4        Moderate              LC                 VU (M)                  VU            Moderate                 Medium
 horseshoe      blasii
 bat

 Geoffroy’s     Rhinolophus        3,346           531        15.6           High               LC                 VU (E)                  VU            Moderate                  High
 horseshoe      clivosus
 bat

 Trident        Asellia               275          155        56.4           High               LC                 LC (M)                  LC            Negligible                Low
 leaf-nosed     tridens
 bat

 Lesser         Rhinopoma           6,911          351          5.1       Moderate              LC                 LC (M)                  LC            Negligible              Negligible
 mouse-         cystops
 tailed bat     (hardwickii)

 Egyptian       Taphozous            660            0            0        Negligible            LC                 LC (M)                  LC            Negligible              Negligible
 tomb bat       perforatus

 Naked-         Taphozous             194           0            0        Negligible            LC                 LC (M)                  LC            Negligible              Negligible
 bellied        nudiventris
 tomb bat

 Egyptian       Nycteris              461          30          6.5        Moderate              LC                 DD (M)                  DD               Low                    Low
 slit-faced     thebaica
 bat

 European       Tadarida          40,422        1,048          2.6           Low                LC                LC (E&M)                 LC            Negligible              Negligible
 free-tailed    teniotis
 bat

 Asian bar-     Barbastella        2,070          268         12.9           High               LC                 NA (M)                  LC            Negligible                Low
 bastelle       leucomelas

 Botta’s        Eptesicus          8,046          687          8.5        Moderate              LC                 LC (M)                  LC            Negligible              Negligible
 serotine       bottae
 bat

 Desert         Hypsugo            3,497          373         10.7           High              DD                  DD (M)                  DD               Low                   Medium
 pipistrelle    ariel

 Natterer’s     Myotis              1,727          113         6.5        Moderate              LC                LC (E&M)                 LC            Negligible              Negligible
 bat            nattereri

 Hemprich’s     Otonycteris       30,047          567          1.9           Low                LC                 LC (M)                  LC            Negligible              Negligible
 long-eared     hemprichii
 bat

 Ruppell’s      Pipistrellus            4           4         100            High               LC                 LC (M)                  LC            Negligible                Low
 pipistrelle    rueppellii

 Kuhl’s         Pipistrellus      30,273        1,034          3.4           Low                LC                LC (E&M)                 LC            Negligible              Negligible
 pipistrelle    kuhlii

 Common         Pipistrellus       5,014          396          7.9        Moderate              LC                LC (E&M)                 LC            Negligible              Negligible
 pipistrelle    pipistrellus

 Northeast      Plecotus            6,185         688          11.1          High              DD                  DD (M)                  DD               Low                   Medium
 African        christii
 long-eared
 bat

Note: Species outlined in red proceed to step 3. LC = Least Concern, NT = Near Threatened, DD = Data Deficient, VU = Vulnerable, EN = Endangered, CR = Critically Endangered.




84 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
    STEP 3. DEVELOP ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT MATRIX AND IDENTIFY PRIORITY BAT VECs
4.4 

4.4.1 METHODS

 The purpose of this step is to identify the priority bat VECs. These are determined using sensitivity assessments
 from step 2 and the LoE.


Part 1 – Determine LoE
The LoE for bat species was determined on the basis of the level of collision risk in Eurobats’ guidelines for
consideration of bats in wind farm projects (Rodrigues et al., 2015).

As no information is available about the collision risk of the species from the study area specifically and from the
country in general, the collision risk level for European bat species (Rodrigues et al., 2015) was used to assess the
LoE, where possible. The LoE was scored as Negligible, Low Medium or High using ‘level of collision risk’ using
criteria in Table 41. This approach could not be applied to three non-European species.

Part 2 – Assign Risk Rating for Each Species
                                                                TABLE 41. LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT SCORING FOR BATS
The matrix in Table 42 assigns the risk rating for each
species population using the “Species Sensitivity” and
“LoE” scores for each species population.                                             EUROBATS LEVEL OF
                                                                LIKELIHOOD OF      COLLISION RISK (RODRIGUES
Part 3 – Identify Priority Bat VECs                             EFFECT SCORING             ET AL., 2015)

Priority bat VECs are those species with major or moderate      Negligible        •	 Species and/or genus with low
risk ratings according to the matrix in Table 42. These                              level of collision risk
                                                                Low               •	 Species with unknown level of
priority bat species passed through to step 4 of the CEA
                                                                                     collision risk
process. Species populations with a risk rating of either
                                                                Medium            •	 Species with medium level of
negligible or low did not proceed to step 4 as they were                             collision risk
not considered priority bat VECs. Results of Step 3 of          High              •	 Species with high level of collision
                                                                                     risk
the CEA for bats are presented in Table 43.

4.4.2 RESULTS

Of the nine species in this step, seven were scoped out and two remaining species were selected as priority bat
VECs – the desert pipistrelle (Hypsugo ariel) and the Ruppell’s pipistrelle (Pipistrellus rueppellii).




TABLE 42. RISK RATING FOR BATS


       SPECIES                                           LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT
     SENSITIVITY
                                 High                  Medium                   Low                    Negligible
         High                   Major                   Major                Moderate                     Minor
        Medium                  Major                 Moderate                 Minor                   Negligible
         Low                  Moderate                  Minor                  Minor                   Negligible




                                                                                        CEA Framework—Bats | 85
TABLE 43. STEP 3 RESULTS


                                                       STEP 2:                       STEP 3:


                                SPECIES                            EUROBATS LEVEL
                               SCIENTIFIC              SPECIES      OF COLLISION    LIKELIHOOD OF
   SPECIES NAME                  NAME                SENSITIVITY        RISK        EFFECTS SCORE   RISK RATING

 Egyptian fruit bat        Rousettus aegyptiacus        Low           Unknown            Low              Minor

 Blasius’s horseshoe       Rhinolophus blasii          Medium           Low            Negligible       Negligible
 bat
 Geoffroy’s horseshoe      Rhinolophus clivosus         High            Low            Negligible         Minor
 bat
 Trident leaf-nosed bat    Asellia tridens              Low           Unknown            Low              Minor

 Asian barbastelle         Barbastella leucomelas       Low            Medium          Medium             Minor

 Desert pipistrelle        Hypsugo ariel               Medium           High             High             Major

 Ruppell’s Pipistrelle     Pipistrellus rueppellii      Low             High             High           Moderate

 Northeast African         Plecotus christii           Medium           Low            Negligible       Negligible
 long-eared bat
 Egyptian slit-faced bat   Nycteris thebaica            Low           Unknown            Low              Minor




    METHODS FOR MITIGATION AND MONITORING, INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS, AND
4.5 
    INFORMATION MANAGEMENT

 The purpose of these steps is to (i) identify mitigation and monitoring measures for priority bat VECs at
 highest risk of potential cumulative effects, to inform project-specific ESIAs and operational monitoring; and
 (ii) recommend institutional arrangements for implementation of mitigation and monitoring.

It is recommended that additional data on bat species’ presence and distribution in the study area be collected as
part of the preconstruction surveys for the ESIAs for the three WPPs and as part of operational monitoring for the
JWPC Tafila WPP. Intersite monitoring and adaptive management recommendations should be made, as needed,
on the basis of the results of monitoring. Recommendations are listed below.

Recommendations for ESIA and/or ESMMP:
Preconstruction survey:

 •	 All WPPs should carry out preconstruction bat surveys to establish the presence or absence of any bat species
    and specifically the priority species identified in this assessment.

Alternatives analysis:

 •	 The results of the preconstruction survey should be used in the alternatives analysis of the WPP.

Operational Monitoring and/or Carcass Searches:

 •	 Carcass searches for priority bats could take place with those carried out for birds. The following is a
    recommended approach:



86 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
    •	 Search plot size: Ideally, the search process should take place around the wind turbine, within a radius equal
       to the total height of the wind turbine, as bats that collide can be blown away from the turbine by high winds.

    •	 Number of sampled wind turbines: If possible, every wind turbine in the wind farm should be sampled
       during each survey visit.

    •	 Monitoring schedule: The entire activity cycle should be assessed. Fatality monitoring should start as soon
       as bats become active after hibernation and last until they return to hibernation.

    •	 Search methods and recording results: The searcher should walk each transect at a slow and regular pace,
       looking for fatalities on both sides of the line.

    •	 Fatality estimates are beneficial, to provide a better estimation of the actual number of bat fatalities. Like the
       estimation of bird fatalities, this is done through carcass removal trials and searcher efficiency trials. Findings
       of carcass removal trials and searcher efficiency trials for birds should be reviewed to inform the priority
       monitoring of mortality.

4.6 SUMMARY OF OUTCOMES OF BATS CEA

The CEA framework for bats was adapted from the CEA framework for birds. It followed a four-step process to
identify the priority bat VECs. A list of 18 species potentially present within the study area was compiled out of
the national list of 26 bat species in Jordan. The UoA selected was the EOO of these species on the national level.
The relative importance of the species was calculated by setting scores for the percentage of the EOO for each
species that falls within the study area. As for the vulnerability score, it was based on the conservation status, being
global and/or regional, depending on the availability of that status for each species. The sensitivity of each species
scoped in to step 3 was determined based on Relative Importance and vulnerability. This resulted in scoping out
nine species, while scoping in the other nine species. The LoE was based on the collision risk for these selected
species using the EUROBATS (2014) guidelines, where available. Risk ratings were determined on the basis of a
sensitivity and likelihood of effect matrix.

Two species with a risk rating of moderate or high were identified as priority bat VECs: the desert pipistrelle
(Hypsugo ariel) and the Ruppell’s pipistrelle (Pipistrellus rueppellii).

The principal mitigation recommended in the CEA Framework for Bats comprises a program of on-site-monitoring
aimed at reducing risks to Priority Bat VECs, and informing Adaptive Management strategies through an improved
understanding of bat behavior and risk at WPPs. Specifically the CEA recommends (i) surveys as part of all
forthcoming CEA WPP ESIAs to establish the presence/absence of any bat species and to improve understanding
of the use of WPP sites by priority species and (ii) a bat carcass search survey program informed by bat ecology
and calibrated using searcher efficiency and carcass removal trails.




                                                                                            CEA Framework—Bats | 87
5. CEA Framework—Habitats
    and Other Species



    OVERVIEW OF CEA FRAMEWORK FOR
5.1 
    HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES

The objectives of the CEA framework for habitats and
                                                                       IND POWER PROJECTS AREA WITHIN
                                                           FIGURE 11. W
other species are as follows:
                                                                    THE STUDY AREA

 •	 Determine which habitats and other species are
    at the highest risk from the cumulative effects of
    the WPPs.

 •	 Identify potential joint mitigation and monitoring
    measures to be undertaken by developers and other
    stakeholders if priority habitats and other species
    VECs are identified.

The focus of this framework is the habitats that exist
in the area of the WPPs, including the 2 km buffer, and
not all habitats that exist in the broader study area,
which includes the Dana BR and IBA. While the study
area is relevant to the Bird and Bat CEA frameworks,
the area around the WPPs is considered appropriate
for this framework (see Figure 11).

Like the bat framework, the framework for habitats and
other species follows a four-step process, summarized in
Figure 12. This process was developed in consultation
with stakeholders in the field of habitats and species
research and conservation in Jordan.

The habitat types in this framework align with the
vegetation type classification by Albert and Bore
(2003.) (See Figure 13 and Annex A for more detail
on habitat and vegetation cover in the study area).




88 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
FIGURE 12. CEA FRAMEWORK HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES


                                                                                               HABITATS AND OTHER
              CEA HABITAT AND OTHER SPECIES FRAMEWORK STEPS:                                SPECIES SPECIES SCOPED OUT


   Step 1: Develop Habitat Map, Other Species List and Identify the Unit of Analysis

 Part 1: Habitat and Other Species List
 Part 2: Identify the Unit of Analysis (UoA)

            Habitats and Other Species move to Step 2


                   Step 2: Identify Habitat and Other Species Sensitivity

 Part 1: Relative Importance Scoring
 Part 2: Vulnerability Scoring                                                                     Habitats and other species
                                                                                                   with “Negligible” Sensitiv-
 Part 3: Assign Habitat and other Species Sensitivity (High/Medium/Low/Negligible)                 ity, do not move to Step 3


                    Habitats and other Species with
              High/Medium/Low Score move to Step 3


 Step 3: Ecological Risk Assessment Matrix and Identify Priority Habitats and Other
                                    Species VECs

 Part 1: Determine Likelihood of Effect (LoE)
 Part 2: Assign Risk Rating (Major/Moderate/Minor/Negligible)
 Part 3: Identify Priority Habitats and other Species of highest risk of impact

 •	 Habitats and (other) species with a Major or Moderate risk rating will be considered
    “ Priority VECs”

             Habitats and other species with Major or
                 Moderate risk rating move to Step 4


 Step 4:	    Identify Mitigation and Monitoring and Institutional Arrangements and
                           Information Management Measures




    STEP 1 – DEVELOP HABITAT MAP AND SPECIES LIST, AND IDENTIFY RELEVANT UNIT OF
5.2 
    ANALYSIS

5.2.1 METHODS

 The purpose of step 1 is to identify all habitat types and other species that could potentially be at risk from the
 cumulative effects of the TRWPP and to determine a relevant UoA by which any effects should be measured.

Step 1 of the framework comprises two parts, as described below.

Part 1: Habitats and Other Species List
Habitats were mapped using the biogeographical zones of Jordan and the available vegetation type maps.
The habitats within the WPP area were then identified. Other species known to represent these habitats were
identified using available literature (including Albert and Bore 2003). As only limited literature and survey data



                                                                            CEA Framework—Habitats and Other Species | 89
(see Section 2.3.5) were available for the WPP area, it was not possible to identify species that would be unique
or restricted to these habitats. This would generally be part of a project-level ESIA.

Part 2: Identify the UoA                                             ABITATS (VEGETATION TYPES) WITHIN THE WPP
                                                         FIGURE 13. H
A relevant UoA for habitats and species was identified            AREA WITHIN THE STUDY AREA
for use in the assessment.

5.2.2 RESULTS

Part 1: Habitat and Other Species List
The habitats in the WPP area were identified from
the mapping of vegetation types within the study
area as shown in Figure 13.

The WPP area is set within two of the
biogeographical zones—the Mediterranean zone
and the Irano-Turanian zone. The following habitats
are present in the WPP area:

 •	 Mediterranean nonforest batha

 •	 Batha-steppe




                                                                                               Tragopogon collinus DC




90 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
 •	 Artemisia herba-alba steppe

 •	 Noaea mucronata brush

After consultations with national experts in ecology and zoology, four species were identified that could be
considered as representative for these habitats but not limited to any one habitat. These species are relatively
widespread. They are as follows:

 •	 Tristram’s jird (Meriones tristrami)

 •	 Wagner’s gerbil (Dipodillus dasyurus)

 •	 Starred agama (Stellagama stellio)

 •	 Spur-thighed tortoise (Testudo graeca)

Part 2: Identify the UoA
Habitats UoA: For the habitats in the WPP area, the UoA was identified as the national coverage of these habitats,
measured in square kilometers.

Species UoA: No national population estimates were available for the four species identified in step 1. The UoA
was therefore considered to be the EOO for each species of the national list identified as occurring within the
study area (Amr, 2012; Ahmad et al, 2001).

    STEP 2 – IDENTIFY HABITAT AND OTHER SPECIES SENSITIVITY
5.3 

5.3.1 METHODS

 The purpose of this step is to determine the sensitivity of each habitat and other species to potential effects
 of the TRWPP. The sensitivity is determined from the relative importance attributed to the TRWPP area for
 each habitat and other species population and the vulnerability of these habitats and species at a regional or
 international scale.

Part 1: Relative Importance Scoring
For each habitat and other species, the relative importance in relation to the UoA was identified.

Habitats Relative Importance                                 TABLE 44. RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORE FOR HABITATS
For habitats, this was done by calculating the percentage
of the surface area of the vegetation type inside the area       SURFACE AREA OF
                                                              HABITAT INSIDE THE WPP
of the WPPs to the total surface area of the vegetation
                                                              STUDY AREA AS SHARE OF          RELATIVE
type in Jordan. The relative importance for the habitats
                                                              NATIONAL COVERAGE (%)       IMPORTANCE SCORE
was scored as negligible, low, moderate, or high, using
                                                                          ≤5                     Negligible
the criteria shown in Table 44.
                                                                     > 5 and ≤ 10                    Low
                                                                      > 1 and ≤20                Moderate
Species Relative Importance
                                                                         >20                         High
As for species, the Relative Importance was calculated
as a percentage:

  Portion of EOO (km2) within TRWPP study area / EOO (km2) in country × 100 = Relative Importance (%)




                                                                  CEA Framework—Habitats and Other Species | 91
TABLE 45. RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORE FOR SPECIES                  The relative importance for the species was scored as negligible,
                                                                 low, moderate, or high, using the criteria shown in Table 45.
  SHARE OF EOO (IN KM2)                   RELATIVE
  WITHIN TRWPP STUDY                    IMPORTANCE               Part 2: Vulnerability Scoring
        AREA (%)                           SCORE                 Habitat Vulnerability
                ≤5                          Negligible           For each habitat, vulnerability was scored on the basis of the
           > 5 and ≤ 10                         Low              national status of priority for conservation of each habitat
          > 10 and ≤ 20                     Moderate             (RSCN, 2008). This was calculated by the percentage of the
                > 20                            High             habitat that is present inside protected areas in the country
                                                                 and scored in line with the criteria listed in Table 46.
TABLE 46. HABITATS VULNERABILITY SCORING

                                                                 Species Vulnerability
  PERCENTAGE OF HABITAT                 VULNERABILITY            Vulnerability was scored using international and/or
     PRESENT WITHIN                        SCORE
                                                                 regional guidance relating to the conservation status and
   PROTECTED AREAS (%)                       (%)
                                                                 vulnerability of the species. No national scale was used in
                    ≤5                       Negligible          the scoring because a National Red List of the Mammals
              > 5 and ≤ 10                       Low
                                                                 and Reptiles of Jordan is in development and no other
            > 10 and ≤ 20                    Moderate
                                                                 national references were available to inform this scoring.
                    > 20                         High
                                                                 The guidance used to determine the vulnerability of the
                                                                 species was the IUCN Global and Regional Red Lists of
TABLE 47. SPECIES VULNERABILITY SCORING
                                                                 Threatened Species (where available). The highest category
                                                                 in any of these assessments was taken into consideration
 VULNERABILITY               IUCN GLOBAL/
 GUIDANCE/                   REGIONAL RED LIST OF                for the vulnerability scoring. Vulnerability for species was
 METRICS                     THREATENED SPECIES                  scored with a negligible, low, moderate, or high score using
                                                                 the criteria listed in Table 47.
 Negligible                  •	 Species that are LC on IUCN
                                Global/Regional Red Lists
                                                                 Part 3: Assign Habitats and Other Species Sensitivity
 Low                         •	 Species that are NT or DD
                                on IUCN Global/Regional          Score
 Moderate                    •	 Species that are VU on IUCN      The following matrix in Table 48 was used to assign the habitat
                                “Global/Regional” Red List       and other species sensitivity using the relative importance
 High                        •	 Species that are CR or EN        and vulnerability scores for each habitat and other species.
                                on IUCN Globa/Regional
                                Red List
                                                                 Habitats and other species with negligible sensitivity did
Note: LC = Least Concern, NT = Near Threatened, DD = Data        not move forward to step 3 and were scoped out of the
Deficient, VU = Vulnerable, EN = Endangered, CR = Critically
Endangered.                                                      CEA process.


TABLE 48. HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES SENSITIVITY SCORING


                                                                  RELATIVE IMPORTANCE
   VULNERABILITY
                                         High                  Moderate                   Low                   Negligible
            High                         High                    High                   Medium                     Low
         Moderate                        High                  Medium                     Low                   Negligible
              Low                      Medium                    Low                      Low                   Negligible
         Negligible                       Low                  Negligible              Negligible               Negligible




92 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
5.3.2 RESULTS

The sensitivity (part 3) of each habitat and other species scoped into step 2 was determined based on relative
importance (part 1) and vulnerability (part 2) applying the method explained above. The results of the process
are provided in Tables 49 and 50.

Step 2 – Habitats and Other Species Progressing to Step 3
Three of the four habitats were scoped out during step 2, with only the Noaea mucronata brush proceeding to
step 3. As for species, all were scoped out because they were all determined to have negligible sensitivity.




TABLE 49. HABITAT RELATIVE IMPORTANCE, VULNERABILITY, AND SENSITIVITY


                       PART 1: RELATIVE IMPORTANCE                      PART 2: VULNERABILITY


                                                                  SHARE OF SURFACE
                        SHARE OF              RELATIVE               AREA INSIDE                           PART 3:
                      SURFACE AREA          IMPORTANCE            PROTECTED AREAS        VULNERABILITY     HABITAT
 HABITAT NAME        IN WPP AREA (%)           SCORE                     (%)                SCORE        SENSITIVITY

Mediterranean                  4.5                Negligible              2.1                  Low         Negligible
non-forest batha
Batha-steppe                   0.6                Negligible              2.2                  Low         Negligible

Artemisia herba-               0.3                Negligible             0.0                Negligible     Negligible
alba steppe
Noaea mucronata               24.2                  High                 0.0                Negligible       Low
brush




TABLE 50. SPECIES RELATIVE IMPORTANCE, VULNERABILITY, AND SENSITIVITY


                                            PART 1: RELATIVE
                                             IMPORTANCE                    PART 2: VULNERABILITY


                                                         RELATIVE         IUCN                             PART 3:
                     SCIENTIFIC          % OF EOO      IMPORTANCE        RED LIST       VULNERABILITY      SPECIES
 SPECIES NAME          NAME               IN WPP          SCORE         CATEGORY           SCORE         SENSITIVITY

Spur-thighed       Testudo graeca          0.05            Negligible    Vulnerable        Moderate       Negligible
Tortoise
Starred Agama      Stellagama stellio      0.01            Negligible   Least Concern      Negligible     Negligible
Wagner’s Gerbil    Dipodillus dasyurus     0.01            Negligible   Least Concern      Negligible     Negligible
Tristram’s Jird    Meriones tristrami      0.01            Negligible   Least Concern      Negligible     Negligible




                                                                        CEA Framework—Habitats and Other Species | 93
    STEP 3 – ECOLOGICAL RISK
5.4                                                                     IKELIHOOD OF EFFECT SCORING FOR HABITATS
                                                              TABLE 51. L
    ASSESSMENT MATRIX AND                                                 AND OTHERS SPECIES
    IDENTIFICATION OF PRIORITY
    HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES                                 LIKELIHOOD OF
                                                               EFFECT SCORING CRITERIA
5.4.1 METHODS
                                                               Negligible           •	 Negligible risk from habitat loss and
                                                                                       degradation due to the cumulative
      The purpose of this step is to identify the priority                             effects of the WPPs.
      habitat and other species VECs. These are
                                                               Low                  •	 Low risk from habitat loss and degrada-
      determined using sensitivity assessments from                                    tion due to the cumulative effects of the
      step 2 and the LoE.                                                              WPPs.

                                                               Medium               •	 Medium risk from habitat loss and deg-
                                                                                       radation due to the cumulative effects
Part 1 – Determine LoE
                                                                                       of the WPPs.
The LoE for habitats and other species was determined
                                                               High                 •	 High risk from habitat loss and degrada-
on the basis of the likelihood of habitat loss and                                     tion due to the cumulative effects of the
degradation occurring from the cumulative WPPs                                         WPPs.
in the Tafila area.34 This likelihood was based on
expert review from the CEA team and knowledge of
the likely direct effects that would occur to specific
habitats and species.
                                                             TABLE 52. RISK RATING FOR HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES

LoE scoring is based on the criteria listed in Table 51.
                                                                                         LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT
Part 2 – Assign Risk Rating for Each Habitat
and Other Species                                             SENSITIVITY       High      Medium         Low        Negligible

The matrix in Table 52 was used to assign the risk                 High         Major       Major     Moderate        Minor
rating for each habitat and other species using the
                                                                 Medium         Major     Moderate      Minor       Negligible
“sensitivity” and “Likelihood of Effect” scores.
                                                                   Low        Moderate     Minor        Minor       Negligible

Part 3 – Identify Priority Habitats and Other
Species VECs
Priority VECs are those habitats and/or other species
that are assigned major or moderate risk rating
categories when their sensitivity and likelihood of
effect category scores were applied within matrix,
above. Habitats and other species with either a negligible or low risk rating are not considered as Priority VECs.

5.4.2 RESULTS

Only one habitat proceeded to step 3, the Noaea mucronata brush. The assessment of LoE (part 1) and assignment
of risk rating (part 3) is summarized in Table 53.




  The LoE score was necessarily qualitative because, as this CEA was done pre-ESIA for three of the four participating WPPs, the
34 

footprints were not available.



94 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE 53. RISK RATING FOR NOAEA MUCRONATA BRUSH


                              STEP 2:                                              STEP 3:


                                                                                                        LIKELIHOOD
                            SPECIES   LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT ASSESSMENT                                   OF EFFECTS  RISK
 HABITAT NAME             SENSITIVITY (NARRATIVE)                                                          SCORE   RATING

  Noaea Mucronata Brush         Low        This habitat is generally within the 2 km buffer zone             Low           Minor
                                           applied by the CEA in the WPP area. Therefore, the risk
                                           of habitat loss and degradation due to the cumulative
                                           effects of the WPPs is considered to be low overall as-
                                           suming standard mitigation measures to limit vegetation
                                           clearance and prevent damage to habitats are imple-
                                           mented in the project-level ESMMPs .




Part 3 – Identify Priority Habitats and Other Species VECs
No priority habitat or species VECs were identified during the CEA as being at a cumulative risk of significant
impacts from the TRWPPs, assuming standard mitigation measures are implemented. However, project-level ESIAs
will need to undertake the necessary habitats and species surveys and impact assessments to inform project-specific
ESMMPs.

    STEP 4 – IDENTIFY MITIGATION AND MONITORING AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
5.5 
    AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT

No priority VECs for habitats and other species were identified in the CEA process. Therefore, no specific measures
are identified for priority VECs for habitats and other species (limited to those covered in the CEA scope).35

Given the number of WPPs to be developed in the area, it would be beneficial if the individual projects considered
a unified method for habitat monitoring in their ESIAs (or ESMPPs), namely:

  •	 Surveys to record species; vegetation cover; dominant vegetation; and presence of mammals’ tracks/signs
     using 20 x 20 m sample plots, randomly located within, and representative of the different vegetation types
     within the WPP study area.

  •	 Consider sharing habitat survey and/or monitoring data with the other projects to provide an improved
     understanding of the habitats and species within the WPP area.

    SUMMARY OF OUTCOMES OF HABITATS AND OTHER SPECIES CEA
5.6 

The CEA framework for habitats and other species followed four steps to identify potential priority VECs. Four
main habitats and species were identified within the WPP area. The UoA used to determine the relative importance
for the habitats was the percentage of surface area within the WPP as compared with its national scale. The UoA



  Site-specific habitat and species surveys were not undertaken as part of the CEA scope; therefore only species representative of
35 

the habitats in the WPP area were considered. The project-specific ESIAs and studies should identify habitats and species within the
project-affected areas and undertake the necessary impact assessment on them. This may identify the presence of other potentially
sensitive habitats and/or species that would need to be considered at an individual project level in the mitigation and management
planning.



                                                                           CEA Framework—Habitats and Other Species | 95
                                                                                                    Tragopogon collinus DC




used to determine the relative importance for the other species was the EOO of these species at the national level. For
each habitat, vulnerability was scored on the basis of the national status of priority for conservation of each habitat.
Vulnerability scores for the other species were based on global and/or regional conservation status, depending on the
availability of that information for each species. The sensitivity of each species scoped in to step 3 was determined on
the basis of relative Importance and vulnerability. This resulted in scoping out of all other species and scoping in only
one habitat—Noaea mucronate brush.

The LoE of Noaea mucronata brush was based on an assessment of the risk of habitat loss and degradation from
the WPPs cumulatively. The risk rating for this habitat was determined on the basis of a sensitivity and likelihood
of effect matrix.

The risk rating for the Noaea mucronata brush was determined to be minor and therefore it was not identified as
a priority VEC at high risk from the TRWPP.

The principal recommendation for the CEA Framework for Habitats and Other Species is to develop and conduct
standardized habitat monitoring surveys as part of WPP ESIAs /ESMMPs and to ensure that mitigation measures
within these that limit vegetation clearance and prevent damage to habitats are implemented.




96 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
6. References




Al-Eisawi, D. 1996. “Vegetation of Jordan.” UNESCO-Cairo Office, Regional Office for Science and Technology
     for Arab States, Cairo.
Alerstam, T. 1979. “Optimal Use of Wind by Migrating Birds: Combined Drift and Overcompensation.” Journal
     of Theoretical Biology, 79: 341–53.
Amr, Z. S. 2012. Mammals of Jordan. 2nd edition. Amman.
Aulagnier, S., and P. Benda. 2008. Plecotus christii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T44931A10965941.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T44931A10965941.en.
———. 2010. Plecotus christii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T44931A10965853.
Aulagnier, S., and J. Palmeirim. 2010. Rhinolophus clivosus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010:
     e.T19531A8955681.
Aulagnier, S., A. M. Hutson, F. Spitzenberger, J. Juste, A. Karataş, J. Palmeirim, and M. Paunovic. 2008. Rhinolophus
     ferrumequinum. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T19517A8947355. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/
     IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T19517A8947355.en.
Aulagnier, S., J. Juste, A. Karataş, J. Palmeirim, and M. Paunović. 2008. Pipistrellus kuhlii. The IUCN Red
     List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T17314A6963166. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.
     T17314A6963166.en.
Aulagnier, S., A. Karataş, and K. Tsytsulina. 2008. Eptesicus bottae. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
     2008: e.T7915A12869203. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T7915A12869203.en.
———. 2010. Eptesicus bottae. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T7915A12869603.
Aulagnier, S., J. Palmeirim, and A. Karataş. 2010a. Nycteris thebaica. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
     2010: e.T14936A4480023.
———. 2010b. Rousettus aegyptiacus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T29730A9527701.
Aulagnier, S., J. Palmeirim, A. Karataş, and M. Paunović. 2010a. Barbastella leucomelas. The IUCN Red List of
     Threatened Species 2010: e.T2554A9453749.
———. 2010b. Myotis nattereri. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T14135A4406656.
———. 2010c. Rhinolophus blasii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T19515A8945720.
Aulagnier, S., J. Palmeirim, A. Karataş, D. Kock, Z. Amr, S. Mickleburgh, A. M. Hutson, and W. Bergmans. 2010.
     Asellia tridens. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T2154A9300096.
Aulagnier, S., M. Paunovic, A. Karataş, J. Palmeirim, A. M. Hutson, F. Spitzenberger, J. Juste, and P. Benda.
     2008. Tadarida teniotis. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T21311A9267377. http://dx.doi.
     org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T21311A9267377.en.
———. 2010. Tadarida teniotis. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T21311A9267935.
Band, W. 2000. “Windfarms and Birds: Calculating a Theoretical Collision Risk Assuming No Avoidance Action.”
     Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) Report, SNH, Inverness.
Band, W., M. Madders, and D. P. Whitfield. 2007. “Developing Field and Analytical Methods to Assess Avian
     Collision Risk at Wind Farms.” In Birds and Wind Farms: Risk Assessment and Mitigation, ed. M. de Lucas,
     G. F. E. Janss, and M. Ferrier. Madrid: Quercus.


                                                                                                    References | 97
Bates, P., P. Benda, S. Aulagnier, J. Palmeirim, W. Bergmans, J. Fahr, A. M. Hutson, Z. Amr, and D. Kock. 2008.
      Taphozous nudiventris. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T21462A9282145. http://dx.doi.
      org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T21462A9282145.en.
———. 2010. Taphozous nudiventris. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T21462A9281783.
Bellebaum, J., F. Korner-Nievergelt, T. Dürr, and U. Mammen. 2013. “Wind Turbine Fatalities Approach a Level
      of Concern in a Raptor Population.” Journal for Nature Conservation, 21: 394–400.
Benda, P., and S. Aulagnier. 2008. Pipistrellus ariel. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T44852A10953736.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T44852A10953736.en.
———. 2010. Pipistrellus ariel. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T44852A10953595.
Benda, P., S. Aulagnier, and A. M. Hutson. 2008. Otonycteris hemprichii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
      2008: e.T15663A4975695. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T15663A4975695.en.
Benda, P., S. Aulagnier, A. M. Hutson, Z. S. Amr, D. Kock, M. Sharifi, A. Karataş, S. Mickleburgh, W. Bergmans, and
      K. Howell. 2008. Rousettus aegyptiacus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T29730A9527058.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T29730A9527058.en.
Benda, P., S. Aulagnier, A. M. Hutson, M. Sharifi, and K. Tsytsulina. 2008. Barbastella leucomelas. The IUCN
      Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T2554A9453998. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.
      T2554A9453998.en.
Benda, P., S. Aulagnier, and J. Palmeirim. 2010. Rhinopoma hardwickii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
      2010: e.T19599A8987029.
———. 2010. Rhinopoma hardwickii. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T19599A8987651. http://
      dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2010–2.RLTS.T19599A8987651.en.
Benda, P., S. Aulagnier, J. Palmeirim, and A. M. Hutson. 2010. Otonycteris hemprichii. The IUCN Red List of
      Threatened Species 2010: e.T15663A4975505.
Benda, P., R. K. Lucan, J. Obuch, A. Reiter, M. Andreas, P. Backor, T. Bohnenstengel, E. K. Eid, M. Sevcik, P. Vallo,
      and Z. S. Amr. 2010. “Bats (Mammalia: Chiroptera) of the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East.” Part 8.
      Bats of Jordan: Fauna, Ecology, Echolocation, Ectoparasites. Prague: Acta Societatis Zoologicae Bohemicae.
Bildstein, K. L. 2009. Migrating Raptors of the World: Their Ecology and Conservation. Ithaca, NY: Comstock
      Publishing Associates.
BirdLife International, n.d. “Biome-restricted species occuring in the Dana IBA, Jordan.” Spreadsheet from BirdLife
      Middle East, Amman.
———. 2012. “Developing and Testing the Methodology for Assessing and Mapping the Sensitivity of Migratory
      Birds to Wind Energy Developments.” Final report. Strix for BirdLife International, Cambridge. 17 January.
———. 2015. “Guidance on Appropriate Means of Impact Assessment of Electricity Power Grids on Migratory
      Soaring Birds in the Rift Valley/Red Sea Flyway.” Regional Flyway Facility, Amman, Jordan.
———. 2016a. Species fact sheet: Aquila nepalensis. http://www.birdlife.org.
———. 2016b. Species fact sheet: Gyps coprotheres. http://www.birdlife.org.
———. 2016c. Species fact sheet: Hieraaetus pennatus. http://www.birdlife.org.
———. 2016d. Species fact sheet: Serinus syriacus. http://www.birdlife.org.
BirdLife International, UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), and GEF (Global Environment Fund),
      n.d. Migratory Soaring Birds Project Documents. http://migratorysoaringbirds.undp.birdlife.org/en/documents.
Carrete, M., J. A. Sánchez-Zapata, J. R. Benítez, M. Lobon, and J. A. Donázar. 2009. “Large-Scale Risk Assessment
      of Wind Farms on Population Viability of a Globally Endangered Long-Lived Raptor.” Biological Conservation,
      142: 2954–61.




98 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Dillingham, P. W., and D. Fletcher. 2011. “Potential Biological Removal of Albatrosses and Petrels with Minimal
      Demographic Information.” Biological Conservation, 144, 1885–94.
Disi, A. M., D. Modrý, P. Necas, and L. Rifai. 2001. Amphibians and Reptiles of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan:
      An Atlas and Field Guide. Frankfurt am Main: Edition Chimaira.
EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development). 2014. “Environmental and Social Policy.” London.
      http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/research/policies/esp-english.pdf.
EcoConsult. 2014. “Bats Monitoring for the Tafileh Windfarm Project.” August. Prepared by Z. S. Amr.
EIB (European Investment Bank). 2009. “EIB Statement on Environmental and Social Principles and Standards.” http://
      www.eib.org/attachments/strategies/eib_statement_esps_en.pdf.
———. 2013. European Investment Bank Environmental and Social Handbook. Version 09. Environment,
      Climate, and Social Office, Projects Directorate, Luxembourg. http://www.eib.org/attachments/strategies/
      environmental_and_social_practices_handbook_en.pdf.
Eid, E. et al. “IUCN Red List of Jordan’s Mammals.” (forthcoming, 2017.)
“The Equator Principles 2013.” Equator Principles Association, United Kingdom. http://equator-principles.com/
      resources/equator_principles_III.pdf.
Gouar, P. L., A. Robert, J.-P. Choisy, S. Henriquet, P. Lecuyer, C. Tessier, and F. Sarrazin. 2008. “Roles of Survival and
      Dispersal in Reintroduction Success of Griffon Vulture, Gyps fulvus.” Ecological Applications, 18: 859–72.
Harrison, D. L., and P. J. J. Bates. 1991. Mammals of Arabia. 2nd edition. Sevenoaks, U.K.: Harrison Zoological
      Museum.
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. 2007. “Updated Master Strategy of Energy Sector in Jordan for the Period 2007–
      2020.” December. http://www.nerc.gov.jo/Download/english%20-energy%20strategy.pdf.
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Ministry of Environment. 2009. “Fourth National Report on the Implementation
      of the Convention on Biological Diversity.” March. https://www.cbd.int/doc/world/jo/jo-nr-04-en.pdf.
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature), and GEF (Global
      Environment Fund). “The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2015–2020.” https://www.cbd.
      int/doc/world/jo/jo-nbsap-v2-en.pdf.
Hernández-Matías, A., J. Real, R. Pradel, A. Ravayrol, and N. Vincent-Martin. 2011. “Effects of Age, Territoriality,
      and Breeding on Survival of Bonelli’s Eagles.” Ibis, 153: 846–57.
Hilgerloh, G. 2009. “The Desert at Zait Bay, Egypt: a Bird Migration Bottleneck of Global Importance.” Bird
      Conservation International, 19: 338–52.
Hiraldo, F., J. J. Negro, J. A. Donazar, and P. Gaona. 1996. “A Demographic Model for a Population of the
      Endangered Lesser Kestrel in Southern Spain.” Journal of Applied Ecology, 33: 1085–93.
Hutson, A. M., S. Aulagnier, and F. Spitzenberger. 2008. Myotis nattereri. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
      2008: e.T14135A4405996. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T14135A4405996.en.
Hutson, A. M., F. Spitzenberger, S. Aulagnier, I. Coroiu, A. Karataş, J. Juste, M. Paunovic, J. Palmeirim, and P.
      Benda. 2008. Pipistrellus pipistrellus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T17317A6968203.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T17317A6968203.en.
———. 2010. Pipistrellus pipistrellus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T17317A6968963.
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2012a. Guidance Notes: Performance Standards on Environmental and
      Social Sustainability. 1 January. http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/e280ef804a0256609709ffd1a5d13d27/
      GN_English_2012_Full-Document.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
———. 2012b. “Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability.” 1 January. http://www.ifc.org/
      wps/wcm/connect/c8f524004a73daeca09afdf998895a12/IFC_Performance_Standards.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.




                                                                                                       References | 99
———. 2013. Good Practice Handbook: Cumulative Impact Assessment and Management: Guidance for the
     Private Sector in Emerging Markets. August. http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/3aebf50041c11f8383ba
     8700caa2aa08/IFC_GoodPracticeHandbook_CumulativeImpactAssessment.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature). 2013. “Arabian Regional Red List (RLAs) for Breeding
     Bird Populations.” Draft, 21 July.
IUCN European Mammal Assessment Team. 2007. Rousettus aegyptiacus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened
     Species 2007: e.T29730A9528038.
IUCN Standards and Petitions Subcommittee. 2010. “Guidelines for Using the IUCN Red List Categories and
     Criteria.” Version 8.1. Prepared by the Standards and Petitions Subcommittee, March.
Jacobs, D., F. P. D. Cotterill, P. J. Taylor, S. Aulagnier, Z. Nagy, and A. Karataş. 2008. Rhinolophus blasii. The
     IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T19515A8945122. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.
     RLTS.T19515A8945122.en.
Jacobs, D., F. P. D. Cotterill, P. J. Taylor, S. Aulagnier, and J. Palmeirim. 2008. Pipistrellus rueppellii. The IUCN
     Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T17361A7010067. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.
     T17361A7010067.en.
Katzner, T. E., E. A. Bragin, and E. J. Milner-Gulland. 2006. “Modelling Populations of Long-Lived Birds of Prey
     for Conservation: A Study of Imperial Eagles (Aquila heliaca) in Kazakhstan.” Biological Conservation,
     132: 322–35.
Kenward, R. E., S. S. Wall, K. H. Hodder, M. Pahkala, S. N. Freeman, and V. R. Simpson. 2000. “The Prevalence
     of Non-Breeders in Raptor Populations: Evidence from Rings, Radio-Tags, and Transect Surveys.” Oikos,
     91: 271–79.
Khoury, F. 1998. “Habitat Selection by Syrian Serin Serinus syriacus in south-west Jordan.” Sandgrouse, 20: 87–93.
———. 2000. “The Impact of Drought Condtions on the Winter Distribution of Syrian Serin (Serinus syriacus)
     in South-West Jordan.” Sandgrouse, 20: 87–93.
Klaassen, R. H. G., M. Hake, R. Strandberg, and T. Alerstam. 2011. “Geographical and Temporal Flexibility in
     the Response to Crosswinds by Migrating Raptors.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B, volume 278, issue
     1710, doi: 10.1098/rspb.2010.2106.
Kock, D., Z. Amr, D. Jacobs, F. P. D. Cotterill, P. J. Taylor, and A. Monadjem. 2008. Rhinolophus clivosus. The
     IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T19531A8955923. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.
     RLTS.T19531A8955923.en.
Kock, D., Z. Amr, S. Mickleburgh, A. M. Hutson, and W. Bergmans. 2008. Asellia tridens. The IUCN Red List of
     Threatened Species 2008: e.T2154A9300360. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T2154A9300360.
     en.
Kock, D., Z. Amr, S. Mickleburgh, A. M. Hutson, W. Bergmans, and S. Molur. 2008. Taphozous perforatus. The
     IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2008: e.T21463A9282975. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.
     RLTS.T21463A9282975.en.
Kock, D., Z. Amr, S. Mickleburgh, A. M. Hutson, W. Bergmans, S. Aulagnier, J. Palmeirim, and S. Molur. 2010.
     Taphozous perforatus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 2010: e.T21463A9282696.
Levin, A. S., and G. A. Kurkin. 2013. “The Scope of Death of Eagles on Power Lines in Western Kazakhstan.”
     Raptors Conservation, 27: 240–44.
Liven-Schulman, I., Y. Leshem, D. Alon, and Y. Yom-Tov. 2004. “Causes of Population Declines of the Lesser
     Kestrel (Falco naumanni) in Israel.” Ibis, 146: 145–52.




100 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Maclean, I. M. D., M. Frederikson, and M. M. Rehfisch. 2007. “Potential Use of Population Viability Analysis to
      Assess the Impact of Offshore Windfarms on Bird Populations.” BTO Research Report No. 480 to COWRIE.
      British Trust for Ornithology, Thetford, U.K.
Madders, M., and D. P. Whitfield. 2006. “Upland Raptors and the Assessment of Wind Farm Impacts.” Ibis, 148:
      43–56.
Mallon, J. M., K. L. Bildstein, and T. E. Katzner. 2015. “In-flight Turbulence Benefits Soaring Birds.” The Auk,
      133: 79–85.
Mateos-Rodríguez, M., and F. Liechti. 2012. “How do Diurnal Long-Distance Migrants Select Flight Altitude in
      Relation to Wind?” Behavioral Ecology, 23, 403–09.
Mickleburgh, S., A. M. Hutson, W. Bergmans, and J. Fahr. 2008. Nycteris thebaica. The IUCN Red List of Threatened
      Species 2008: e.T14936A4480382. http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T14936A4480382.en.
Newton, I. 1979. Population Ecology of Raptors. Vermillion, South Dakota: Buteo Books.
———. 2008. The Migration Ecology of Birds. London: Academic Press.
Newton, I., P. E. Davis, and J. E. Davis. 1989. “Age of First Breeding, Dispersal and Survival of Red Kites (Milvus
      milvus) in Wales.” Ibis, 131: 16–21.
Newton, I., M. J. McGrady, and M. K. Oli. 2016. “A Review of Survival Estimates for Raptors and Owls.” Ibis,
      in press.
Niel, C., and J.-D. Lebreton. 2005. “Using Demographic Invariants to Detect Overharvested Bird Populations
      from Incomplete Data.” Conservation Biology, 19: 826–35.
Porter, R. F. 2005. “Soaring Bird Migration in the Middle East and North-East Africa: The Bottleneck Sites.” In
      Mainstreaming Conservation of Migratory Soaring Birds into Key Productive Sectors Along the Rift Valley/
      Red Sea Flyway, pp. 126–167. UNPD Project Document.
Qumsiyeh, M. B. 1996. Mammals of the Holy Land. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press.
Rodrigues, L., L. Bach, M.-J. Dubourg-Savage, B. Karapandza, D. Kovac, T. Kervyn, J. Dekker, A. Kepel, P. Bach, J. Collins,
      C. Harbusch, K. Park, B. Micevski, and J. Minderman. 2015. “Guidelines for Consideration of Bats in Wind Farm
      Projects – Revision 2014.” EUROBATS Publications Series No. 6 (English Version). UNEP/EUROBATS Secretariat,
      Bonn, Germany.
RSCN (Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature). 2008. Protected Areas Review of Jordan [in Arabic].
      Jordan: National Press.
Salameh, M., and Z. Amr. 2011. “Hunting Regulation Laws in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan: A Study of the
      Laws Relevant to the Multilateral Environmental Agreements that the Kingdom Has Signed” [in Arabic].
      Unpublished.
Sanz-Aguilar, A., J. A. Sánchez-Zapata, M. Carrete, J. R. Benítez, E. Ávila, R. Arenas, and J. A. Donázar. 2015.
      “Action on Multiple Fronts, Illegal Poisoning and Wind Farm Planning, Is Required to Reverse the Decline
      of the Egyptian Vulture in Southern Spain.” Biological Conservation, 187: 10–18.
Scottish Natural Heritage. 2010. “Use of Avoidance Rates in the SNH Wind Farm Collision Risk Model.” SNH
      Avoidance Rate Information and Guidance Note. Scottish Natural Heritage, Inverness.
Sharma, A. K., M. Saini, S. D. Singh, V. Prakash, A. Das, R. Bharathi Dasan, S. Pandey, D. Bohara, T. H. Galligan,
      R. E. Green, D. Knopp, and R. J. Cuthbert. 2014. “Diclofenac Is Toxic to the Steppe Eagle (Aquila nipalensis):
      Widening the Diversity of Raptors Threatened by NSAID Misuse in South Asia.” Bird Conservation International,
      24: 282–86.
Shirihai, H., and D. A. Christie. 1992. “Raptor Migration at Eilat.” British Birds, 85: 141–86.




                                                                                                       References | 101
Shirihai, H., R. Yosef, D. Alon, G. M. Kirwan, and R. Spaar. 2000. Raptor Migration in Israel and the Middle East.
      A Summary of 30 Years of Field Research.” Eilat: International Birding and Research Center.
Spiegel, O., R. Harel, A. Centeno-Cuadros, O. Hatzofe, W. M. Getz, and R. Nathan. 2015. “Moving Beyond Curve
      Fitting: Using Complementary Data to Assess Alternative Explanations for Long Movements of Three Vulture
      Species.” The American Naturalist, 185, E44–54.
Symes, A., J. Taylor, D. Mallon, R. Porter, C. Simms, and K. Budd. 2015. “The Conservation Status and Distribution
      of the Breeding Birds of the Arabian Peninsula.” Cambridge, U.K., and Gland, Switzerland: IUCN, and
      Sharjah, United Arab Emirates: Environment and Protected Areas Authority.
Wade, P. R. 1998. “Calculating Limits to the Allowable Human-Caused Mortality of Cetatceans and Pinnipeds.”
      Marine Mammal Science, 14: 1–37.
Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust (Consulting) Limited. 2012. “Developing Guidelines on the Use of Population
      Viability Analysis for Investigating Bird Impacts Due to Offshore Wind Farms.” Crown Estate SOSS. March.
Wilson, D. E., and D. M. Reeder, eds. 2005. Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographical Reference.
      Volume 1, 3rd edition. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
World Bank Group. 2015. “Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines for Wind Energy.” August 7. http://
     www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/2c410700497a7933b04cf1ef20a40540/FINAL_Aug+2015_Wind+Energy_
     EHS+Guideline.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
Yosef, R. and M. Markovets. 2009. “Spring Bird Migration Phenology in Eilat, Israel.” ZooKeys 31: 193–210.
Zalles, J. I., and K. L. Bildstein, eds. 2000. “Raptor Watches, A Global Directory of Raptor Migration Sites.”
     BirdLife Conservation Series No. 9. BirdLife International, Cambridge, U.K., and Hawk Mountain Sanctuary,
     Kempton, PA.
Zduniak, P., R. Yosef, T. H. Sparks, H. Smit, and P. Tryjanowski. 2010. “Rapid Advances in the Timing of the
     Spring Passage Migration through Israel of the Steppe Eagle (Aquila nipalensis).” Climate Research, 42: 217.




102 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex A. Regional Environmental
and Social Context



ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT
TOPOGRAPHY AND LANDSCAPE
The study area, situated on the eastern Jordan Valley, is topographically diverse. It extends from Wadi Araba at
100 m below sea level and rises eastward to 1,600 m in the Sharah Mountains (also referred to as the Southern
Highlands). The WPP sites are located in the eastern part of the study area on an approximate north–south
orientation, along the higher-altitude parts of the Rift Valley margins, adjacent to the Dana BR. The remainder of
the study area extends from the Dana BR westward across desert lowlands within the Jordan Valley (Figure A1).
Altitudinal gradients (Figure A2) in the study area give rise to its unique biological and ecological features as well
as a diversity of land uses.



FIGURE A1. TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP OF TRWPP STUDY AREA




                                                           Annex A. Regional Environmental and Social Context | 103
FIGURE A2. TRWPP CEA STUDY AREA AND SECTIONS

                                                                                                                                                              Section 2                         Jabal Al Khor

                                                                                                                       1,500
                                                                                                                      1,400
                                                                                                                       1,300                                          Eastern edge of
                                                                                                                                                                       Dana Reserve
                                                                                                                       1,200
                                                                                                                        1,100
                                                                                                                      1,000




                                                                                             Elevation in meters
                                                                                                                         900
                                                                                                                         800
                                                                                                                         700
                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                         500
                                                                                                                         400
                                                                                                                         300
                                                                                                                         200            Western edge of
                                                                                                                          100            Dana Reserve
                                                                                                                            0   Wadi
                                                                                                                                Araba
                                                                                                                       –100




                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                        5,000

                                                                                                                                                10,000

                                                                                                                                                          15,000

                                                                                                                                                                   20,000

                                                                                                                                                                             25,000

                                                                                                                                                                                       30,000

                                                                                                                                                                                                  35,000

                                                                                                                                                                                                           40,000
                                                                                                                                                           Distance in meters

                                                           Section 1          Jabal Quryat                                                                    Section 3                         Eastern edge of
                                                                              Um Shaheem                                                                                                         Dana Reserve
                      1,400                                                                                            1,300
                       1,300                                                                                           1,200
                       1,200                                                                                           1,100
                       1,100                                                                                          1,000
                      1,000
                                                                                                                         900
                         900
                                                                                                Elevation in meters
Elevation in meters




                         800                                                                                             800
                                                     Eastern edge of
                         700                          Dana Reserve                                                       700
                         600                                                                                             600
                         500                                                                                             500                                            Jabal Zureig
                         400                                                                                             400                                             Al Meerad
                         300                                                                                             300
                         200
                                       Western edge of                                                                   200
                         100            Dana Reserve
                           0                                                                                             100     Wadi
                               Wadi                                                                                              Araba
                       –100    Araba                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                              2,000
                                                                                                                              4,000
                                                                                                                              6,000
                                                                                                                              8,000
                                                                                                                            10,000
                                                                                                                             12,000
                                                                                                                             14,000
                                                                                                                             16,000
                                                                                                                             18,000
                                                                                                                            20,000
                                                                                                                             22,000
                                                                                                                            24,000
                                                                                                                            26,000
                                                                                                                            28,000
                                                                                                                            30,000
                                                                                                                             32,000
                                                                                                                            34,000
                                                                                                                            36,000
                                                                                                                            38,000
                                                                                                                            40,000
                                                                                                                            42,000
                                 0
                             2,000
                             4,000
                             6,000
                             8,000
                           10,000
                            12,000
                            14,000
                            16,000
                            18,000
                           20,000
                           22,000
                           24,000
                           26,000
                           28,000
                           30,000
                           32,000
                           34,000
                           36,000




                                                         Distance in meters                                                                                  Distance in meters



Habitat and Vegetation Cover
Biogeographical Zones
Jordan is divided into four main biogeographical zones: Irano-Turanian, Mediterranean, Saharo–Arabian, and
Sudanian Penetration (Figure A3). Vegetation cover, soil texture, altitude, and annual rainfall are among the
major factors that shaped these biogeographical regions. The figure indicates the zones; however, the transitions
between the zones are not always distinct and the transitional areas can be a mixture of the adjacent zones. This
is especially the case along the rift.

The study area is located within all but one of these biogeographical zones (the Saharo-Arabian zone). The WPP
project area, including the buffer areas, is generally located on the eastern side of the Dana BR and IBA within
the Mediterranean and Irano-Turanian biogeographical zones, described below.



104 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
  •	 The JWPC Tafila, LAMSA, Abour, and KOSPO WPPs FIGURE A3. MAIN BIOGEOGRAPHICAL ZONES OF JORDAN
     are generally in the Mediterranean zone (Mediterranean
     nonforest with sparse shrub). The Mediterranean region
     is represented by the mountain ranges extending from
     near Irbid in the north to Ra’s an Naqb in the south.
     It consists of forested vegetation, with typical species
     including Phoenician juniper (Juniperus phoenicea),
     white broom (Retama raetam), Pistacia atlantica,
     Aleppo pine (Pinus halepensis), Quercus calliprinos,
     and Vallonea oak (Quercus ithaburensis). Open areas
     are characterized by high cover of Sarcopoterium
     spinosum and Artemisia herba-alba. The altitude
     varies from 700 to 1,500 m above sea level, and
     average annual rainfall is 400 to 600 millimeters (mm).
     The soil consists of several types—terra rosa, sandy,
     and sandy-loamy—owing to erosion of the Nubian
     sandstone that dominates much of the southern part
     of Jordan, and calcareous soil in the center and north.

  •	 The Fujeij WPP is located in a mixture of the two zones,
     which includes the transition with the Irano-Turanian
     zone.36 This zone is increasingly arid, and the landscape
     becomes more Mediterranean nonforest toward the
     rift. This region is represented by a narrow strip that
     surrounds the Mediterranean biogeographical zone
     except in the far north. The Irano-Turanian region
     extends to the northeast, joining the Syrian Desert. The
     vegetation is dominated by jointed anabasis (Anabasis
     articulata), Artemesia herba-alba, Astragulus spinosum, white broom (Retama raetam), Urginea maritima, lotus
     jujube (Ziziphus lotus), bushy bean-caper (Zygophyllum dumosum), and scattered Atlantic pistachio (Pistacia
     atlantica) trees. The altitude ranges from 400 to 700 m above sea level, and average annual rainfall is 50 to
     100 mm. The layer of surface soil is very thin or absent in some areas, and surface rockiness is very high.

Vegetation Types
Jordan has 19 vegetation types (Albert and Bore, 2003), (Figure A4), 12 of which are present in the study area.
Within the WPP sites, only four of these vegetation types are represented: Mediterranean nonforest batha, batha-
steppe, Artemisia herba-alba steppe, and thorny saltwort (Noaea mucronata) brush.

Wadi System
Running along the western side of the study area is the Wadi Araba. Wadi Araba is to the west of the Dana BR and is the
name given to the section of the Jordan Valley that runs south from the Dead Sea to Aqaba. Tributary wadis run down
from the rift, east to west, into the Wadi Araba. These tributaries include Wadi Dana; those within the Dana BR are
indicated in Figure A5. These wadis are dry except during rainfall events and generally flow only as a result of flash floods.


36    This transition zone is not shown on the main biogeographical zones of Jordan in Figure A3 as the map is at a coarse scale.



                                                                     Annex A. Regional Environmental and Social Context | 105
FIGURE A4. VEGETATION TYPES IN THE TRWPP STUDY AREA




Dana Biosphere Reserve and Important Bird and Biodiversity Area
The Dana BR is Jordan’s largest nature reserve, covering approximately 300 square kilometers (km2). It was
designated as a nature reserve in 1989. It is a system of mountains and wadis, extending from the top of the eastern
Rift Valley to the desert lowlands of Wadi Araba, with an elevation drop of more than 1,600 meters.

The Dana BR contains three bio-geographical zones and four distinct vegetation zones (see Figures A3 and A4). This
condensed variety of landforms and habitats, combined with dramatic changes in elevation, results in vast biological
diversity. The total number of species recorded so far consists of 800 plant species, of which 3 were new to science,
51 mammal species, and 33 reptile species.37 Wildlife includes the sand cat (Felis margarita), the wolf (Canis lupus),
and the Egyptian spiny-tailed lizard (Uromastyx aegyptia). So far, 25 IUCN Red-List Endangered and Vulnerable
animals have been found in the Dana BR, making it an area of global importance. One unique vegetation type in the
reserve is the Phoenician juniper (Juniperus phoenicea). The most important tree species found is the Mediterranean
cypress (Cupressus sempervirens), the last such trees remaining in the region.

The Dana BR is a key example of significant major geological processes in the development of landforms. Rock and
soil formations found in the BR demonstrate the geological stages of the area. It features about 100 archaeological


37    MoENV figures, 2009.



106 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
FIGURE A5. WADIS IN THE DANA NATURE RESERVE




sites, including the ancient copper mines in Wadi Feinan, which are considered the most important archaeological
complex in southern Jordan outside of Petra.

Global environmental organizations also recognize the importance of the Dana BR and surrounding areas. In 1998
UNESCO designated the Dana BR under the Man and the Biosphere program, which aims to establish a scientific
basis for the improvement of relationships between people and their environments.38 In 2000, BirdLife International
identified the Dana IBA,39 which covers 310 km2, as a key area for the conservation of the world’s birds due to the
diverse assemblage of breeding birds of unusually mixed biogeographical origins present in the area. The Dana IBA
overlaps with the Dana BR by approximately 29.2 km2.

The Dana IBA (Figure A6) is important for resident and summer breeding species and has particular conservation
significance for the Syrian Serin (Serinus syriacus) and the griffon vulture (Gyps fulvus). Griffon vulture breeding
sites are known to be located within the Dana IBA and nowhere else in Jordan. BirdLife International also assigned
the Dana IBA a “very high” soaring bird sensitivity rating, with records of 26 of the country’s total 37 MSBs. As the


38  The Man and the Biosphere program draws on the natural and social sciences, economics, and education to improve human livelihoods
and obtain the equitable sharing of benefits, and to safeguard natural and managed ecosystems, promoting innovative approaches to
economic development that are socially and culturally appropriate, and environmentally sustainable (http://www.unesco.org/new/en/
natural-sciences/environment/ecological-sciences/man-and-biosphere-programme/about-mab/).
39  IBAs are identified as being globally important for the conservation of bird populations by the nongovernmental organization

BirdLife International, using an internationally agreed set of criteria.



                                                                   Annex A. Regional Environmental and Social Context | 107
FIGURE A6. DANA IMPORTANT BIRD AND BIODIVERSITY AREA (IBA)




WPPs lie directly adjacent to the Dana IBA, it was considered important to include the IBA area in the TRWPP study
area so that the potential cumulative effects on species relevant to the integrity of the Dana IBA could be considered.

Overlapping with the southern edge of the Dana IBA and to the south of the Dana BR is the proposed Shoubak
Nature Reserve40 (Figure A6). Currently there is no timeline for establishing this as a protected area.

The Rift Valley/Red Sea Flyway and MSBs
The Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway is the second most important flyway in the world for MSBs (raptors, storks, pelicans,
and ibises). An estimated 1.5 million birds of 37 species use this flyway to migrate between their breeding areas in
Eastern Europe and Western and Central Asia in spring and to their wintering areas in Africa in autumn (BirdLife
International, 2012, 2015). Tributary routes originating in these wintering and breeding areas converge at migration
bottlenecks as birds enter or leave Africa by routes that avoid crossing large expanses of open water (Hilgerloh, 2009;


  The proposed Shoubak protected area is located mainly in Aqaba Governorate, except for its northeastern part which is located
40 

in Ma’an Governorate. It has an area of approximately 77 km2. Like the Dana BR, the proposed Shoubak protected area represents
three main biogeographical zones: Mediterranean, Irano-Turanian, and Sudanian, with the Irano-Turanian zone covering more than
90 percent of the total area. As for vegetation types, five are identified in the area: juniper, evergreen oak, water, steppe and acacia,
and rocky Sudanian. During the rapid assessments carried out in the proposed area, 145 plant species, 44 bird species, 12 mammal
species, 10 reptile species, and 1 amphibian species had been recorded, as of the drafting of the CEA report.



108 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Shirihai et al., 2000; Zalles and Bildstein, 2000; Bildstein,
2009) (see Box).                                                          MSB Behavior and Migration Bottlenecks
Away from bottleneck sites, flyway migration routes vary     For raptors and large soaring birds that optimize their energy
between the spring and autumn seasons and according to       expenditure during migratory flight by making use of columns
the origin and destination of individual species (Figure
                                                             of rising air (thermals and/or updrafts) (Figure A7) that develop
A8). In autumn, many of the migrants breeding west of
                                                             over land, traveling over water is energetically demanding
the Ural Mountains (e.g., the lesser spotted eagle, Levant
sparrowhawk, and honey buzzard) funnel through the           and risky.

Bosphorus in Turkey, and then head southeast, passing
along the eastern edge of the Mediterranean Sea. Species
that breed further east (e.g., the steppe buzzard,
steppe eagle, and black kite) use routes between the
Black and Caspian Seas or routes to the south of the FIGURE A7. D
                                                                 IAGRAM OF A BIRD USING A THERMAL (LEFT) TO
Caspian Sea, continuing on a broad front through                GAIN ALTITUDE, EXITING THE THERMAL, LOSING
Arabia and crossing into Africa at the southern                 ALTITUDE, AND THEN REGAINING ALTITUDE BY
end of the Red Sea. In spring, most species avoid               TAKING ADVANTAGE OF AN UPDRAFT (RIGHT)
this crossing and instead head up the west side of
the Red Sea, cross the Gulf of Suez and the Sinai
Peninsula to Eilat. From here, the majority of birds
head northward following the Jordan Rift Valley,
with more easterly breeding species heading eastward
across the top of the Arabian Peninsula.

Evidence from migration studies at Eilat suggests
that migration through southern Jordan is likely
to involve larger numbers of birds during the
northward spring migration than the southward
autumn migration (Shirihai et al., 2000; Shirihai
                                                              Source: unknown, obtained from http://www.paulnoll.com/Oregon/Birds/flight-
and Christie, 1992; Leshem and Yom-Tov, 1998).41              soaring-diagram.html (Accessed January 2017).
                                                              As a consequence, MSBs, in particular those species that largely rely on moving
However, due to a lack of observational data from             between thermals to migrate, avoid crossing large areas of water whenever pos-
                                                              sible. This results in these species funneling toward migration bottlenecks. These
the south of Jordan, this supposition cannot currently        are locations along a migration route where sea crossings are minimal, or narrow
                                                              land bridges between areas of sea occur (Newton, 2008). During the spring and
be verified.                                                  autumn migrations, birds are concentrated at these locations due to both the
                                                              funneling effect of birds from disparate origins arriving at these crossing points
Soaring Bird Migration over TRWPP Area                        and because good thermal conditions are needed to enable these species to gain
                                                              adequate height before making even a short sea crossing. Examples of migra-
The key migration bottlenecks along the Rift                  tion bottlenecks away from the Middle East include the Strait of Gibraltar (Spain)
                                                              between Europe and Africa, and the Bosphorus (Turkey) between Europe and
Valley/Red Sea flyway are located along the Red               Asia (Zalles and Bildstein, 2000; Bildstein, 2009).

Sea coast, the Gulf of Suez, and the Gulf of Aqaba
(Porter, 2005). Eilat, the bottleneck nearest to the
study area, is approximately 100 km south of the study area in Israel. The moderate distance from Red Sea
bottleneck locations and favorable thermal conditions throughout the study area result in low to moderate
levels of MSB migratory activity depending on the time of day, season, and other environmental conditions.


 Birdlife International. Soaring bird sensitivity map, a users’ guide. http://migratorysoaringbirds.undp.birdlife.org/en/sensitivity-
41 

map-instructions. (Accessed March 2015).



                                                                   Annex A. Regional Environmental and Social Context | 109
FIGURE A8. MIGRATION ROUTES OF RAPTORS (SPRING VS. AUTUMN) AND MAJOR WATCH POINTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST




Source: Shirihai et al. 2000.
Routes: A: black kite, honey buzzard, buzzard, lesser spotted eagle, and Levant sparrowhawk. B: black kite, honey and steppe buzzards, a few steppe
and lesser spotted eagles, and Levant sparrowhawk. C: honey buzzard, lesser spotted eagle, and Levant sparrowhawk. D: lesser spotted and steppe
eagles. E: steppe eagle. F: steppe eagle, steppe buzzard, and black kite. G: lesser spotted eagle, steppe eagle, steppe buzzard, and black kite. H: Steppe
eagle, steppe buzzard, black kite, and Levant sparrowhawk.
Vantage points: 1- Bosphorus, 2-East Pontics, 3-Iskenderun, 4-Southeast Caspian, 5-Kfar Quassem and Northern Valleys, 6-North Negev and Dead
Sea, 7-Suez, 8-Eilat, 9-Kuwait, 10-Strait of Hormuz, 11-North Yemen, 12-Bab el Mandab.




On a given day, the species composition and number of individuals of each species observed will relate to
species-specific migration schedules and the migratory behavior of the species (Shirihai et al., 2000). For MSBs
that typically migrate dispersed across a broad front (e.g., Egyptian vulture, harriers, and some falcons), the
proportion of a flyway population flying through the study area is likely to be small because the migration
corridor is wide. Movements of these species through an area like the TRWPP will typically involve single
or small groups of birds. Conversely, narrow-front migrants (e.g., the common crane, black and white stork,
honey buzzard and steppe buzzard), which restrict themselves to relatively narrow migration corridors, tend
to move in larger flocks and thus may constitute a higher proportion of the flyway population.

Social Context
The majority of the study area is within the Tafila Governorate, with areas in the south in the Governorates of
Aqaba and Ma’an (Figure A9); however, topographically and socially the study area is more linked to the Tafila
Governorate. The WPP sites are located in the Tafila Governorate,42 with the exception of Fujeij, which is located
in the Ma’an Governorate.

42    Tafila is also spelled Tafilah and Tafileh.




110 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Summary of Tafila Governorate                                 FIGURE A9. GOVERNORATES OF THE TRWPP STUDY AREA

The Tafila Governorate is one of 12 governorates in the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Located 184 km south
of Amman, it is bordered by the Al Karak Governorate
to the north and the Ma’an and Aqaba Governorates
to the south. It covers an area of approximately 2,209
km2, equal to 2.5 percent of the total area of Jordan. The
population of Tafila in 2011 was estimated at 87,500,
approximately 2.5 percent of Jordan’s population. The
governorate is one of the least populated in the country,
with the population spread among 35 towns and villages.

The governorate depends mainly on tourism from other
parts of the country visiting the nature reserves and hot
springs. Agriculture is considered to be the third largest
sector in the governorate after tourism and archeology.
Fruit and olive cultivation, covering 42 km2, predominates,
with 31 km2 occupied by olive farms.

Key employment sectors in the governorate include the
service sectors (education, vocational training, health, and
local government), productivity sectors (agriculture, tourism,
and archaeology) and infrastructure sectors (irrigation,
public works, and electricity). The majority of employment
comes from the service sectors. Unemployment rates are
high in Tafila, at 17.5 percent compared with the national
average of 13.5 percent. According to the Tafila Directorate of Social Development (2012), the poverty rate is one
of the highest in the country at 17.2 percent, with approximately 10.4 percent of the population receiving subsidies
from the Directorate of Social Development.

Land Ownership and Use
There is a mixture of land ownership in the study area. The Dana BR is government land whereas the areas outside
the reserve are either privately owned or government lands. As is the case in most of Jordan, the land in the area is
divided among tribes on the basis of watershed and pasture. Historic ownership of tribal lands, referred to as tribal
fronts, is still acknowledged and is based on formal agreements or semiformal understandings between tribal groups.
Private ownership also follows the distribution of the tribes that have inhabited the area over centuries.

Local Communities and/or Tribes and Land Uses
Tribes can be divided into three groups on the basis of their distribution in the study area and their seasonal
movements and land uses:

 •	 TRWPP Eastern Part: The eastern part of the study area is inhabited by the semi-nomadic tribe of Al-Hajaya.
    The landscape in this area, including areas around some of the WPPs, is moderately hilly and rocky with
    sparse vegetation. Sheep and goats graze in WPP areas, and there is some small-scale, low-intensity agriculture



                                                              Annex A. Regional Environmental and Social Context | 111
    (e.g., wheat, cereals). Dwellings in the study area are limited to small towns and villages, including those of
    Gharandal, Bsaira, Al-Ees, and Al-Qadisiyyeh. In addition, semi-nomadic Bedouin settlements, mainly tents,
    are present seasonally.

 •	 TRWPP Northern Part: The northern part of the TRWPP, in particular around Gharandal and Al-Ees, is inhabited
    by the Saudiyyeen tribes, whereas the areas around Al-Qadisiyyeh to the south are owned by members of the
    Atatah tribes. Tribes use land located in the study area to grow cereal crops and allow their livestock to graze.
    Their livestock is present in the WPP areas during spring and summer, and moves westward into the Dana BR
    from winter to early spring. They are allowed access to the Dana BR on the basis of an agreement signed with
    the RSCN, the managing entity of the BR.

 •	 TRWPP Western Part: The western lower part of the study area in Wadi Araba is inhabited by a mix of semi-
    nomadic Bedouin tribes that include Saidiyyeen, Ammarin, Rashaydeh, and Azazmeh. These tribes do not
    extend into the WPP areas and mainly use the westernmost part of the study area during winter, accessing
    the Dana BR during spring and summer on the basis of an agreement signed with the RSCN. Over the past
    several decades, the government has encouraged members of these tribes to abandon their nomadic lifestyle,
    and as a result, these tribes are becoming semi-nomadic. Villages present in this part of the TRWPP have been
    established for specific tribes. For example, Gregra, the oldest village in the area, is inhabited by the Ammarin
    and Saidiyyeen. The recently established Feynan village is inhabited by the Rashaydeh, and Ghwebbeh is
    inhabited by the Azazmeh. The Azazmeh are originally from the Negev and moved into Wadi Araba after the
    establishment of the Israel on their lands in 1948. The Azazmeh are therefore the only tribe in the area that
    does not “own” a tribal front.

Movement of Semi-nomadic Bedouin Livestock Owners
The movement of the Bedouin livestock owners follows the change in vegetation cover and the availability of
pasture. They are generally present in their highest densities in the study area in the spring to autumn, from
March/April until late September/October. They spend the rest of the year in the east. Movements of Bedouin
and their livestock may vary from year to year and are dependent on the timing of seasonal changes. In some
years, depending on rainfall and onset of cold weather, the eastward movement can take place in early September
or in late November. Similarly, movements in spring are likely to be determined by the availability of pasture in
wintering areas and/or summering areas.

Land Uses and the Wind Power Projects in the CEA
It should be noted that, as is the case for many wind energy projects, the WPPs in the CEA will not restrict the use
of land by livestock owners (whether semi-nomadic or local communities). This is considered to be a benefit of
the WPP, as land use is not restricted. That said, ongoing pastoralist land use influences how some birds, notably
vultures, use the area. This is described further in Section 3 in this report.




112 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement




INTRODUCTION AND STAKEHOLDER LIST

This annex summarizes the stakeholder engagement activities that were undertaken throughout the CEA process.
All stakeholder interactions were recorded in stakeholder consultation logs and meeting minutes, a summary of
which is provided here.

SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGEMENT PER CEA PHASE

Stakeholder engagement, which took place both bilaterally and multilaterally, was the cornerstone of the CEA
process. Table B1 summarizes the main stakeholder engagement activities per each CEA phase43 and the outcomes
per engagement. For details on the attendees, see Tables B2, B3, and B4 in this annex.




                                                                                           Verreaux’s Eagle – Aquila verreauxii


43    The CEA phases are described in Section 2 of the main body of this report.



                                                                                   Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement | 113
TABLE B1. SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES PER CEA PHASE


                                                                                                                             BILATERAL OR
     CEA PHASE              DATE(S)           TYPE OF ORGANIZATION          ORGANIZATION NAME                                MULTILATERAL   SCOPE OF THE MEETING                               OUTCOMES

Phase 1: Scoping         19 January 2015      Ministries and government     MoEnv                                                 B         To present the CEA concept and approach and        Summary of Outcomes:
                         19 January 2015      departments                   Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources              B         seek stakeholder views, opinions and data on
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 Overall, there was positive support for the CEA concept and feedback was
                                                                            (MEMR)                                                          the development and scope of the CEA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  given in relation to the CEA approach and scope.
                         20 January 2015                                    Department of Antiquities (DoA) in Ministry of        B
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 The scoping phase engagement highlighted some key issues that informed
                                                                            Tourism and Antiquities (MoTA)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  the CEA approach, including the shortage of ornithologists and qualified
                         21 January 2015                                    Jordan Investment Commission (JIC)                    B                                                               surveyors, capacity issues, and the need for data confidentiality for certain
                         20 January 2015      Developers                    EDAMA                                                 M                                                               stakeholders.
                                                                            KOSPO                                                                                                              •	 The potential VECs were identified and discussed in addition to existing data
                                                                            Abour                                                                                                                 and data needs.
                                                                            Tafila
                                                                            LAMSA
                         20 January 2015      Conservation organizations,   American University of Madaba (AUM) and               M
                                              academia and civil society    Jordan BirdWatch
                                              organizations                 BirdLife International Middle East



                                                                            BirdLife International HQ (Cambridge) via
                                                                            teleconference
                                                                            RSCN
Phase 2: Supplemen-      14–16 April 2015     TRWPP CEA workshop focused on birds and bats including bird survey training         M         Three weeks of in-field training of bird survey-   •	 The workshop comprised a number of sessions, culminating with a field visit
tary Data Collec-                                                                                                                           ors to build capacity                                 to the JWPC Tafila WPP, which was under construction at the time, and the
tion and Capacity                                                                                                                                                                                 Dana BR.
Building
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 Key discussion points raised in each session were recorded in minutes of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                  workshop and have been considered in the CEA process.
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 See ‘TRWPP CEA workshop focused on birds and bats including bird survey
                                                                                                                                                                                                  training’, which provides details on the workshop and the in-field training
                                                                                                                                                                                                  provided to surveyors.
                          19 April 2015       Conservation organizations,   AUM and Jordan BirdWatch                              B         To discuss field methodology, VECs, and the        •	 Provide input on the field methodology, e.g., categorization of primary and/
                                              academia and civil society                                                                    preliminary Significance and Sensitivity Matrix       or secondary species and field survey species.
                                              organizations
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 Discuss the concern that the new access roads for the wind farm may
                                                                                                                                                                                                  provide access for hunters to areas that had formerly been hard to reach.
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 Review habitat VECs, e.g., discuss the concern for potential issues related to
                                                                                                                                                                                                  creating barriers for north–south movement of tortoise.
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 Verify the apparent absence of griffon vultures in the TRWPP area.
                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 Agree on the boundaries of the TRWPP area for the CEA.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (continued on next page)




114 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE B1. SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES PER CEA PHASE (continued )


                                                                                                           BILATERAL OR
    CEA PHASE             DATE(S)        TYPE OF ORGANIZATION         ORGANIZATION NAME                    MULTILATERAL   SCOPE OF THE MEETING                            OUTCOMES

                        20 April 2015   Conservation organization     BirdLife International Middle East        B                                                         •	 Provide input on the field methodology, e.g., categorization of primary and/
                                                                                                                                                                             or secondary species field survey species, survey stratification approach, dis-
                                                                                                                                                                             cussion of peak and nonpeak effort and suggested durations, the maximum
                                                                                                                                                                             distance of observation (2 km) from the VP.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Provide input into the preliminary Significance and Sensitivity Matrix, e.g.,
                                                                                                                                                                             classifications used and relation with BirdLife Soaring Birds Sensitivity Map.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Verify the apparent absence of griffon vultures in the TRWPP area.
                        20 April 2015   Conservation organization     RSCN                                      B                                                         •	 Input in the field methodology, e.g., effort and issues around adjacent VP
                                                                                                                                                                             (chance of double-counting).
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Discuss suggestions for postconstruction monitoring, e.g., involve Bedouin,
                                                                                                                                                                             employ dogs to detect dead raptors).
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Discuss concern that the new access roads for the wind farm may provide
                                                                                                                                                                             access for hunters to areas that had formerly been hard to reach easily.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Planning the next meeting in Jordan around the timing of events for World
                                                                                                                                                                             Migratory Bird Day 2015.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Verify the apparent absence of the griffon vulture in the TRWPP area.
                        23 April 2015   Conservation organizations,   AUM and BirdWatch Jordan                  B         Follow-up meetings to discuss field methodol-   •	 Final comments on the issues discussed in a meeting on 20 April 2015. The
                         7 May 2015     academia, and civil society                                                       ogy, VECs, and a preliminary Significance and      AUM (Dr. Khoury) provided a document on sensitive resident and/or breeding
                                        organizations                                                                     Sensitivity Matrix                                 bird populations in TRWPP:
                        28 May 2015
                                                                                                                                                                            •	 Likely to be affected will be those species breeding along the adjacent rift
                                                                                                                                                                               margins and frequently or occasionally foraging on hilly mountain plateaus
                                                                                                                                                                               beyond (east of) the ridge
                                                                                                                                                                            •	 Sensitive species include the griffon vulture, short-toed eagle, long-legged
                                                                                                                                                                               buzzard, and Bonelli’s eagle
                                                                                                                                                                            •	 Factors related to WPPs affecting these populations are described (includ-
                                                                                                                                                                               ing habitat loss, loss of ecological connectivity, increased disturbances,
                                                                                                                                                                               various developments, and hunting)
                        23 April 2015   Conservation organizations    BirdLife International Middle East        B                                                         •	 Obtain formal feedback on the documents on field methodology, VECs, and
                         1 May 2015                                                                                                                                          the preliminary Significance and Sensitivity Matrix
                         7 May 2015                                                                                                                                       •	 Address the concern about increase in hunting, given the increased access as
                         8 May 2015                                                                                                                                          a result of the WPP access roads.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Add inputs related to the habitat VEC.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Discuss the apparent absence of griffon vultures in the TRWPP area.
                        23 April 2015   Conservation organizations    RSCN                                      B                                                         •	 Obtain formal feedback on the documents on field methodology, VECs, and
                         7 May 2015                                                                                                                                          the preliminary Significance and Sensitivity Matrix.
                        28 May 2015                                                                                                                                       •	 Obtain formal comments on postconstruction monitoring.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Address the concern about the increase in hunting, given the greater access
                                                                                                                                                                             resulting from the WPP access roads.
                                                                                                                                                                          •	 Discuss the apparent absence of the griffon vulture in the TRWPP area.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (continued on next page)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement | 115
TABLE B1. SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES PER CEA PHASE (continued )


                                                                                                                            BILATERAL OR
     CEA PHASE              DATE(S)           TYPE OF ORGANIZATION          ORGANIZATION NAME                               MULTILATERAL   SCOPE OF THE MEETING                             OUTCOMES

                           11 June 2015       Ministries and government     MoEnv                                                M         Kick-off meeting of the AC:                      •	 Clarified the AC members’ role, i.e., to discuss and feedback information from
                                              departments                                                                                                                                      AC with their respective stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                                           •	 To present and agree on the outcomes of the
                                              Developers                    Abour (developers’ representative)                                scoping (phase I)                             •	 AC members agreed on
                                              Conservation organizations,   RSCN
                                                                                                                                           •	 To agree on next steps                          •	 CEA objectives
                                              academia, and civil society   BirdLife International Middle East
                                              organizations                                                                                                                                   •	 The current geographic scope of the CEA (WPPs: Abour, KOSPO, JWPC
                                                                            AUM and Jordan BirdWatch                                                                                             Tafila, and LAMSA), and that Fujeij will be approached for possible inclu-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 sion in the geographic scope
                                                                                                                                                                                              •	 Definitions of what the CEA is and is not
                                                                                                                                                                                              •	 The CEA process and the intervention points expected from them
                                                                                                                                                                                              •	 All selected VECs
                                                                                                                                                                                              •	 Next steps, provisional milestones, and next meetings of the AC
                                              IFIs                          EIB (Eva Mayerhofer) via teleconference                                                                         •	 On the AC member’s suggestion to include tourism (including visual impact),
                                                                                                                                                                                               it was agreed that the literature examples of wind farms on tourism would
                                                                                                                                                                                               be explored, the possibility of a joint evaluation of this for all projects would
                                                                                                                                                                                               be explored by the AC, with the understanding that IFC PSs do not cover this
                                                                                                                                                                                               aspect.
                                                                            IFC (In addition to the CEA team, investment
                                                                                                                                                                                            •	 Selection of priority bird species to be included in the CEA will be distributed
                                                                            officers Jaikishin Asnanai and John Mantzavi-
                                                                                                                                                                                               to the AC in July.
                                                                            natos via teleconference, country officer Dr.
                                                                            Ahmed Attiga                                                                                                    •	 An update of spring fieldwork for birds was presented.
                                                                                                                                                                                            •	 Results of additional analysis (in addition to project-specific data and beyond
                                                                                                                                                                                               the CEA projects’ direct area of influence) to support the CEA were presented.
Phase 3: CEA Frame-      7 October 2015       Ministries and government     MoEnv                                                M         2nd AC Meeting:                                  •	 Fujeij WPP agreed to contribute data to the CEA.
work and Assess-                              departments
                                                                                                                                           •	 To present and discuss the proposed CEA       •	 AC members agreed on
ment                                          Developers                    Abour (developers’ representative)                                Framework
                                                                                                                                                                                             •	 Categories of species populations used for CEA framework
                                              Conservation organizations,   RSCN
                                                                                                                                           •	 To present and discuss initial results
                                              academia, and civil society                                                                                                                    •	 Steps 1–5 of CEA framework
                                                                            BirdLife International Middle East
                                              organizations                                                                                •	 To review the approach for moving forward
                                                                            AUM and Jordan BirdWatch                                                                                         •	 Having further bilateral meetings with experts on the AC to discuss the
                                                                                                                                                                                                results of each step and refined the approach
                                                                                                                                                                                             •	 That monitoring will happen for all species and adaptive management will
                                                                                                                                                                                                be undertaken
                                                                                                                                                                                            •	 The following suggestions were made by AC members and taken on board:
                                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Information management and sharing to be covered in step 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Addition of step 6, “Institutional Arrangements/
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Information Management/Management Program” to the CEA Frame-
                                                                                                                                                                                                   work
                         14 October 2015      Conservation organizations    RSCN                                                 B         To discuss in more detail the Framework          Discussion with members of the ERP.
                                                                                                                                           that was presented in the AC meeting of 7
                                                                                                                                                                                            •	 The RSCN provided distribution maps of all resident bird species that it had
                                                                                                                                           October 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                               prepared in cooperation with Dr. Fares Khoury.
                                                                                                                                                                                            •	 The RSCN was invited to participate in discussions of steps 1–2 (categories 2
                                                                                                                                                                                               and 4) with BirdLife International and Dr. Fares Khoury.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (continued on next page)




116 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE B1. SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES PER CEA PHASE (continued )


                                                                                                            BILATERAL OR
    CEA PHASE             DATE(S)        TYPE OF ORGANIZATION          ORGANIZATION NAME                    MULTILATERAL   SCOPE OF THE MEETING                                 OUTCOMES

                       19 October 2015   Conservation organizations    RSCN                                      M         To discuss “Consultation Package #1” for the         Discussion with members of the Expert Review Panel:
                                                                                                                           Master List (Step 2, Category 2–4)
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Agreement on the master list for categories 1 and 2
                                                                       BirdLife International Middle East
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Adjustments to the master list for categories 3 and 4
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Adjustments to “downlist” or “uplist” species on the basis of available esti-
                                                                                                                                                                                   mates from the RSCN and/or BirdLife for category 2 species.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Category 4 species: not possible to provide population estimates for these
                                                                                                                                                                                   species but the team provided an estimate of the national population per-
                                                                                                                                                                                   centage occurring in the TRWPP area (including the Dana BR and IBA).
                      3 November 2015    Conservation organizations    RSCN                                      M         To discuss “Consultation Package #2” (Step 2,        Discussion with members of the Expert Review Panel:
                                                                       BirdLife International Middle East                  Category 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Agreement on the consultation sheet (importance plus vulnerability scores)
                                                                                                                                                                                   sent by the CEA team, except for the Levant sparrowhawk, European honey
                                                                                                                                                                                   buzzard, steppe buzzard, for which clarification was given by the NRP.
                      16 November 2015   Conservation organizations    RSCN                                      B         Meeting with RSCN GIS Unit team to discuss           •	 The RSCN agreed to vegetation and biogeographical maps that show the
                                                                                                                           the possibility of cooperation in providing data        coverage of the habitats and zones inside TRWPP.
                                                                                                                           and maps for the CEA framework regarding
                                                                                                                           habitats
                      18 November 2015   Conservation organizations    RSCN                                      M         To discuss “Consultation Package #3” (Step 3,        Discussion with members of the Expert Review Panel:
                                                                       BirdLife International Middle East                  Categories 1, 3, and 4)
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 The logic behind the rating and categorization of the different grades was
                                                                                                                                                                                   not clear to the stakeholders (likelihood of effect plus risk rating). Stakehold-
                                                                                                                                                                                   ers requested follow-up meeting with CEA team on this aspect. This was
                                                                                                                                                                                   covered in the meeting on 29 November 2015.
                      25 November 2015   Conservation organizations    RSCN                                      B         Meeting with RSCN GIS Unit team to discuss           •	 The RSCN agreed to provide distribution maps for bat species in the TRWPP.
                                                                                                                           the possibility of cooperation in providing data
                                                                                                                           and maps for the CEA framework regarding
                                                                                                                           bats and to review the habitat maps that were
                                                                                                                           provided earlier
                      29 November 2015   Conservation organizations,   RSCN                                      M         To discuss “Consultation Package #3” (Step 3,        Discussion with members of the Expert Review Panel:
                                         academia and civil society    BirdLife International Middle East                  Categories 1, 3, and 4) (second meeting)
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Agreement on rating (likelihood of effect plus risk rating), except for steppe
                                         organizations
                                                                       AUM and Jordan BirdWatch                                                                                    eagle, for which clarification was asked from CEA team
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Discussion of consultation packages #1 and #2: request to CEA team for
                                                                                                                                                                                   more clarification on Levant sparrowhawk, European honey buzzard, steppe
                                                                                                                                                                                   buzzard
                      2 December 2015    Conservation organizations    RSCN                                      B         Meeting with the RSCN fauna research team            •	 Overview of available data in the Dana BR and IBA, and plans for bat survey
                                                                                                                           to discuss the availability of data on bats in the      there
                                                                                                                           Dana BR and IBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (continued on next page)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement | 117
TABLE B1. SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES PER CEA PHASE (continued )


                                                                                                                 BILATERAL OR
     CEA PHASE              DATE(S)           TYPE OF ORGANIZATION          ORGANIZATION NAME                    MULTILATERAL   SCOPE OF THE MEETING                             OUTCOMES

                        17 December 2015      Ministries and government     MoEnv                                     M         3rd AC Meeting:                                  •	 AC members agreed on
                                              departments
                                                                                                                                •	 Presentation of the results of step 1–3       •	 Meeting with ERP to
                                              Developers                    Abour (developers’ representative)
                                                                                                                                •	 Discussion of the thresholds approach           •	 Identify thresholds (threshold decision tree in step 4) using practical
                                              Conservation organizations,   RSCN
                                                                                                                                                                                      knowledge and inputs from various stakeholders
                                              academia, and civil society                                                       •	 Review of methods and outcomes of step 4
                                                                            BirdLife International Middle East
                                              organizations                                                                                                                        •	 Identify potential measures to address external stressors for the Mitigation
                                                                            AUM and Jordan BirdWatch                            •	 To present preliminary mitigation and moni-
                                                                                                                                                                                      and Monitoring Strategy (step 5).
                                                                                                                                   toring (step 5)
                                                                                                                                                                                   •	 Propose a working mechanism for step 6 focused on a potential “central
                                                                                                                                •	 To discuss ideas for management program
                                                                                                                                                                                      reporting mechanism and/or adaptive management” to be incorporated
                                                                                                                                   and institutional arrangements (step 6)
                                                                                                                                                                                      within the CEA
                                                                                                                                                                                 •	 IFC will develop a draft Mitigation and Monitoring Strategy to be proposed
                                                                                                                                                                                    for review by the developers focus group.
                                                                                                                                                                                 •	 AC members will provide feedback and comments to the draft RSCN Guide-
                                                                                                                                                                                    lines for Wind Energy.
                                                                                                                                                                                 •	 The proposed bats and habitats and other species frameworks.
                                                                                                                                •	 To present the bats and habitats and other    •	 Timeline for draft final report, next AC meeting, final report, and launching
                                                                                                                                   species frameworks, to present the RSCN          event of CEA report
                                                                                                                                   National Guidelines for Wind Energy
                        14 December 2015      Developers                    Abour, KOSPO, and JWPC Tafila             M         To review preliminary ideas on mitigation and    •	 Developers gained familiarity with the preliminary three-pronged approach
                                                                                                                                monitoring (step 5) with the developers             for mitigation and monitoring (on-site, intersite, and joint measures)
                                                                                                                                                                                 •	 Developers agreed to review a draft framework and provide comments, once
                                                                                                                                                                                    it was developed by the CEA team.

                        27 December 2015      Conservation organizations,   RSCN                                      M         To discuss “Consultation Package #4” (step 4:    •	 The ERP requested clarification from the CEA team on
                                              academia, and civil society   BirdLife International Middle East                  thresholds)
                        28 December 2015                                                                                                                                           •	 How potential biological removal (PBR) figures were calculated
                                              organizations
                                                                            AUM and Jordan BirdWatch
                                                                                                                                                                                   •	 The threshold for the booted eagle
                                                                                                                                                                                   •	 Adding other external stressors for the lesser kestrel
                                                                                                                                                                                   •	 Why the steppe eagle was scoped out and did not reach step 4 despite its
                                                                                                                                                                                      passage in relatively large numbers in Jordan in general and the perception
                                                                                                                                                                                      that more individuals are probably wintering in the country and around
                                                                                                                                                                                      Tafila
                                                                                                                                                                                 •	 The ERP agreed that all raptor species face at least a low impact of each of
                                                                                                                                                                                    the stressors.
                                                                                                                                                                                 •	 The ERP supports the idea of a study on other stressors as one has never
                                                                                                                                                                                    been done in the country.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (continued on next page)




118 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE B1. SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES PER CEA PHASE (continued )


                                                                                                              BILATERAL OR
    CEA PHASE             DATE(S)          TYPE OF ORGANIZATION          ORGANIZATION NAME                    MULTILATERAL   SCOPE OF THE MEETING                               OUTCOMES

                       12 January 2016     Conservation organizations,   RSCN                                      M         To discuss “Consultation Package #5” (step 5:      Discussion of proposed mitigation and monitoring measures and suggestions
                                           academia, and civil society   BirdLife International Middle East                  mitigation and monitoring)                         made with the Expert Review Panel:
                                           organizations
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Need for another look at the VECs that were dropped earlier so as to be con-
                                                                                                                                                                                   sidered in the future (including intrinsic appeal of wind farms and archaeol-
                                                                                                                                                                                   ogy)
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Prepare a conservation action plan for the griffon vulture since it is one of
                                                                                                                                                                                   the most important VECs in the area and all recommended actions and
                                                                                                                                                                                   monitoring could be put under this conservation action plan.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Vulture restaurants do not seem to be a valid option for the future since the
                                                                                                                                                                                   preliminary results from the established ones in the Dana BR/IBA do not
                                                                                                                                                                                   show any significant activity.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Hunting control, livestock and/or grazing management, and a local commu-
                                                                                                                                                                                   nities outreach plan are the three main pillars of monitoring and actions that
                                                                                                                                                                                   need to be carried out to ensure the safety of the major VECs in the area.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Habitat monitoring and its relation to livestock grazing and urban develop-
                                                                                                                                                                                   ment is important.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Agreed document would be amended and shared for review again.
                     End of January 2016   Developers                    Abour, KOSPO, and JWPC Tafila             M         To review and discuss the draft Mitigation,        Developers met without the CEA team and sent comments to the team.
                                                                                                                             Monitoring, and Management Plan
                       20 January 2016     Ministries and government     MoEnv                                     B         To discuss options for step 6 (institutional ar-   Draft, Concept Note on Enhancement of the MoEnv’s Compliance and Audit
                                           departments                                                                       rangements and information management)             Function for the Wind Energy Sector
                       18 February 2016
                      29 February 2016     Developers                    Abour, KOSPO, and JWPC Tafila             M         To review and discuss developers’ comments         The CEA team and developers discussed all aspects of the draft plan. The CEA
                                                                                                                             on the draft Mitigation, Monitoring, and Man-      team incorporated agreed comments.
                                                                                                                             agement Plan
                        2 March 2016       Ministries and government     MoEnv (excused)                           M         4 th AC Meeting:                                   AC members agreed on
                                           departments
                                                                                                                             •	 Presentation of CEA Report progress             •	 The necessity to train new personnel for in-flight monitoring of priority birds
                                           Developers                    Abour (developers’ representative)                                                                        in response to the current limited number of trained experts in the field.
                                                                                                                             •	 Summary of outcomes
                                           Conservation organizations,   RSCN
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Monitoring to be undertaken during both summer and winter.
                                           academia, and civil society                                                       •	 Focus on step 5 (Mitigation, Monitoring, and
                                                                         BirdLife International Middle East
                                           organizations                                                                        Management Plan) and step 6 (Management         •	 Shutdown on demand for priority birds with a clearly defined protocol is a
                                                                         AUM and Jordan BirdWatch (excused)                     Program and Institutional Arrangements)            very efficient and effective mitigation measure with clear communication as a
                                                                                                                                                                                   condition for success.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Having a clear process for carcass searches that is based on good practice
                                                                                                                                                                                   and learned lessons is important.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Vulture restaurants might be considered as mitigation measures in the
                                                                                                                                                                                   future based on more documentation of their activity. Suggested biodiversity
                                                                                                                                                                                   offset of development of a special conservation area within the study area will
                                                                                                                                                                                   be removed from the MMP due to the possibility of attracting birds to the WPP
                                                                                                                                                                                   sites, which is undesirable.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Developers working together is considered a best practice as they could
                                                                                                                                                                                   learn from each other and have consistent review.
                                                                                                                                                                                •	 Potential cooperation between the Developers’ Internal Committee and
                                                                                                                                                                                   BirdLife will be discussed in a separate bilateral meeting between these
                                                                                                                                                                                   groups.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (continued on next page)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement | 119
TABLE B1. SUMMARY OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES PER CEA PHASE (continued )


                                                                                                                     BILATERAL OR
     CEA PHASE              DATE(S)           TYPE OF ORGANIZATION   ORGANIZATION NAME                               MULTILATERAL   SCOPE OF THE MEETING                     OUTCOMES

                                                                                                                                                                             •	 Potential for establishing a joint survey of breeding birds jointly funded by
                                                                                                                                                                                the developers—the RSCN will provide a rough estimate of the program and
                                                                                                                                                                                cost.
                                                                                                                                                                             •	 IFC supports the RSCN’s Guidelines for Wind Energy and could express that
                                                                                                                                                                                to the government.
                                                                                                                                                                             •	 IFC will explore donor funding opportunities to build MoEnv capacity and
                                                                                                                                                                                then to develop a connection between the MoEnv with technical AC (prob-
                                                                                                                                                                                ably RSCN and BirdLife) with respect to the CEA management program.
                                                                                                                                                                             •	 IFC will explore the possibility of translating the Final CEA to Arabic.
                                                                                                                                                                             •	 Next steps: review the process of the draft CEA report, finalizing, editing and
                                                                                                                                                                                publishing, launching event.
                                                                                                                                                                             •	 The final CEA report will be considered for use as best practice by BirdLife
                                                                                                                                                                                and will be presented on as many occasions as possible, including The IUCN
                                                                                                                                                                                Congress 2016 (Hawaii).
                           March 2016         All of the above       BirdLife International Middle East, RSCN, AUM        B         Comment period for CEA and Response to   Comments on the CEA received and responded to
                                                                     and Jordan BirdWatch, MoENV, Abour, KOSPO,                     Comments
                                                                     LAMSA, and JWPC Tafila, EBRD, EIB




120 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
STAKEHOLDER LIST

The following individuals were represented in the various stakeholder meetings that took place over the life of
the project.


TABLE B2. STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED—MINISTRIES AND GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS


                                          MINISTRIES AND GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS

    MoEnv                                                      H.E. Dr. Taher Al Shakhshir             Minister for Environment
                                                               Ezzat Abu Hamra                         Director of Licensing and Permitting
                                                                                                       Directorate
                                                               Abdul Kareem Ashalabi                   EIA Head of Section
                                                               Ahmad Qatarneh                          Secretary General
                                                               Belel Qtishat                           Nature Protection Directorate
    Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR)            Omar Momani                             Director of RE and EE Directorate
                                                               Yacoub Marar                            Head of Solar Energy Section
    Department of Antiquities (DoA) in the Ministry of         Aktham O. Abbadi                        Director of Excavations and Surveys
    Tourism and Antiquities (MoTA)                             Khalil Hamdan                           Director of Museums
    Jordan Investment Commission (JIC)                         Dr. Khaled Al-Momani                    Director of Urban Planning and
                                                                                                       Infrastructure



TABLE B3. STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED—DEVELOPERS


                                                                 DEVELOPERS

    EDAMA                                Yara Abdel Samad                                      CEO
    KOSPO                                Tae Yong Lee                                          Electrical I&C Manager
                                         Abdullah Thabah Al-Jamal                              Electrical Engineer
    Abour                                Dr. Naser Hasweh                                      Abour Wind Energy Company
                                         Fereydoon Abtahi                                      Abour Wind Energy Company
    JWPC Tafila                          Sean Miller                                           Project Manager
    LAMSA                                Adam Pringle                                          Project Manager
    KEPCOa                               (various)

a
 Note that the engagement with KEPCO took place on a bilateral basis with IFC only. This developer was not present at any of the formal stakeholder
engagement meetings.




                                                                                              Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement | 121
TABLE B4. STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED—CONSERVATION ORGANIZATIONS, ACADEMICS, AND CIVIL SOCIETY
ORGANIZATIONS


               CONSERVATION ORGANIZATIONS, ACADEMICS, AND CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS

 AUM and Jordan BirdWatch        Fares Khoury         AUM Biology and Biotechnology Faculty
 BirdLife International Middle   Osama Al Nouri       Project Coordinator, Migratory Soaring Birds
 East and Headquarters           Sharif Jbour         CEPF RIT Project Officer for Middle East
 (Cambridge)
                                 Marcus Kohler        Senior Program Manager (Flyways), BirdLife International, Cambridge
 Royal Society for the           Rasha Haymour        Conservation Technical Officer
 Conservation of Nature          Tareq Qaneer         Bird Researcher
 (RSCN)
                                 Abdul Razzaq Hmoud   Head of Wildlife Law Enforcement Section and National Project
                                                      Manager of the UNDP BirdLife migratory soaring birds project
                                 Mohammed Za’rour     Director of Strategic Development
                                 Nashat Hamidan       Manager of Ecological Research Centre/Department
                                 Natalia Boulad       RSCN GIS Unit
                                 Qamar AlMimi         RSCN GIS Unit
                                 Omar Abed            RSCN Fauna Research Unit
                                 Thabet Sharee        RSCN Fauna Research Unit



TWRPP CEA Workshop focused on Birds and Bats                             ORKSHOP TRAINERS AND ORNITHOLOGICAL
                                                              TABLE B5. W
including Bird Survey Training (April 14–16, 2015)                          SPECIALISTS


In April 2015, IFC organized a three-day workshop                  TRAINER/
and associated in-field training, which was led by                SPECIALIST               PROFESSIONAL POSITION
Natural Research Projects Ltd. and supported by other
                                                               D. Jackson              Director and Senior Research Ecologist,
ornithological, bat, and impact assessment specialists.                                Natural Research Projects Ltd
Training comprised three days of workshop sessions             S. Pinder               Research Ecologist, Natural Research
(14–16 April 2015), focusing primarily on best practice                                Projects Ltd
                                                               A. Camina Cardenal      IFC Technical Adviser
in ornithological and bat survey methods for wind
                                                               M. Mackintosh           Director, Claverton Associates Ltd
energy impact assessments, combined with one-to-
                                                               Zuhair Amr              Professor, Jordan University of Science
one in-field training in applying best practices at the
                                                                                       and Technology
TRWPP sites conducted over the period 29 March to
                                                               Laith El-Moghrabi       Independent bird expert
22 April 2015.




122 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
           TTENDEES AT THE TAFILA WIND FARM CEA WORKSHOP FOCUSED ON BIRDS AND BATS (APRIL 14–16, 2015)
TABLE B6. A


                                     MINISTRIES AND GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS

MoEnv                                Ezzat Abu Hamra               Director of Licensing Directorate
                                     Hanin Abu Hamra               Green Economics
                                     Belal Qtishat                 Natural Protection Directorate – Biodiversity
Ministry of Energy and Mineral       Ali Khawaldah                 Renewable Energy and EE Directorate
Resources (MEMR)                     Arwa Abukashef                Renewable Energy and EE Directorate

                                                         DEVELOPERS

EDAMA                                Yara Abdel Samad              CEO
KOSPO                                Lee Ju-Mong                   Senior Manager/Business Development Department
                                     Abdullah Al Jamal             Electrical Section Head
Abour                                Fereydoon Abtahi              Abour Wind Energy Company
JWPC Tafila                          Sean Millar                   Project Manager
LAMSA                                Adam Pringle                  Project Manager

               CONSERVATION ORGANIZATIONS, ACADEMICS, AND CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS

BirdLife International Middle-East   Osama Al Nouri                Project Coordinator, Migratory Soaring Birds
                                     Sharif Jbour                  CEPF RIT Project Officer for Middle East
                                     Tareq Qaneer                  Bird Researcher
Royal Society for the Conservation   Abdel Razzaq Al-Hmoud         Head of Wildlife Law Enforcement Section and National
of Nature (RSCN )                                                  Project Manager of the UNDP BirdLife MSB Project
                                     Mohammad Zarour               Director of Strategic Development
Dana Nature Reserve                  Malik Awaji                   Ecologist
American University of Madaba        Fares Khoury                  Professor
JUST                                 Zuhair Amr                    Professor
Independent Bird Expert              Laith El-Moghrabi             N/A
Independent Bird Expert              Ibrahim Hasani                N/A
BirdWatch                            Roberto Massis                Jordan BirdWatch, Jordan Tour Guides Association

                                                    CONSULTING COMPANIES

Enviromatics                         Majdi Salameh                 Director and Lead Consultant
Arabtech Jardaneh                    Khaled Nassar                 Head of Environment
                                     Ashraf Ma’ani                 Senior Environment Engineer
                                     Rasha Tomaira                 Senior Environmentalist

                                 DONORS/INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

EBRD                                 Omonullah Sadullakhujaev      Associate Banker




                                                                               Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement | 123
TABLE B7. WORKSHOP SESSIONS AND TOPICS COVERED


                                                                DAY 1

Session 1: ESIA and CIA – Key Differences and Consideration                                                           Dr. D. Jackson

•	 Defining the CIA and how it differs from an ESIA

•	 The importance of delivering an assessment that embraces the past, present, and future condition of the social
   and environmental components

•	 The range and importance of stakeholder involvement in the process

•	 The need to recognize that there is no “one right way” of assessment and mitigation
Session 2: ESIA Scoping and Information Requirements                                                                  Dr. D. Jackson

•	 Types of baseline information used in the CIA

•	 The importance of consulting with developers and the existing ESIA for the Tafila Wind Energy Project to address
   knowledge gaps relating to wind farm design, siting, area of influence, and plausible mitigation measures

•	 Positive and negative impacts on VECs (birds, bats, habitats, and people)

•	 The potential range of impacts on VECs affected

•	 Introduction to international best practice guidelines for assessing the effects of wind energy developments on
   wildlife
Session 3(a): Priority Bird Species                                                                                   Dr. D. Jackson

•	 The types of bird species populations (e.g., migratory, breeding) using the TRWPP area and the characteristic
   level of risk for each of these population groups

•	 The characteristics and scale of the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway and its relevance to the TRWPP area

•	 The criteria that define a priority bird field survey list
Session 3(b): Survey Design Principles                                                                                Dr. D. Jackson

•	 Types of baseline survey

•	 Baseline survey program design, and balancing data quality and affordability

•	 Types of survey effort required to conduct collision risk modeling

•	 Spatial survey effort (geographical survey coverage from VP) – recommended approach, guidance, and poten-
   tial pitfalls

•	 Temporal survey effort (duration and timing of VP watches) recommended approach, guidance, and potential
   pitfalls
Session 4: Bats: Priority Species and Survey Methods                                                                  Dr. D. Jackson

•	 Global conservation status of bats

•	 Characteristics of bat movements and migration within Jordan

•	 Reasons why bats are attracted to wind farms

•	 Review of the scale of effects on bats of the TRWPP

•	 Best practice guidelines for conducting bat surveys in the Tafila area
                                                                                                             (continued on next page)




124 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE B7. WORKSHOP SESSIONS AND TOPICS COVERED (continued )


                                                                DAY 2

Session 5: Bird Survey Methods                                                                                         Dr. D. Jackson

•	 Flight activity VP field survey method and best practice

•	 Field data entry of survey effort, weather, occurrence of target species, and flight activity for “primary target
   species” using standard recording forms

•	 Techniques for mapping flight routes for primary target species

•	 The “Band” collision risk model—explaining the method
Session 6: Case Study: Migration Patterns in Spain                                                                        Alvaro
                                                                                                                         Camina
•	 Characteristics of migration patterns in Spain, with particular emphasis on raptor migration
                                                                                                                         Cardenal
•	 Relationship between collision rate and passage rate of migrant raptors
Session 7: Impact Assessment                                                                                           Dr. D. Jackson
•	 The importance of assessing the long-term sustainability of each VEC at each stage of the project
•	 The aims of an impact assessments
•	 Concepts of acceptable change, mitigation, offsetting, and residual impact
Session 8: Lessons Learned: Griffon Vulture Case Studies (Spain)                                                          Alvaro
                                                                                                                         Camina
•	 The effectiveness of vulture restaurants in reducing mortality at wind farms
                                                                                                                         Cardenal
•	 The need to account for changing vulture foraging patterns relating to macro-environmental change and
   changes in prey type and availability
Session 9: Mitigation and Monitoring
•	 The importance of postconstruction analysis to check if predicted assessments are realized and if proposed
   mitigation is adequate
•	 Types of mitigation and the extent to which they may be effective in Jordan
Session 10: Summary of CIA
•	 Review of achievements so far, in particular developers using unified migration survey methods
•	 Next steps including developing a standardized bird survey, consulting on how to calculate impacts for TRWPP,
   and establishing a list of priority bird VECs

                                                                DAY 3

Tafila Wind Energy Project. Field Study Visit                                                                            VESTAS
                                                                                                                         Environ-
•	 On site introduction to the history associated with developing the Tafila wind farm
                                                                                                                       ment, Health
•	 Breeding raptor survey at the adjacent Dana BR                                                                      and Services
•	 Levels of hunting and/or shooting at the wind farm site                                                              Manager;
                                                                                                                       Malik Alawaji
•	 Protocol on finding bird fatalities at site                                                                           (RSCN)
Due to time and weather constraints, a demonstration of survey techniques was not possible during the field visit.

                                                   MARCH 29–APRIL 22, 2015

Three weeks of in-field training applying best practices at the TRWPP sites conducted                                  Simon Pinder,
                                                                                                                         Laith El-
An additional one-to-one in-field training was conducted, aimed at the surveyors identified to undertake the
                                                                                                                         Moghrabi
Spring 2015 Flight Activity Surveys for the TRWPP sites. Eight bird surveyors were trained as part of this program.
The objective was to support the development of capacity in Jordan to plan and conduct bird surveys, applying a
standardized methodology in order to provide consistency in approach.




                                                                                        Annex B. Stakeholder Engagement | 125
126 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
ANNEX C. CEA Regulatory, Policy,
and Guidance Framework



NATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDANCE

REGULATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA)

The Jordanian EIA Regulation (No. 37, 2005)44 requires EIAs to describe the project and environmental baseline,
impacts to be assessed, and mitigation measures to be developed. The Regulation, which in part reflects international
practice on EIAs, provides screening criteria and guidance on projects that require a comprehensive EIA, a
preliminary EIA study, or no EIA. Although international EIA practice and some legal frameworks45 have evolved
to consider cumulative effects, Jordan’s EIA Regulation presently does not require such a consideration—therefore,
cumulative effects tend not to be assessed in Jordan. This CEA is the first to be conducted in any sector in Jordan.

Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), which relates to potential impacts of government-wide or sector-wide
policies, plans, or programs, is in its infancy in Jordan. It is being piloted as a tool in some development zones and
special economic areas. SEA is not covered fully within the national regulations, and no SEA of the wind sector
in Jordan has been undertaken to date.

THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY STRATEGY AND ACTION PLAN

Jordan has a long-standing commitment to biodiversity. The country became a signatory to the Convention on
Biological Diversity in 1993 and in 2001 to the Convention on Migratory Species (1979). As part of its commitments
to the Convention on Biological Diversity, Jordan published its second National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
Plan (NBSAP) (2015–2020) in 2014.46 The NBSAP, which sets out Jordan’s strategic approach to conserving
biodiversity, notes the challenges to biodiversity conservation in the country, namely:

  •	 Habitat destruction (as a result of uncontrolled overgrazing, urban expansion, water use etc.)
  •	 Wildlife persecution
  •	 Alien and exotic species invasion
  •	 Inadequate tourism development
  •	 Recent challenges with the influx of refugees
  •	 Underlying issues of the low awareness of biodiversity, weak governance, lack of connections between science
     and development, inadequate knowledge systems, and an absence of sustainable financing for biodiversity-
     related programs

The CEA acknowledges the importance of biodiversity in Jordan as outlined in the NBSAP. Table C1 shows how
the CEA is aligned with the NBSAP and indicates how CEA proposals could assist, in part, in supporting NBSAP
implementation.

44  Except for within the Aqaba Special Economic Zone, which has its own regime for enterprise permitting and environmental appraisal.
45  European Union, EIA Directive 2014/52/EU.
46  https://www.cbd.int/doc/world/jo/jo-nbsap-v2-en.pdf.




                                                           ANNEX C. CEA Regulatory, Policy, and Guidance Framework | 127
TABLE C1. SUMMARY OF CEA ALIGNMENT AND POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTION TO THE NBSAP (2015–2020)


NBSAP PRIORITIES AND KEY PERFORMANCE                          TRWPP CEA ALIGNMENT AND/OR POTENTIAL
INDICATORS (KPIs)                                             CONTRIBUTION TO DELIVERY OF NBSAP PRIORITY/KPIs

Jordan’s biogeographical regions and representative           The CEA habitats assessment used updated maps of the biogeographi-
ecosystems and vegetation types (pp. 18–20)                   cal regions and vegetation types from the RSCN.
The NBSAP states that the proportion of threatened            The CEA considers IUCN threat levels to identify species sensitivity for
species to the total number of species is very high,          the identification of priority bird VECs.
especially for mammals, where 13 out of 83 mammals
(15.6 percent) are considered globally threatened
(pages 21 and 29).
The NBSAP Jordan states that “Jordan’s location by the        This CEA was undertaken precisely because of the importance of the
Great Rift Valley makes the country one of the most           Great Rift Valley.
important flyways and resting points for migratory
birds in the spring and autumn. Hundreds of thousands
of birds cross the area yearly....” (pp. 21 and 28 (regard-
ing the IBA)).
Protected Area Networks (p. 23)                               The CEA recognizes the Protected Areas Network and has considered
                                                              the Dana BR within its geographical scope.
Threats to biodiversity (p. 32)                               The CEA acknowledges the threats to biodiversity and, specifically,
                                                              habitat destruction and/or degradation due to the development of
                                                              infrastructure and to overgrazing and persecution of wildlife (i.e.,
                                                              illegal hunting and trading of species). These external threats in the
                                                              landscape are reflected in the methods applied in the assessment of
                                                              cumulative risks for bird species in the CEA.
Illegal hunting (p. 34)                                       The CEA addresses illegal hunting by explicitly considering it as one of
                                                              the external stressors to wildlife.
Threat of climate change (p. 35)                              The CEA addresses the threat of climate change to biodiversity (p. 35)
                                                              by helping support more sustainable investments in the wind sector.
Stakeholder engagement, public participation and              By engaging stakeholders from nongovernmental organizations and
raising awareness, including the following: raising           the scientific communities as well as the private sector, the CEA is
awareness and mobilizing stakeholders in the conser-          aligned with the NBSAP principles of improving public participa-
vation of biodiversity (p. 36); improved public participa-    tion, mobilizing stakeholders to be more involved in decision-making
tion in environmental processes and decision-making           processes related to biodiversity, and raising awareness on biodiversity
frameworks (p. 37); public awareness of biodiversity as       issues related to the wind sector.
one of the underlying causes of biodiversity loss (p. 37);
improved involvement of civil society in the decision
making process with regard to biodiversity (p. 38); and
NBSAP implementation arrangements through stake-
holder engagement (p. 83).
Addressing the underlying causes of biodiversity loss,        The approach of linking the scientific community (e.g., the RSCN, Bird-
including:                                                    Life, and academics) and the wind power project developers as part of
                                                              the AC for the CEA contributes to improving connections between the
•	 Lack of connection between scientific and develop-
                                                              scientific and development agendas with regard to the wind sector.
   ment agendas (p. 38)
                                                              The CEA recommendations for data sharing and centralized report-
•	 Inadequate knowledge management (p. 39)                    ing as part of the joint mitigation and monitoring strategy, along with
                                                              the proposals for institutional arrangements and information sharing,
                                                              could also contribute to addressing these NBSAP priorities.
Strategic directions toward an improved NBSAP global          The CEA is aligned in this regard with the NBSAP requirement to e.g.,
alignment (p. 51)                                             “Encourage and facilitate the interinstitutional collaboration in the
                                                              various fields of biodiversity while allowing for more specialization;
                                                              Enhance the participation and involvement of national stakeholders—
                                                              and particularly local communities—in the design, implementation,
                                                              and evaluation of national biodiversity strategies and programs at the
                                                              central and site-based levels.”
                                                                                                                 (continued on next page)



128 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE C1. SUMMARY OF CEA ALIGNMENT AND POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTION TO THE NBSAP (2015–2020) (continued )


NBSAP PRIORITIES AND KEY PERFORMANCE                        TRWPP CEA ALIGNMENT AND/OR POTENTIAL
INDICATORS (KPIs)                                           CONTRIBUTION TO DELIVERY OF NBSAP PRIORITY/KPIs

Setting the National Targets (p. 54)                        The CEA addresses some of the identified key factors influencing
                                                            biodiversity (e.g., weak governance systems and structures related
                                                            to biodiversity, ongoing disconnect between scientific research and
                                                            development programs, lack of adequate documentation).
The 2050 Vision (p. 55)                                     The principles behind the CEA are aligned with the 2050 Vision state-
                                                            ment in the NBSAP.
The 2020 Strategic Goals (p. 56)                            The CEA is aligned with the 2020 Strategic Goals, more specifically:
                                                            goal VI on the strengthening of participative planning approach;
                                                            goal VII on the response to human-induced pressures; goal VIII on
                                                            protected areas, priority species, and genetic resources; and goal X on
                                                            knowledge management and monitoring.

                                                            THE CEA IS ALIGNED WITH THE NBSAP, AND THE
                                                            RECOMMENDATIONS PRESENTED WITHIN THE CEA
NBSAP KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS                            COULD CONTRIBUTE TO A NUMBER OF THE NBSAP KPIs,
(KPIs)                                                      INCLUDING THE ITEMS BELOW.

•	 KPI 1.2, Biodiversity integrated into key development sector strategies
•	 KPIs 2.1–2.2, National Biodiversity Committee NBC
•	 KPI 4.2, Nature Conservation Directorate at the MoEnv: implement a human resources training program
•	 KPI 4.4, National biodiversity monitoring system
•	 KPIs 5.1–5.3, Participative national biodiversity planning protocol
•	 KPI 6.1, Biodiversity program portfolio established and maintained
•	 KPI 9.3, National database for biodiversity hotspots updated
•	 KPI 9.5, All impacts of development projects associated with biodiversity hotspots eliminated or at least minimized
•	 KPI 11.1, Biodiversity conservation articles integrated into the new rangeland strategy
•	 KPI 11.2, Key wild and/or native rangeland species conservation programs initiated
•	 KPI 12.1, Renewable energy wind regulations adequately address biodiversity conservation
•	 KPI 14.1, Status of key wildlife and game species assessed
•	 KPI 14.2, Wildlife hunting regulations reviewed
•	 KPIs 16.1–16.6, KPIs on protected areas
•	 KPI 18.1, Status of key terrestrial and freshwater fauna assessed and conservation action plans implemented
•	 KPI 18.2, National database for terrestrial and freshwater fauna red list established, updated, and addressed in all relevant
   strategies and action plans
•	 KPIs 21.1–21.3, Ecosystem benefits
•	 KPI 23.1, Understanding of climate change impacts on biodiversity
•	 KPI 26.1, National initiatives on biodiversity information systems harmonized and integrated within the CHM Central Clearing
   House Mechanism
•	 KPI 26.2, NBC working group on biodiversity knowledge and comprehensive map of Jordan’s biodiversity
•	 KPI 26.3, Series of scientific research protocols on biodiversity research developed and updated regularly




                                                             Annex C. CEA Regulatory, Policy, and Guidance Framework | 129
NATIONAL LEGAL FRAMEWORK ON HUNTING

Jordan is a leader in wildlife conservation in the Middle East. The country ratified laws and regulations to address
wildlife hunting not long after the kingdom was established in 1946 and subsequently ratified several international
and regional environmental agreements.

The MoEnv is the principal governmental entity specializing in environmental protection and is responsible for
international multilateral environmental agreements.47 In 2006, Jordan established the Royal Department for
Environmental Protection within the MoEnv to implement and enforce environmental protection and wildlife
conservation laws and regulations. This ministry works with Jordan’s RSCN to prepare and implement wildlife
conservation laws and regulations. The Ministry of Agriculture produces most laws related to wildlife hunting,48
provisions licenses for import and export of animals and plants, and licenses zoos.49

The approach to hunting control has evolved from the first hunting law in 1934, issued by Prince Abdullah
before independence, to Agriculture Law No. 44 of 2002, which details in 72 articles species, hunting seasons,
and regions where species can be hunted; to a 2008 bylaw that outlines species banned from being hunted.
The 2008 bylaw covers more than 250 bird species, 30 mammals, and 10 reptile species in three appendices50
organized according to threat levels, with those species most severely threatened in Appendix I. The severity of
hunting penalties corresponds to the appendix in which the species is listed. The highest penalty is imprisonment
for a period of four months and a fine of JD 2,000 for each bird/animal shot.

The CEA highlights and addresses the effects of illegal hunting on wildlife in Jordan by explicitly incorporating
estimates of the magnitude of these external stressor effects into the assessment of species-specific long-term
viability for priority VECs.

RSCN GUIDELINES FOR WIND ENERGY DEVELOPMENT IN JORDAN

The RSCN is dedicated to the conservation of biological diversity in Jordan. As a nongovernmental organization with
a governmental mandate to establish protected areas and as BirdLife International’s local partner in Jordan, the RSCN
has focused significantly on conservation of bird populations. In recognition of the growing demand for wind energy
in Jordan and its potential impact on migratory and resident bird species, RSCN is developing guidelines for wind
energy development in cooperation with BirdLife International’s Middle East Division and national experts.51 The
guidelines, which focus on bird monitoring during the preconstruction, construction, and postconstruction phases of
wind projects, build on experience from across the world and refer to several national and international guidelines,
including the World Bank Group’s Environment, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines for Wind Energy (2015).



47  These agreements and conventions, to which many countries are signatories, such as the Convention on Migratory Species, the
Convention on Biological Diversity, and the Convention on the International Trade of Endangered Species of Flora and Fauna. For
details, see http://www.unep.org/delc/MEAImplementationSupport/tabid/54401/Default.aspx.
48  Agriculture Law No. 44 of 2002, http://www.ecolex.org/details/legislation/agriculture-law-no-44-of-2002-lex-faoc046440/.

49  The Ministry delegated responsibility for wildlife conservation laws, regulations, and by-laws to the RSCN.

50  Appendix I includes 36 bird species, including 17 soaring bird species such as the griffon vulture (Gyps fulvus), Egyptian vulture

(Neophron percnopterus), and Eastern imperial eagle (Aquila heliaca). This appendix also includes 13 mammal species, including
Nubian ibex (Capra nubiana) and 4 marine turtle species. Appendix II lists 103 bird species, including 15 soaring birds such as golden
eagle (Aquila chrysaetos), short-toed snake-eagle (Circaetus gallicus), and long-legged buzzard (Buteo rufinus). The list also includes
9 mammal species and several reptiles and amphibian species. Appendix III includes 134 bird species, 12 mammal species, and 10
reptile species.
51  The CEA team contributed comments to the RSCN.




130 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
The main focus of the RSCN Guidelines is bird monitoring during the preconstruction, construction, and
postconstruction phases of a project. The Guidelines were in development when the CEA was being prepared.

INTERNATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDANCE DOCUMENTS

IFC PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ON ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY

The IFC Performance Standards (PS) on Environmental and Social Sustainability (2012)52 set out the E&S requirements
for investment and advisory projects financed by IFC. They are recognized as an international benchmark for
achieving E&S sustainability in private sector projects in emerging markets. The PS also serve as the backbone of
the “Equator Principles,”53 E&S standards that have been voluntarily adopted by more than 80 financial institutions,
including commercial banks and export credit agencies.

Each of the eight PSs is supported by an accompanying Guidance Note (GN):

  •	 PS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

  •	 PS2: Labor and Working Conditions

  •	 PS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention

  •	 PS4: Community Health, Safety, and Security

  •	 PS5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

  •	 PS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources

  •	 PS7: Indigenous Peoples

  •	 PS8: Cultural Heritage

PS 1 and PS 6 are directly relevant to this CEA and are summarized in the following sections.

PS1—Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks
The objectives of PS1 are as follows:

  •	 To identify and evaluate the E&S risks and impacts of the project

  •	 To adopt a mitigation hierarchy to anticipate and avoid, or where avoidance is not possible, minimize, and,
     where residual impacts remain, compensate and/or offset for risks and impacts to workers, affected communities,
     and the environment

  •	 To promote improved environmental and social performance of clients through the effective use of management
     systems

  •	 To ensure that grievances from affected communities and external communications from other stakeholders
     are responded to and managed

  •	 To promote and provide means for adequate engagement with affected communities throughout the project
     cycle on issues that could affect them and to ensure that relevant E&S information is disclosed and disseminated.


52    http://ifc.org/sustainabilityframework.
53    http://www.equator-principles.com/.



                                                      Annex C. CEA Regulatory, Policy, and Guidance Framework | 131
PS1 addresses cumulative impacts. Paragraph 8 states that “…environmental and social risks and impacts will
be identified in the context of the project’s area of influence.” It also states that the project’s area of influence
encompasses “[c]umulative impacts that result from the incremental impact, on areas or resources used or directly
impacted by the project, from other existing, planned or reasonable defined development at the time the risks and
impact identification process is conducted.”

Where multiple projects occur or are proposed for a geographic area, IFC may require clients to conduct a
cumulative impact assessment (CIA54) as part of the identification of risks and impacts to inform MMPs. GN1
recognizes that in certain instances, where multiple projects (existing and future) are planned by different third
parties over a long period, a cumulative assessment by one individual project developer may not be appropriate
and a more regional or sectoral assessment may be more applicable.

The TRWPP CEA has been developed to address the cumulative effects of the five WPPs. The cumulative effects
have been considered in determining the area of influence for the CEA, to inform the geographical scope. The
CEA objectives, as outlined in Section 1.2, align directly with the PS1 objective of identification and evaluation of
E&S risks and impacts of a project. The other PS1 objectives and requirements pertaining to mitigation hierarchy,
use of management systems to improve environmental and social performance, engagement, and disclosure of
information also informed the approach to the CEA and to which the CEA is aligned. The recommendations of
the CEA would support a project developer in achieving PS1 requirements.

PS 6—Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
The objectives of PS6 are as follows:

  •	 To protect and conserve biodiversity

  •	 To maintain the benefits that arise from ecosystem services

  •	 To promote sustainable management of living natural resources through the adoption of practices that integrate
     conservation needs and development priorities

PS6 reinforces the mitigation hierarchy introduced in PS1 (avoid, minimize, restore, compensate and/or offset)
and outlines requirements related to biodiversity offsets, which may be considered only after other options have
been exhausted.

The participating WPPs within the TWRPP study area would be subject to the natural habitat requirements of
PS6, which require “no net loss” (NNL) of biodiversity, where feasible. GN6 defines NNL as “the point at which
project-related impacts on biodiversity are balanced by measures taken to avoid and minimize the project’s
impacts, to undertake on-site restoration and finally to offset significant residual impacts, if any, on an appropriate
geographic scale (e.g., local, landscape-level, national, regional).” NNL is implemented in practice through the
identification of biodiversity values that are monitored through time with respect to the NNL goal. The identified
priority VECs in the CEA would be considered the focus of NNL in the TWRPP study area.



54 As noted in Section 1.2, priority VECs were selected on the basis of risks rather than on the significance of predicted impacts over a
defined time period. It is for this reason that the term “cumulative effects assessment” was chosen for this initiative. IFC’s publication
Cumulative Impact Assessment and Management: Guidance for the Private Sector in Emerging Markets Good Practice Handbook
recognizes the interchangeability of these two terms. See http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_
site/ifc+sustainability/learning+and+adapting/knowledge+products/publications/publications_handbook_cumulativeimpactassessment.



132 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
WORLD BANK GROUP ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR WIND ENERGY

IFC’s PSs are supported by the World Bank Group general and industry-specific EHS Guidelines.55 These are technical
reference documents containing general and industry-specific examples of good international industry practice (GIIP)
that provide a performance benchmark for new facilities at a reasonable cost. In 2015, a revised EHS Guidelines for
Wind Energy was published, covering both onshore and offshore wind energy facilities. The Guidelines present a
summary of the EHS issues for wind power projects, along with recommended mitigation measures and monitoring
performance indicators. Of the many aspects relevant to this CEA, three are highlighted here:

  •	 Where multiple wind farm facilities are located in the same geographical area and near areas of high biodiversity
     value, developers are encouraged to implement a coordinated approach to surveys and monitoring. The Guidelines
     mention that a common survey methodology and approach lends itself to cumulative impact assessment, as data
     collection methods and the level of effort could be standardized. The TWRPP CEA takes this approach. The
     Guidelines encourage cumulative impact assessments in cases where multiple wind farms are located near areas of
     high biodiversity value. In the case of the TWRPP CEA, the area of high biodiversity value is the Dana BR and IBA.

  •	 Where multiple wind farm facilities are located in the same geographical area and close to areas of high biodiversity
     value, the Guidelines encourage wind project developers to implement common postconstruction monitoring
     procedures so that results can be assessed cumulatively. This aligns with the TWRPP CEA recommendations on
     monitoring. The Guidelines suggest that a common data-sharing and reporting mechanism would facilitate this
     process. The TWRPP CEA recommends an approach that involves the government of Jordan.

  •	 Wind farm developers are also encouraged to make postconstruction monitoring results available to relevant
     stakeholders.

IFC’S CUMULATIVE IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT: GUIDANCE FOR THE PRIVATE SECTOR IN EMERGING
MARKETS, GOOD PRACTICE HANDBOOK

IFC’s Good Practice Handbook Cumulative Impact Assessment and Management: Guidance for the Private Sector
in Emerging Markets (2013) guided the TWRPP CEA process. The Handbook refers to a six-step process for
cumulative assessments, drawing primarily from good practice established in the United States and Canada. The
CEA provided a good opportunity to test elements of the 2013 Handbook with respect to the reaches of private
sector biodiversity management.

Though the TWRPP CEA process generally aligns with the process outlined in the Handbook, there are some
differences, largely due to the limited data on migratory and resident soaring birds. For instance, although Jordan’s
regulatory framework on hunting control is strong, there are very limited data on this and other external stressors
in Jordan.

The approach recommended in the Handbook for assessing the expected “future condition of the VEC” (Handbook
Step 4, “Assess cumulative impacts”) was not possible in the context of the TWRPP CEA due to limited data
regarding biodiversity values.56 This will often be the case in many middle-income and developing countries
where regional biodiversity data are scarce. The Handbook’s Step 5 (“Assess significance of predicted cumulative
impacts”) also differs from the CEA: the TWRPP CEA uses a risk assessment methodology, whereas the Handbook
estimates impacts over a defined period of time.

55    http://ifc.org/ehsguidelines.
56    The lack of biodiversity values for developing countries is a common issue.



                                                               Annex C. CEA Regulatory, Policy, and Guidance Framework | 133
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT E&S PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

E&S requirements for EBRD investments include its Environmental and Social Policy (2014),57 10 Performance
Requirements (PRs), plus national legislation and relevant EU directives, regardless of a project’s jurisdiction. The
EBRD is committed to promoting European Union environmental standards as well as the European Principles
for the Environment, to which it is a signatory, and which are also reflected in the PRs.

The two PRs directly relevant to this CEA are summarized in the following subsections.

PR1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Impacts and Issues
PR1 establishes the importance of

  •	 integrated assessment to identify the environmental and social impacts and issues associated with projects and

  •	 environmental and social performance throughout the life of a project.

PR1 objectives are largely aligned with IFC PS1.58 Para. 9 of PR1 addresses cumulative impacts. It states that
“Additionally, the assessment process will consider cumulative impacts of the project in combination with impacts
from other relevant past, present, and reasonably foreseeable developments as well as unplanned but predictable
activities enabled by the project that may occur later or at a different location….” The CEA has been developed
in alignment with PR1, and the recommendations of the CEA, if implemented, would support a project developer
in achieving PR1 requirements.

PR6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
PR6 recognizes that the conservation of biodiversity and sustainable management of living natural resources are
fundamental to environmental and social sustainability. Para. 8 of PR6 addresses the topic of cumulative impacts on
biodiversity. It states that “The assessment should also consider direct, indirect and cumulative impacts and evaluate
the effectiveness and feasibility of the mitigation measures to be applied to the project.” PR6 also emphasizes the
importance of the mitigation hierarchy concept with the aim of achieving NNL of biodiversity, and where appropriate,
a net gain of biodiversity, as does IFC PS6. The CEA identifies priority VECs, which would be considered the focus
of NNL and would be defined as “priority biodiversity features” in PR6. The TWRPP CEA sets threshold values
for each priority VEC and recommends a set of mitigation and management measures. Monitoring measures are
designed to determine long-term compliance with the NNL goal. The CEA was developed generally in line with the
principles outlined in PR6, and, if implemented, would support a project developer in achieving PR6 requirements.

EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK

The EIB’s lending strategy is underpinned by the promotion of sustainable development and specifically the
preservation for future generations of environmental and social capital that exists today. The EIB Statement on
Environmental and Social Principles and Standards (200959) sets out the bank’s policy context for the protection
of the environment and human well-being. The EIB Environmental and Social Handbook60 provides an operational
translation of those standards across 10 thematic areas, including “assessment and management of environmental




57  Available at http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/research/policies/esp-final.pdf.
58  The EBRD’s PR10 addresses stakeholder engagement.
59  http://www.eib.org/attachments/strategies/eib_statement_esps_en.pdf.

60  http://www.eib.org/attachments/strategies/environmental_and_social_practices_handbook_en.pdf.




134 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
and social impacts and risks,” “stakeholder engagement,” and “biodiversity and ecosystems”—with which the
CEA is generally aligned.

BIRDLIFE INTERNATIONAL’S MSB PROJECT

BirdLife International is working with the United National Development Program and the Global Environment
Facility on the MSB Project to conserve soaring birds during migration along the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway. The MSB
Project aims to integrate conservation of visiting birds into five key sectors: agriculture, energy, hunting, tourism,
and waste management. The MSB project is working with 11 countries within the flyway, including Jordan.

The CEA incorporates many of the tools and approaches offered by the project. The project’s Soaring Bird Sensitivity
Map, which provides information on the distribution of soaring birds along the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway, was
used to identify priority bird VECs in this CEA. In addition, the CEA is aligned with MSB wind sector guidance61
to help donors, partners, governments, and developers integrate bird and biodiversity concerns into wind projects:

  •	 The MSB guidance recommends an assessment of cumulative impacts during planning and construction
     phases of a wind power project. The guidance highlights that the cumulative effects of successive wind power
     projects may exceed the capacity of the population to regenerate, in which case the bird population will go
     into decline. The CEA’s Framework for Birds (Section 3) considers the cumulative effects of the five WPPs on
     a species population’s viability and capacity to regenerate.

  •	 The CEA recognizes the MSB recommendation of using shutdown on demand as an effective tool for safeguarding
     MSB populations transiting through wind energy developments sited along the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway.
     Shutdown on demand for priority bird VECs is a key element of the mitigation approach proposed in the CEA
     (Section 3.6).

  •	 Other mitigation and monitoring actions recommended in the CEA align with those proposed within the MSB
     guidance, such as VP surveys, carcass searches, and the implementation of an adaptive management approach
     based on monitoring results.

  •	 The CEA reflects additional MSB guidance for developers and donors, including the following:

        •	 Consulting ornithological and conservation experts regarding the assessment methodology

        •	 Committing to adaptive management of wind farm operations

        •	 Recognizing that ongoing monitoring data should be used to inform mitigation activities

        •	 Ensuring that mitigation measures are implemented according to expert opinion

        •	 Working with other developers in the region to reduce cumulative impacts—the novel approach in the
           CEA of the developers participating in this process together demonstrates alignment with the approach
           encouraged in the MSB guidance

        •	 Recommending making data available in a centralized source—as an investor, IFC has advocated the sharing
           of data during the CEA initiative and the participating developers have shared data on their WPPs




61    http://migratorysoaringbirds.undp.birdlife.org/en/documents.




                                                              Annex C. CEA Regulatory, Policy, and Guidance Framework | 135
   •	 Engaging developers, government representatives, conservation organizations, academia, and other civil
      society groups during the CEA directly aligns with the approach recommended in the MSB guidance

   •	 Providing funding (by IFC and developers) for the generation of new and additional survey data and
      collision risk modeling to improve knowledge and identify the highest risks of the TRWPP in order to
      inform MMPs—this directly aligns with recommendations within the MSB guidance




136 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex D. Database Development




This annex describes the steps to merge the MSB field survey data from five WPPs in the TRWPP study area into one
common database. This annex describes how project-specific datasets were compiled into the common database rather
than how survey data were collected in the field. Annex E describes the trends analysis conducted using the database
and how this analysis informed the TRWPP CEA.

The MSB species in the study area included in the database were as follows:

  •	 Common crane
  •	 Black stork
  •	 White stork
  •	 Osprey
  •	 European honey-buzzard
  •	 Short-toed snake-eagle
  •	 Lesser spotted eagle
  •	 Steppe eagle
  •	 Egyptian vulture
  •	 Eastern imperial eagle
  •	 Booted eagle
  •	 Western marsh-harrier
  •	 Hen harrier
  •	 Pallid harrier
  •	 Montagu’s harrier
  •	 Levant sparrowhawk
  •	 Eurasian sparrowhawk
  •	 Black kite
  •	 Steppe buzzard

This list broadly aligns with category 1 MSB populations (as defined in Section 3.2 of the main body of the report
and in Annex G, Table G1) with some differences, as noted and with explanation.62


  Note that the database was created before the development of the CEA framework that resulted in the bird species population
62 

categories.




                                                                                   Annex D. Database Development | 137
 •	 The red-footed falcon and the Eurasian hobby appear as a category 1, MSB population in the CEA (see Annex
    G), but these are not soaring birds and do not rely on thermals or updrafts at the Rift Margins in the same
    way that other species do. They were therefore not included in the database.
 •	 The common and lesser kestrel are considered category 1 MSB population, and category 2 resident and summer
    breeding raptor populations, in the CEA (see Annex G). For the reasons identified above, these species were
    also not included in the database.
 •	 The Lanner falcon is considered a category 1 MSB population (see Annex G), but it was not included in the
    database due to its very low occurrences. In the CEA, its inclusion in step 2 was regarded as a precautionary
    measure. It was scoped out of step 3.

 •	 The griffon vulture was not included in the database. It was consistently treated as category 2, resident and
    summer breeding raptor population, in the CEA (see Annex G), given its association with the biogeographical
    population in the study area. It was also excluded because
    this species’ movements are more influenced by human
                                                                FIGURE D1. DATABASE COMPILATION APPROACH
    activities than by the factors considered in the trend
    analysis (i.e., weather conditions) for which this database
                                                                            Step 1: Creating the “datasets”
    was created.

The database was compiled using the steps in Figure D1.              Step 2: Calculating variable “birds per hour”

STEP 1: CREATING THE DATA SETS
                                                                            Step 3: Cleaning the data sets
The raw survey bird data from WPPs collected during the
spring and/or autumn seasons in the years 2013, 2014,
                                                                         Step 4: Merging the data sets into
and/or 2015 were entered into one Excel spreadsheet using                     one common database
the same format (described below). One data set or Excel
spreadsheet was created per season per WPP.

Because this CEA was developed before the ESIAs for the majority of the participating WPPs, the number of
survey days and seasons for each bird survey at each WPPs are not provided in this report—this information will
be provided in ESIAs for the project-specific WPPs when they are developed.

All available survey data could not be compiled in the database because of (i) differences in collection methods
and (ii) lack of on-site meteorological data from meteorological masts. Therefore, certain data sets had to be
excluded, although the one common database (see step 4) included at least two seasons of field surveys for each
of the participating WPPs. The variables entered for each observation record were as shown in Table D2.

STEP 2: CALCULATING VARIABLE “BIRDS PER HOUR”

The probability of recording more birds in the field usually increases with an increased amount of observation
activity. Over the span of 2013–2015, the amount of observation activity differed from project to project due
to the different consultancy companies engaged by the projects. Hence, using the absolute number of observed
individual birds (variable 2.7) alone may result in incorrect estimation of abundances. Instead, the metric “birds
per hour” was calculated using variables 2.7 (number of individual birds) and the surveyor’s observation activity
(variable 2.2) and added as a new variable. With this variable, passing rates can be compared from data collected
at different WPPs with observation periods and using different methods.



138 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE D2. LIST OF VARIABLES INCLUDED IN THE SPREADSHEET FOR EACH OBSERVATION RECORD


 VARIABLE                                           DESCRIPTION

 1.	    Wind Power Project (WPP)                    Name of the WPP where the observation took place
 2.	    Variables per species

 2.1	   Date of the observation                     •	 Recorded using DD/MM/YY format
                                                    •	 Observation of single bird or multiple birds
 2.2	   Start and finish time of the survey         The surveyor’s observation activity (time spent) in the field for one day; yields the daily
                                                    observation time

 2.3	   The time of sunrise and sunset a on This yields the daylight hours per day (i.e., hours available for diurnal bird flight activity)
        the day of the observation
 2.4	 The time of the observationb                  The time at which the bird(s) were first seen during the surveys
 2.5	   The time of the observation in              As calculated in minutes from sunrise or from sunset. With midday being set at 13:00,
        relation to sunrise or sunset               an observation before midday would be recorded as the difference of minutes between
                                                    that observation time and sunrise. If an observation is made after midday, it would be
                                                    recorded as the difference in minutes between that observation time and sunset.
 2.6	   Species name                                2.6.1 Species common name
                                                    2.6.2 Scientific name
 2.7	   The number of individual birds              Number of bird(s) observed
 2.8	   Flying height                               Flying height was recorded in three categories: (1) < 30 m, (2) at 30–120 m, (3) >120 m,
                                                    which corresponds to “below,” “at,” and “above” the rotor-swept area, respectively. This
                                                    information was recoded in the database into two categories: combining (1) and (2)
                                                    into one “high-risk” category and keeping (3) separate.
 Weather data                                       Obtained directly from developers’ meteorological mast stations, which provides data
                                                    in 10-minute intervals
 3.1	   Wind speed                                  Meters/second
 3.2	   Wind direction                              In degrees
 3.3	Temperature                                    Degrees Celsius
 3.4	Tailwind                                       Calculated using variables 3.1 (wind speed) and 3.2 (wind direction)
 3.5	Crosswind

a. As derived from www.timeanddate.com for Amman, Jordan.
b. On the field survey forms, the total time the bird was observed was recorded in 15-second intervals. In the database, the start time of the first
15-second interval was used as the time of the observation.
c. The reason for this is to take a conservative approach, as it can be difficult in the field to identify the heights when observing birds at a distance with
the lack of a clear point of reference (e.g., a turbine). It also helps to account for large bird species that often change flying height and enter the rotor-
swept area at quick speeds.




STEP 3: CLEANING THE DATA SETS

Before the database could be used for the analysis, several steps were needed to “clean” the data. The database
was verified for potential inconsistencies, summarized below.

ACCOUNT FOR THE “ZERO COUNTS”

The zero counts refer to those periods during observation activity when no birds are passing. If the zero counts
are not reflected in the database, abundance indexes might be inflated. Therefore, zero counts were added as new
records in the database, with variable 2.7 (number of individual birds) equal to 0. This was done for all the species
and every monitoring day for each project.




                                                                                                         Annex D. Database Development | 139
CLEANING THE DATA FOR DOUBLE-COUNTING

Counts of the same individuals at the same time by different surveyors could inflate the real numbers of birds
migrating in a certain area. In the study area, two possible types of double-counting errors may occur:

 •	 When surveyors are located at different projects within close proximity to one another.

 •	 When surveyors are located within the same project where there are multiple VP or counted in a vantage point
    following a previous count in another VP.

The second of these two errors is more likely in the study area, as the earlier surveys conducted at some of
the WPPs had multiple observers in the same area, with some overlap between them.

To trace double counts, the original data sets for each WPP were examined in detail. Dates and times of the
observation, species, and individuals recorded and the location of VP were all checked. If there were counts of
the same species and very similar numbers at the same observation time for different VP, they were considered as
a double count and were deleted in merged database. The simultaneous observations at different VP with large
differences in the number of birds passing were not considered as double counts.

Overall, the numbers of double counts at different VP and/or by different observers over the years was generally
low. Species that were more frequently double counted were the steppe buzzard, honey buzzard, common crane,
and griffon vulture.

COMPARING SPECIES ACCUMULATION CURVES PER WPP AND SEASON

As mentioned above, differing levels of survey effort (and observation activity) at each WPP during different
seasons may result in differences in the number of species observed. Before merging data sets from WPPs, it
was necessary to assess the potential effect of lower survey efforts on the total number of species observed.
To account for this, species accumulation curves were prepared for each WPP and for each season. The curves
were compared with one another and compared with the one that was obtained from the most comprehensive
field survey (in terms of observation activity in the field). From these comparisons, it was determined that the
surveys conducted at all WPPs observed similar numbers of species and therefore could be merged into the
common database.

STEP 4: MERGING THE DATA SETS INTO ONE COMMON DATABASE

After cleaning the individual data sets for double-counting and other possible inconsistencies, two common
databases were created, containing the data for the spring and autumn seasons of the four WPPs. The data were
transformed into the file formats using statistical software packages STATISTICA 8.0 (Statsoft 1998), “R” (R Core
Team 2014), and SPSS.




140 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex E. Trends Analysis –
Migratory Soaring Birds




This annex describes the objectives and types of analyses performed on MSBs using the database described in
Annex D. The findings of this trends analysis informed the following steps in the CEA framework for category 1,
MSB populations (as described in Section 3.2 of the main body of this report):

 •	 Step 3 – Ecological Risk Assessment Matrix and Identify Priority Bird VECs
    The LoE was used to assess ecological risk in step 3 of the CEA framework for birds. The LoE was primarily
    determined using the CRM estimates (see Section 3.4.1), which are based on one spring survey season for
    multiple WPPs. This trends analysis supplements the CRM as it is based on data pooled over multiple years
    with the aim of identifying specific environmental and topographic conditions that may present a high risk
    of collision to specific MSBs.

 •	 Step 4 – Identify Thresholds for Fatalities for each Priority Bird VEC
    Apart from the primary threshold targets (for priority bird VECs), extreme event threshold targets
    were set for nonpriority birds, particularly nonpriority MSBs occurring in the TRWPP area, due to the
    potential for unpredictable presence of flocks of migratory populations (see Section 3.5.1). The latter was
    evidenced by the results below in the section on flocking behavior of MSBs in the TRWPP study area.

 •	 Step 5 – Identify Mitigation and Monitoring
    The results of the trends analysis helped to define and refine the mitigation measures, in particular measure 1.1
    on in-flight monitoring of priority birds, measure 1.2 on the protocol for shutdown on demand for priority
    birds, and measure 2.3 on the adaptive management response.

FLOCKING BEHAVIOR OF MSBs IN THE TWRPP STUDY AREA

MSBs migrate in different ways. Some fly in flocks whereas others fly individually. The impact of a single collision
of one individual is not comparable with that of tens or hundreds of collisions as a consequence of a migrating
flock passing through.

METHODS

 •	 For each species, the average number of birds per observation was calculated using variable 2.7 (“number of
    individual birds” (per observation), see Annex D, Table D2). This was done for the spring and autumn seasons
    separately (Table E1).

 •	 For the MSBs that are also resident and summer breeding in the area (short-toed snake-eagle), the average
    flock size (as observed from the survey data) may not reflect the flock size for migrating birds because for this
    species it was not possible to separate individuals that were migrating from resident and/or summer breeding
    individuals that were also present in the TRWPP area.




                                                            Annex E. Trends Analysis – Migratory Soaring Birds | 141
RESULTS

 •	 The observed MSB species show a similar flocking behavior at all WPP sites per season.

 •	 For some species, flocking behavior differs between spring and autumn seasons: e.g., European honey-buzzard,
    steppe eagle, Levant sparrowhawk.

 •	 The steppe buzzard and European honey-buzzard account for most of the bird observations (see number of
    observations in Table E1). They also show large average numbers of birds per observation, which means that
    they frequently fly in large flocks through the TWRPP area. However, as illustrated by the high variances and
    the minimum and maximum flock sizes, flocks of these species can have divergent sizes.

 •	 A second group consists of gregarious species that are less frequently observed through the TWRPP study area
    (see number of observations in Table E1): the white stork, black stork, common crane, Levant sparrowhawk
    (in autumn), and steppe eagle (in spring). If they are observed, they fly in flocks (the ending number of the
    ±95 percent confidence intervals is > 3), yet the (relatively) high variances and the minimum and maximum
    flock sizes illustrate the variability of flock sizes.

 •	 The other species typically migrate individually, in pairs or up to three individuals at the maximum (the ending
    number of the ±95 percent confidence intervals is < 3).

CONCLUSIONS

 •	 Evidence from the bird surveys in the TRWPP area illustrate the potential risk of multiple individuals colliding
    with turbines due to a demonstrated tendency to migrate through the area in flocks.

 •	 However, the observed flock sizes are overall relatively small and extremely big flocks do not frequently occur.

 •	 That said, the observation that nonpriority MSB species (such as European honey-buzzard and steppe buzzard)
    may fly over the study area in large flocks justifies the need to set extreme event threshold targets for nonpriority
    birds in step 4 of the CEA framework (see Section 3.5.1). The values in Table E1 can help to identify the MSB
    species populations to which these thresholds should apply.



TABLE E1. FLOCKING BEHAVIOR PER MSB SPECIES IN THE TWRPP AREA


                                             CONFIDENCE
                          AVERAGE NO.
                                              INTERVALS
                          OF BIRDS PER                       NO. OF             MINIMUM MAXIMUM
     MSB SPECIES          OBSERVATION       (+95 PERCENT) OBSERVATIONS VARIANCE FLOCK SIZE FLOCK SIZE


                                                 SPRING MIGRATION

Common crane                     —                 —                 —               —             —              —
Black stork                      —                 —                 —               —             —              —
White stork                      3                0–8                 6             18.7           1              12
Osprey                           —                 –                 —               —             —              —
European honey-buzzard           89              30–148              180          158,805.5        1            2,886
Egyptian vulture                 1                 –                  7              0             1               1
Short-toed snake-eagle           1                  1                70              0.1           1               3

                                                                                                    (continued on next page)




142 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE E1. FLOCKING BEHAVIOR PER MSB SPECIES IN THE TWRPP AREA (continued )


                                                      CONFIDENCE
                               AVERAGE NO.
                                                       INTERVALS
                               OF BIRDS PER                           NO. OF             MINIMUM MAXIMUM
      MSB SPECIES              OBSERVATION           (+95 PERCENT) OBSERVATIONS VARIANCE FLOCK SIZE FLOCK SIZE

Lesser spotted eagle                     2                    1–3                     14                 3.4              1                7
Steppe eagle                             3                   0–5                    109                176.9              1              140
Eastern imperial eagle                   2                   0–3                     10                  4.8              1                8
Booted eagle                              1                     –                     11                   0              1                 1
Western marsh-harrier                     1                     –                     4                    0              1                 1
Hen harrier                             —                       –                    —                    —             —                 —
Pallid harrier                            1                     –                     19                   0              1                 1
Montagu’s harrier                       —                       –                    —                    —             —                 —
Levant sparrowhawk                       4                   0–11                      2                   4              1              225
Eurasian sparrowhawk                    —                       –                    —                    —             —                 —
Black kite                               2                    2–3                    99                 14.4              1               34
Steppe buzzard                           12                 10–15                   576              1,249.3              1              431

                                                          AUTUMN MIGRATION

Common crane                            58                 13–103                    10              3,951.29            4               168
Black stork                             38                   2–75                     13             3,591.06             1              220
White stork                             19                   1–64                      5               1,335.2            1               84
Osprey                                    1                     –                      3                       0          1                 1
European honey-buzzard                   8                   1–10                   108                139.02             1               60
Egyptian vulture                         2                    1–4                     8                   3.27            1                5
Short-toed snake-eagle                    1                      1                   83                  0.07             1                2
Lesser spotted eagle                      1                   1–2                     17                 0.97             1                5
Steppe eagle                              1                      1                  196                   0.37            1                6
Eastern imperial eagle                    1                      1                   26                   0.15            1                3
Booted eagle                              1                      1                    13                 0.08             1                2
Western marsh-harrier                     1                      1                   70                  0.23             1                4
Hen harrier                               1                      1                   55                   0.21            1                4
Pallid harrier                            1                      1                   62                  0.25             1                4
Montagu’s harrier                         1                      1                   10                    0.1            1                2
Levant sparrowhawk                    209                  0–433                      9            84,436.03              1             700
Eurasian sparrowhawk                      1                     –                      3                       0          1                 1
Black kite                               2                    1–2                    74                   1.07            1                5
Steppe buzzard                          16                  10–21                   337               2,554.61            1             500
Note: Average number of birds per observation: average flock size; confidence intervals ±95 percent: confidence intervals ±95 percent for
the average flock size; number of observations: number of records per species regardless the number of birds per record (Bold: species defined as
priority bird VECs in the CEA).




                                                                            Annex E. Trends Analysis – Migratory Soaring Birds | 143
EFFECT OF TOPOGRAPHY AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS ON MSB FLIGHT BEHAVIOR IN
THE TRWPP STUDY AREA

The trends analysis identified environmental and topographic conditions that may present a high risk of wind
farm-related collision to specific MSBs. This information supports the LoE calculation (step 3) and other steps of
the CEA. For each MSB the effect of topographic and environmental variables on collision risk were tested for
collision risk relating to several variables, as described here.

Distance from the Rift Valley Ridge
MSBs migrate predominantly by gliding between thermals or soaring along slopes using “lift” from air currents
rising over ridges. The strength of these ascending air currents will influence the flying height of MSBs, resulting
in higher- or lower-height flights (Klaassen et al., 2010). Thus, the distance of the WPP site to the Rift Valley ridge
is likely to be relevant to the flying height of MSBs over the site. For this purpose, ArcGIS® was used to calculate
the distances from the ridge to the averaged center of each WPP using the estimated locations of the turbines:
projects were classified as (A) < 1 km, (B) 1–5 km, and (C) > 5 km from the ridge. The ridge was considered as
the point at which the slopes start descending toward the Jordan Rift Valley.

Time of day, specifically the hours around dawn and sunset compared with the middle hours of the day
Thermals develop as land surface warms, typically during morning, and reduce in strength as the land surface
cools toward evening. The flying height of MSBs that predominantly rely on thermals to migrate is therefore likely
to be associated with thermal strength through the day, with lower flying heights and greater collision risk likely
to be associated with periods of low thermal development in the morning and evening. To test for differences in
collision risk likelihood through the day, the trends analysis examined flying height of MSBs in the period after
dawn and before dusk compared with during the middle part of the day.

Air temperature
Air temperature is likely to affect the flying height of MSBs because it is associated with thermal development. In
addition to affecting flying height throughout the day, temperature is also likely to affect flying height through
the migration season. In the TRWPP this should correspond to higher flying heights during the later parts of the
spring migration and the earlier parts of the autumn migration; i.e., during those parts of the migration period
closest to the warmer summer months.

Wind direction and wind speed
Wind strength and direction may be utilized to aid MSB migration, with birds optimizing travel distance by drifting
away from their intended migration route in stronger winds at higher altitudes and then compensating for this
displacement in weaker winds at lower altitudes (Alerstam, 1979). In addition, migrating raptors may adjust their
flying height to maximize assistance from tail winds (Mateos-Rodríguez and Liechti, 2012).

METHODS

Collision risk was assessed by assigning each flying height record (variable 2.8, see Annex D) to one of two
categories according to whether flights were at collision risk height or not. Flying height records were categorized
as either (1) at or below turbine height or (2) above turbine height. Categorized flight observations were then used
in Classification and Regression Tree (CART) analysis to examine, through the use of simple predictive models,
how collision risk varied according to the four “flying height relevant” variables. CART analysis was considered
suitable for this type of data because it allows the following:


144 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
 •	 The effect of each of the four variables on all species to be analyzed while preserving the detail for individual
    species

 •	 Use of all variables within the model no matter how interrelated they are—given the small number of available
    variables, it was important to keep them all in the model

 •	 Different types of variables (binomial, continuous, categorical) to be included in the model

 •	 Clear partitioning of the data set and the fitting of a simple prediction model within each partition, which
    helps evaluators to make clear decisions for mitigation on the basis of birds’ behavior

CARTs were run separately for the spring and autumn seasons. Cross-validation was applied to estimate how
accurately the predictive models matched actual data, by repeating the analysis using independent samples that
were not used to build the model.

The collision risk output from the CART analysis was assigned to the following three categories (Tables E2 and E3):

 •	 Low collision risk (green color): the predicted number of bird observations at collision risk flying height is
    smaller than the predicted number of observations not at collision risk flying height.

 •	 Moderate collision risk (orange color): the predicted number of observations at collision risk flying height is
    equal to the predicted number of observations not at collision risk flying height.

 •	 High collision risk (red color): the predicted number of observations at collision risk flying height is higher
    than the predicted number of observations not at collision risk flying height.

RESULTS

Spring Migration Period
The validation test to assess how well the model in the CART analysis predicted the actual flight height data
indicated that the majority (74 percent) of the bird observations in the field were correctly predicted by the model.
The proportion of observations that were wrongly predicted as either above turbine height when they should have
been below or vice versa were approximately equal and in most cases were for the same two species (steppe and
honey buzzard). The model results from the CART analysis were therefore considered valid. Table E2 shows (1)
the overall collision risk level (low, moderate, or high) for each species, and (2) the collision risk level relevant
to environmental and topographic factors tested. For the variable 1. Distance to the Rift Valley ridge, distance
categories B and C were merged to become a >1 km from the ridge category because the results in B and C did
not differ.

The results from the spring model showed no clear effect of wind direction and/or wind speed or temperature
on collision risk likelihood. A high collision risk level was detected <1 km from the Rift Valley ridge in the early
morning and evening for the steppe eagle, Eastern imperial eagle, Egyptian vulture, booted eagle, black kite, and
steppe buzzard and during the central hours of the day for the white stork, European honey buzzard, lesser-spotted
eagle, and pallid harrier. There was no clear evidence of a time of day effect for any species >1 km from the Rift
Valley ridge. Overall the results indicate that MSBs tend to fly lower and are therefore at greater risk of collision
with turbines when they are close to the Rift Valley ridge and fly higher as they move away from the ridge as they
progress east and/or northeast on their northbound migration.




                                                            Annex E. Trends Analysis – Migratory Soaring Birds | 145
           VERALL COLLISION RISK PER SPECIES AND FACTORS INFLUENCING COLLISION RISK AT DIFFERENT
TABLE E2. O
          DISTANCES FROM RIFT VALLEY RIDGE (SPRING SEASON)




Autumn Migration Period
The validation test to assess how well the model in the CART analysis predicted the actual flight height data
indicated that the majority (81 percent) of the bird observations in the field were correctly predicted by the model,
indicating that the results from the model are generally valid. Seven percent of observations wrongly predicted
birds as being above turbine height when they should have been below. This included records of booted eagle,
lesser spotted eagle, imperial eagle, steppe eagle, common crane, Levant sparrowhawk, black stork, steppe buzzard,
and Montagu’s harrier. For these species, the output from the autumn model will tend to slightly underestimate
levels of collision risk.

For the variable 1. Distance to the Rift valley ridge, distance categories B and C were merged to become a > 1 km
from the ridge category because the results in B and C did not differ.



146 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
                                                                      VERALL COLLISION RISK PER SPECIES AND FACTORS INFLUENCING COLLISION RISK AT DIFFERENT DISTANCES FROM RIFT VALLEY RIDGE
                                                           TABLE E3. O
                                                                   (AUTUMN SEASON)
Annex E. Trends Analysis – Migratory Soaring Birds | 147
The autumn model is less complex than the
spring model (see Table E1). For all MSBs
the model predicted that half or more of the
records of birds passing over the TRWPP
sites would be at collision risk height,
indicating a moderate to high collision risk
level irrespective of the distance from the
Rift Valley ridge. Within these results, the
highest risk in autumn for all species was
close to (i.e., < 1 km) the ridge.

The results indicated a moderate level of
collision risk at <1 km from the Rift Valley
ridge when air temperature is > 18.5°C, with
approximately half of records predicting birds
flying at collision risk height. This effect was
not evident beyond 1 km from the ridge.

During the autumn migration period, the
collision risk level was high for all MSBs
in the early morning and evening but only
at a distance of > 1 km from the Rift Valley
ridge. This contrasts with the spring migration
period when high collision risk in the early
morning and evening was evident only close
to the ridges.

The autumn model indicated a high collision
risk level for a varied group of MSBs (white
stork, short-toed snake-eagle, Egyptian vulture,
western marsh-harrier, pallid harrier, and
Eurasian sparrowhawk) when migration was
associated with tailwinds but only at distances
> 1 km away from the Rift Valley ridge.

CONCLUSIONS

 •	 In general, there is an increased risk of
    collision and thus more fatalities expected         Turbine blades during construction phase of wind power project
    during autumn migration for the MSB
    species considered.

 •	 The presence of the Rift Valley ridge in the landscape appears to affect the heights of the MSBs flying over
    the TRWPP area. This effect appears to be different in spring than in autumn. These local movements could
    be explained according to general movements in spring and autumn (see Figure E1):




148 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
    •	 In spring, field observations suggest that MSBs travelling south–north mainly follow the same south–
       north route with some deviations to the east. Birds following the latter deviation pass through the
       TRWPP area: they come from low altitudes after crossing near or through the Red Sea and have to
       “climb” the Rift before heading north.

    •	 In autumn, migration is more scattered over the area. The ridge appears to have less effect on the flying
       height of MSBs, as they are heading north–south and “descending” almost all the time. Yet, the same effect
       as in spring exists for the MSBs that fly over the TRWPP area—they come from the northeast and have to
       gain height to pass over high mountains in the Tafila area before following the Rift Valley ridge to head
       south (see middle blue arrow in Figure E1).

 •	 Certain weather conditions appear to affect the flying height of some MSB populations passing over the
    TRWPP sites. This effect differs between spring and autumn.

 •	 The possible impacts of topography (landscape) and weather conditions need to be considered when designing
    mitigation and adaptive management strategies, e.g., when establishing the shutdown periods of the turbines
    and the data collection in the postconstruction monitoring. This may be particularly relevant where turbines are
                                                                    located closer to the Rift Valley ridge. Yet, more
                                                                    data (on landscape features, flight trajectories)
            ENERAL FLIGHT TRAJECTORIES OF MSBs DURING
FIGURE E1. G
                                                                    will be needed to refine mitigation—this would be
           SPRING (RED ARROWS) AND AUTUMN (BLUE
                                                                    based on project-level postconstruction monitoring.
           ARROWS)
                                                                     •	 The finding that MSBs fly at collision risk
                                                                        height during the early part of the day may
                                                                        also be a consequence of birds roosting at or
                                                                        close to WPP sites (e.g., steppe eagles have been
                                                                        recorded perched on pylons of high-voltage
                                                                        power lines during the autumn migration).
                                                                        Monitoring and mitigation planning, in
                                                                        particular the distribution of postconstruction
                                                                        monitoring effort, would therefore benefit from
                                                                        a greater understanding of the locations of
                                                                        actual and potential roosting sites for those
                                                                        species identified as potentially at risk.




                                                             Annex E. Trends Analysis – Migratory Soaring Birds | 149
150 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex F. Standardized Bird Survey




This annex describes the standardized vantage-point (VP) bird survey methodology developed to ensure that flight
activity data collected at TRWPP sites during the spring 2015 surveys were suitable for predicting bird mortality
rates using a CRM. It was designed as a cost-effective, efficient method for obtaining reasonably unbiased data,
representative of the migration period and providing a viable alternative to “continuous,” day-long migration
surveys. The methods are based on good practice in VP survey protocols, tailored specifically to capture flight
activity data for MSBs at TRWPP sites.

VP surveys refer to timed and repeated observational monitoring sessions from predefined locations strategically
positioned in relation to each other so that as much as possible of the airspace over a WPP site can be monitored
effectively and efficiently for bird flight activity.

This annex covers the process of selecting VPs, the process of designing a stratified survey visit protocol to ensure
that the results are representative of flight activity through the migration period and through the day, and key
aspects of the field survey protocol. The annex covers only a recommended approach for VP surveys. Other survey
methods, in particular those to quantify breeding bird populations, are not covered.

SELECTING VANTAGE POINTS

Ideally, VP locations should initially be identified within a geographical information system (GIS) using a
digital elevation model (DEM) of the site, the proposed turbine layout, and tools to assess the visible airspace
(viewshed) from prospective VPs. Ideally, VPs should be selected so that together they provide a view of all wind
farm turbine locations buffered to 500 m, with the viewing arc from each VP not exceeding 180 degrees and
the viewing distance not exceeding 2 km. Including a 500 m buffer around each turbine reduces the potential
that birds that use the flight activity area only occasionally will be missed. Using GIS viewshed tools allows
the visible airspace at rotor height from each VP to be mapped and VP locations to be optimally positioned to
detect birds flying at collision risk height at all turbine locations with a minimum of viewing overlap (for an
example, see Figure F1).

VPs and their associated viewsheds identified within the GIS need to be verified in the field before the survey starts.
This is done to check that small-scale topographic features and/or human-created obstacles absent from the DEM
are not obscuring the view. If the view is obscured, then it may be feasible to move the VP a short distance so that
the view is no longer obstructed and the viewshed remains relatively unchanged.

DEMs were not available for TRWPP sites so VPs were carefully selected using maps overlaid with turbine
locations and validated during initial field visits to ensure that collectively VPs had an optimal view of proposed
development area and had a clear view of all turbine locations.




                                                                              Annex F. Standardized Bird Survey | 151
STRATIFYING EFFORT THROUGH THE                                            XAMPLE OF VP SELECTION DEM, TURBINE
                                                              FIGURE F1. E
MIGRATION SEASON AND THROUGH THE DAY                                      LAYOUT AND GIS TOOLS, ILLUSTRATING THE
                                                                          VISIBLE AREAS FROM EACH VP
Stratifying the survey effort helps to ensure that flight
activity data are representative of the overall migration
period. The suggested approach is to split the survey
effort into two strata for each migration season; “low
activity periods” preceding and following the peak
migration and a “high activity period,” that covers
the main migration period. For the spring migration
in the TRWPP study area, the following periods are
suggested:

 •	 High-activity period: 22 March to 15 May. This is
    an eight-week period when the watch effort covers
    15 percent of daylight time (equivalent to 18 hours
    per VP per week).

 •	 Low-activity period: 1 March to 21 March, and then
    16 May to 31 May. These two periods total five weeks
    during which the watch effort is half that of the high-
    activity period, comprising 7.5 percent of daylight
    time (equivalent to 9 hours per VP per week).

The total allotted hours for low-activity periods and for the high-activity period are further stratified into different
periods within a day with an equal number assigned to each of the following periods:

 •	 Early morning (sunrise–10:00)

 •	 Late morning (10:00–13:00, approximately solar noon)

 •	 Early afternoon (13:00–16:00)
 •	 Late afternoon (16:00–sunset)

The same approach is taken for the autumn migration, with the recommended high-activity period between
September 16 and October 15, and low-activity periods between September 1 and 15 and October 16 and November
30. As in spring, the allotted hours within these activity periods are spread equally across the four periods in the
day given above. For an example of a stratified approach for the spring migration showing ideal distribution of
survey hours at each VP per week, see Table F1.

Since this survey was carried out, it has been recognized that migration peak activity for certain MSB species
occurs in February (very early spring). Although February was not surveyed in 2015, there were multiple surveys
that were conducted in February in previous years (2013–2014). This information was incorporated into the
common database (see Annex D) and trends analysis (see Annex E), which were used to support the findings
of the CRM.




152 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE F1. EXAMPLE OF A STRATIFIED APPROACH FOR THE SPRING MIGRATION SHOWING IDEAL DISTRIBUTION OF
SURVEY HOURS AT EACH VP PER WEEK


                                                                                                               LOW
                    LOW ACTIVITY                               HIGH ACTIVITY                                 ACTIVITY


                         1–21 MARCH                            22 MAR–15 MAY                                 16–31 MAY
 DAYTIME
 STRATA           WK1       WK2    WK3      WK4   WK5   WK6     WK7      WK8         WK9    WK10 WK11      WK12 WK13

Early morning      2.3       2.3      2.3   4.5   4.5    4.5     4.5         4.5      4.5     4.5    4.5     2.3        2.3
Late morning       2.3       2.3      2.3   4.5   4.5    4.5     4.5         4.5      4.5     4.5    4.5     2.3        2.3

Early afternoon    2.3       2.3      2.3   4.5   4.5    4.5     4.5         4.5      4.5     4.5    4.5     2.3        2.3
Late afternoon     2.3       2.3      2.3   4.5   4.5    4.5     4.5         4.5      4.5     4.5    4.5     2.3        2.3
Totals              9         9        9     18    18    18      18          18        18     18      18      9          9
                             27                                        144                                         18
                                                                 189




FIELD TECHNIQUES

To help ensure that the flight activity data collected is consistent, has minimal bias, and is suitable for CRM, the
following field work guidelines were recommended:

 •	 Surveyors should position themselves inconspicuously to minimize their effects on bird movements. This often
    precludes the use of hill summits for VP observations.

 •	 If permitted by the land owner, surveyors should mark the exact location of each VP on the ground (i.e., a
    pile of stones or a marked cane) to ensure consistency in observer position, and take the coordinates of VPs
    using a global positioning system (GPS) device as accurately as possible.

 •	 Watches should be by a single surveyor under conditions of good visibility (> 2 km).

 •	 Weather conditions (i.e., wind direction and strength, cloud cover, precipitation, and visibility) should be
    recorded at the start of the watch and at every subsequent hour. Ideally observations should be made in a
    range of wind conditions. This is particularly important in the case of soaring birds, for which wind direction
    and strength is likely to affect migration behavior and flight routes.

 •	 Each continuous watch session should last a maximum of three hours but can be suspended and then resumed
    to take account of changes in visibility (e.g., fluctuations in the cloud base) or short rest breaks. Experience
    from field trials shows that the performance of most observers declines after three hours, and some may prefer
    to conduct shorter watches. A gap of at least half an hour between watches is advisable to reduce fatigue. A
    shorter gap might be used if the watch is shorter than three hours.

 •	 Using a combination of naked eye and binoculars, surveyors should constantly scan a predefined arc of up to
    180º from each VP until a target species is detected in flight. Larger arcs cannot be scanned efficiently.




                                                                                   Annex F. Standardized Bird Survey | 153
154 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex G. CEA for Birds Results:
Step 1 – Species Population List



TABLE G1. STEP 1 RESULTS—SPECIES POPULATION LIST


SPECIES POPULATION                                     SPECIES SCIENTIFIC
CATEGORY                   SPECIES NAME                NAME                    REASON INCLUDED

Category 1: Migratory      Common crane               Grus grus                Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
Soaring Bird (MSB)         Black stork                Ciconia nigra            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
populations
                           White stork                Ciconia ciconia          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Osprey                     Pandion haliaetus        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           European honey-buzzard     Pernis apivorus          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Egyptian vulture           Neophron percnopterus    Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Short-toed snake-eagle     Circaetus gallicus       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Lesser spotted eagle       Clanga pomarina          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Steppe eagle               Aquila nipalensis        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Eastern imperial eagle     Aquila heliaca           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Booted eagle               Hieraaetus pennatus      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Western marsh-harrier      Circus aeruginosus       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Hen harrier                Circus cyaneus           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Pallid harrier             Circus macrourus         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Montagu’s harrier          Circus pygargus          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Levant sparrowhawk         Accipiter brevipes       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Eurasian sparrowhawk       Accipiter nisus          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Black kite                 Milvus migrans           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Steppe buzzard             Buteo buteo vulpinus     Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Lesser kestrel             Falco naumanni           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Common kestrel             Falco tinnunculus        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Red-footed falcon          Falco vespertinus        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Eurasian hobby             Falco subbuteo           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Lanner falcon              Falco biarmicus          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
Category 2: Resident and   Short-toed snake-eagle     Circaetus gallicus       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
summer breeding raptor     Griffon vulture            Gyps fulvus              Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
populations
                           Golden eagle               Aquila chrysaetos        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Verreaux’s eagle           Aquila verreauxii        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                           Bonelli’s eagle            Aquila fasciata          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys

                                                                                                     (continued on next page)




                                                    Annex G. CEA for Birds Results: Step 1 – Species Population List | 155
TABLE G1. STEP 1 RESULTS—SPECIES POPULATION LIST (continued )


 SPECIES POPULATION                                SPECIES SCIENTIFIC
 CATEGORY                SPECIES NAME              NAME                        REASON INCLUDED

                         Long-legged buzzard       Buteo rufinus               Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Lesser kestrel            Falco naumanni              Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common kestrel            Falco tinnunculus           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Sooty falcon              Falco concolor              Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Barbary falcon            Falco pelegrinoides         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
Category 3: Other        Common quail              Coturnix coturnix           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
migrants and wintering   European nightjar         Caprimulgus europaeus       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
populations
                         Alpine swift              Tachymarptis melba          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Little swift              Apus affinis                Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Pallid swift              Apus pallidus               Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common swift              Apus apus                   Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common cuckoo             Cuculus canorus             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Corncrake                 Crex crex                   Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Glossy ibis               Plegadis falcinellus        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Eurasian bittern          Botaurus stellaris          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common hoopoe             Upupa epops                 Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         European bee-eater        Merops apiaster             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         European roller           Coracias garrulus           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Eurasian wryneck          Jynx torquilla              Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Merlin                    Falco columbarius           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Red-backed shrike         Lanius collurio             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Woodchat shrike           Lanius senator              Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Masked shrike             Lanius nubicus              Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Eurasian golden oriole    Oriolus oriolus             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Sand martin               Riparia riparia             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Eurasian crag-martin      Hirundo rupestris           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Barn swallow              Hirundo rustica             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Red-rumped swallow        Hirundo daurica             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Northern house-martin     Delichon urbicum            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Calandra lark             Melanocorypha calandra      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Bimaculated lark          Melanocorypha bimaculata Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Greater short-toed lark   Calandrella brachydactyla   Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Wood lark                 Lullula arborea             Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                               in project area
                         Eurasian skylark          Alauda arvensis             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Upcher’s warbler          Hippolais languida          Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Willow warbler            Phylloscopus trochilus      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common chiffchaff         Phylloscopus collybita      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common chiffchaff         Phylloscopus collybita      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         (wintering)
                                                                                                     (continued on next page)


156 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE G1. STEP 1 RESULTS—SPECIES POPULATION LIST (continued )


 SPECIES POPULATION                                   SPECIES SCIENTIFIC
 CATEGORY                 SPECIES NAME                NAME                      REASON INCLUDED

                         Wood warbler                 Phylloscopus sibilatrix   Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Blackcap                     Sylvia atricapilla        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Garden warbler               Sylvia borin              Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                                in project area
                         Common whitethroat           Sylvia communis           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Lesser whitethroat           Sylvia curruca            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common starling              Sturnus vulgaris          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Eurasian blackbird           Turdus merula             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Song thrush                  Turdus philomelos         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         European robin               Erithacus rubecula        Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                                in project area
                         Bluethroat                   Luscinia svecica          Abour wind farm report listed as occurring
                                                                                in project area
                         Bluethroat (wintering)       Luscinia svecica          Abour wind farm report listed as occurring
                                                                                in project area
                         Black redstart               Phoenicurus ochruros      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Black redstart (wintering)   Phoenicurus ochruros      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common redstart              Phoenicurus phoenicurus   Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Whinchat                     Saxicola rubetra          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common stonechat             Saxicola torquatus        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Common stonechat (win-       Saxicola torquatus        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         tering)
                         Northern wheatear            Oenanthe oenanthe         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Finsch’s wheatear            Oenanthe finschii         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Black-eared wheatear         Oenanthe hispanica        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Pied wheatear                Oenanthe pleschanka       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Isabelline wheatear          Oenanthe isabellina       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Rufous-tailed rock-thrush    Monticola saxatilis       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Blue rock-thrush             Monticola solitarius      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Spotted flycatcher           Muscicapa striata         Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                                in project area
                         Spanish sparrow              Passer hispaniolensis     Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Dead sea sparrow             Passer moabiticus         Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Pale rock sparrow            Petronia brachydactyla    Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         White wagtail                Motacilla alba            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         White wagtail (wintering)    Motacilla alba            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Yellow wagtail               Motacilla flava           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Tawny pipit                  Anthus campestris         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Tree pipit                   Anthus trivialis          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Red-throated pipit           Anthus cervinus           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Eurasian chaffinch           Fringilla coelebs         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys

                                                                                                      (continued on next page)



                                                  Annex G. CEA for Birds Results: Step 1 – Species Population List | 157
TABLE G1. STEP 1 RESULTS—SPECIES POPULATION LIST (continued )


 SPECIES POPULATION                                 SPECIES SCIENTIFIC
 CATEGORY                 SPECIES NAME              NAME                      REASON INCLUDED

                          European serin            Serinus serinus           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          European greenfinch       Carduelis chloris         Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                              in project area
                          European goldfinch        Carduelis carduelis       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Eurasian linnet           Carduelis cannabina       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Corn bunting              Miliaria calandra         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Ortolan bunting           Emberiza hortulana        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
Category 4: Other resi-   Chukar                    Alectoris chukar          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
dents and summer breed-   Sand partridge            Ammoperdix heyi           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
ing populations
                          Rock dove                 Columba livia             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Feral pigeon              Columba livia domestica   Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Eurasian collared dove    Streptopelia decaocto     Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Laughing dove             Spilopelia senegalensis   Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Spotted sandgrouse        Pterocles senegallus      Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                          Crowned sandgrouse        Pterocles coronatus       Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                          Alpine swift              Tachymarptis melba        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Eurasian thick-knee       Burhinus oedicnemus       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Cream-colored courser     Cursorius cursor          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Little owl                Athene noctua             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Hume’s owl                Strix butleri             Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                          Pharaoh eagle-owl         Bubo ascalaphus           Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                          Woodchat shrike           Lanius senator            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Masked shrike             Lanius nubicus            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Brown-necked raven        Corvus ruficollis         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Common raven              Corvus corax              Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Pale crag-martin          Hirundo obsoleta          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Greater hoopoe-lark       Alaemon alaudipes         Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                          Bar-tailed lark           Ammomanes cinctura        Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                          Desert lark               Ammomanes deserti         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Dunn’s lark               Eremalauda dunni          Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                          Crested lark              Galerida cristata         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Wood lark                 Lullula arborea           Recorded breeding in Dana IBA (expert review)
                          Temminck’s lark           Eremophila bilopha        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Streaked scrub-warbler    Scotocerca inquieta       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                          Graceful prinia           Prinia gracilis           Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                              in project area
                          White-spectacled bulbul   Pycnonotus xanthopygos    Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                              in project area
                          Orphean warbler           Sylvia hortensis          Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                              in project area
                                                                                                     (continued on next page)




158 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
TABLE G1. STEP 1 RESULTS—SPECIES POPULATION LIST (continued )


 SPECIES POPULATION                                 SPECIES SCIENTIFIC
 CATEGORY                 SPECIES NAME              NAME                       REASON INCLUDED

                         Arabian warbler            Sylvia leucomelaena        Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Sardinian warbler          Sylvia melanocephala       Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Spectacled warbler         Sylvia conspicillata       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Arabian babbler            Turdoides squamiceps       Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Tristram’s starling        Onychognathus tristramii   Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Eurasian blackbird         Turdus merula              Recorded breeding in Dana IBA (expert review)
                         White-tailed wheatear      Oenanthe leucopyga         Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Hooded wheatear            Oenanthe monacha           Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Mourning wheatear          Oenanthe lugens            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Black-eared wheatear       Oenanthe hispanica         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Desert wheatear            Oenanthe deserti           Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Isabelline wheatear        Oenanthe isabellina        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Blue rock-thrush           Monticola solitarius       Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Blackstart                 Cercomela melanura         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Palestine sunbird          Nectarinia osea            Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         House sparrow              Passer domesticus          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Spanish sparrow            Passer hispaniolensis      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Dead sea sparrow           Passer moabiticus          Recommended for inclusion by expert review
                         Rock sparrow               Petronia petronia          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Pale rock sparrow          Petronia brachydactyla     Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Tawny pipit                Anthus campestris          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Long-billed pipit          Anthus similis             Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Syrian Serin               Serinus syriacus           Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         European greenfinch        Carduelis chloris          Abour wind farm report; listed as occurring
                                                                               in project area
                         European goldfinch         Carduelis carduelis        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Eurasian linnet            Carduelis cannabina        Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Desert finch               Rhodopechys obsoletus      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Trumpeter finch            Bucanetes githagineus      Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Pale rosefinch             Carpodacus synoicus        Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Corn bunting               Miliaria calandra          Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Ortolan bunting            Emberiza hortulana         Recorded at TRWPP during bird surveys
                         Cretzschmar’s bunting      Emberiza caesia            Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA
                         Striolated bunting         Emberiza striolata         Listed as population occurring at Dana IBA




                                                 Annex G. CEA for Birds Results: Step 1 – Species Population List | 159
TABLE G2. STEP 1—SPECIES POPULATIONS SCOPED “OUT” OF CEA STEP


                         SPECIES SCIENTIFIC         SCREENING – REASON SPECIES POPULATION EXCLUDED FROM
    SPECIES NAME               NAME                                         STEP 2

Eurasian spoonbill       Platalea leucorodia        Recognized as a vagrant in Jordan (including Andrews, 1996)
Oriental honey-buzzard   Pernis ptilorhynchus       Rare and vagrant (principle migratory is not Rift Valley/Rea Sea flyway)
Cinereous vulture        Aegypius monachus          Recognized as a vagrant in Jordan (including Andrews, 1996)
Lappet-faced vulture     Torgos tracheliotos        Recognized as a vagrant in Jordan (including Andrews, 1996)
Greater spotted eagle    Clanga clanga              Recognized as a vagrant in Jordan (including Andrews, 1996)
White-tailed sea-eagle   Haliaeetus albicilla       No evidence that population recorded or likely to be recorded at TRWPP
Eleonora’s falcon        Falco eleonorae            Vagrant (principle migratory is not Rift Valley/Rea Sea flyway)
Saker falcon             Falco cherrug              Very scarce migrant (principle migratory is not Rift Valley/Rea Sea flyway)
Peregrine falcon         Falco peregrinus           Very scarce migrant
Bearded vulture          Gypaetus barbatus          Former breeding in Dana IBA (last recorded in 1966; Andrews, 1996)
Garganey                 Spatula querquedula        No evidence that population recorded or likely to be recorded at TRWPP
European turtle-dove     Streptopelia turtur        No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP
Great white pelican      Pelecanus onocrotalus      No evidence that population recorded or likely to be recorded at TRWPP
Lesser grey shrike       Lanius minor               No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP
Orphean warbler          Sylvia hortensis           No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP
Rueppell’s warbler       Sylvia rueppelli           No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP
Kurdish wheatear         Oenanthe xanthoprymna      Recognized as a vagrant in Jordan (including Andrews, 1996)
Brambling                Fringilla montifringilla   No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP
Cretzschmar’s bunting    Emberiza caesia            No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP
Little swift             Apus affinis               Does not breed in the TRWPP Study Area (expert review)
Pallid swift             Apus pallidus              Does not breed in the TRWPP Study Area (expert review)
Common barn-owl          Tyto alba                  Only breeds in north of Jordan; no evidence that population recorded at
                                                    TRWPP
Tawny owl                Strix aluco                Only breeds in north of Jordan; no evidence that population recorded at
                                                    TRWPP
Fan-tailed raven         Corvus rhipidurus          No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP
Cetti’s warbler          Cettia cetti               No evidence that population recorded at TRWPP




160 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex H. CEA For Birds Results:
Step 2 – Species Sensitivity
Results


MSB “broad front” migrant populations were categorized for Relative Importance according to criteria below
except for Common and Lesser Kestrel. These species were assumed to have both migratory and resident populations
present at the TRWPP sites. It was not possible to separate out migrants from resident populations. As a result, a
precautionary approach was taken. All recorded birds for each species were assumed to be migrants in Category 1 and
assessed in the same way as all other non-broad front MSB populations by comparing seasonal maximum estimate
from TRWPP sites with the seasonal maximum given for the flyway. This precautionary approach resulted in higher
Relative Importance score than if the species were dealt with as MSB “broad front” species.




                                                                                               Dana Biosphere Reserve




                                            Annex H. CEA For Birds Results: Step 2 – Species Sensitivity Results | 161
TABLE H1. CATEGORY 1, MIGRATORY SOARING BIRD POPULATIONS—RELATIVE IMPORTANCE, VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY
SCORING

                                                                                                                                                                                   ASSIGN
                                                                                                                                                                                   SPECIES
                                                            RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING                                         VULNERABILITY SCORING                           SENSITIVITY

                                                                              ESTIMATED
                                                                               SHARE OF
                                                                                FLYWAY                                         CMS
                                               HIGHEST       RIFT VALLEY/ POPULATION                             IUCN       RAPTORS
                                              SEASONAL         RED SEA          PASSING         RELATIVE        GLOBAL         MOU           SPECIES                            SENSITIVITY
                      SPECIES               COUNTS FOR         FLYWAY          THROUGH        IMPORTANCE       RED LIST    CATEGORY VULNERABILITY VULNERABILITY PER SPECIES
 SPECIES NAME         SCIENTIFIC NAME           TRWPP        POPULATION        TRWPP (%)          SCORE       CATEGORY 2 RATING            INDEX (SVI)           SCORE          POPULATION

 Common crane          Grus grus                   3,493         60,000             5.8         Moderate           LC                           10             Moderate           Medium
 Black stork           Ciconia nigra                 930           8,300           11.2            High            LC                           10             Moderate             High
 White stork           Ciconia ciconia               516        338,000            0.2          Negligible         LC                           10             Moderate          Negligible
 Osprey                Pandion haliaetus                9             130           6.9           Low*             LC           yes              7                 Low               Low
 European honey-       Pernis apivorus            12,099        850,000             1.4            Low             LC                            7                 Low               Low
 buzzard
 Egyptian vulture      Neophron                       67           1,200            5.6         Moderate           EN                           10                High              High
                       percnopterus
 Booted eagle          Hieraaetus                      32          2,000            1.6            Low             LC           yes              9                High            Medium
                       pennatus
 Short-toed            Circaetus gallicus            459           12,100           3.8            Low             LC           yes              7             Moderate              Low
 snake-eagle
 Lesser spotted        Clanga pomarina               727        142,000            0.5          Negligible         LC           yes              9                High               Low
 eagle
 Eastern imperial      Aquila heliaca                214              556          38.5            High            VU                            9                High              High
 eagle
 Steppe eagle          Aquila nipalensis             297         76,600            0.4          Negligible         EN           yes              9                High               Low
 Western marsh-        Circus aeruginosus             92           1,600           6.0            Low*             LC                            8                 Low               Low
 harrier
 Hen harrier           Circus cyaneus                227              40         567.5         Moderate*           LC           yes              8             Moderate             High
 Pallid harrier        Circus macrourus               89              165         53.9            Low*             NT                            8             Moderate             High
 Montagu’s             Circus pygargus                92              252          36.5           Low*             LC                            8                 Low            Medium
 harrier
 Levant sparrow-       Accipiter brevipes          3,746         60,400             6.2            High            LC           yes              6                 Low            Medium
 hawk
 Eurasian spar-        Accipiter nisus                153         4,000             3.8           Low*             LC                            6             Negligible        Negligible
 rowhawk
 Black kite            Milvus migrans           550,044           36,700            1.5            Low             LC           yes              8             Moderate              Low
 Steppe buzzard        Buteo buteo                 4,452        205,000             5.9         Moderate           LC                            7                 Low               Low
                       vulpinus
 Lesser kestrel        Falco naubmanni               942             500         188.4             High            LC                            6             Negligible            Low
 Common kestrel        Falco tinnunculus        883,872              450         196.4             High            LC           yes              6                 Low            Medium
 Red-footed            Falco vespertinus              38          11,400            0.3        Negligible*         NT                            6                 Low           Negligible
 falcon
 Eurasian hobby        Falco subbuteo                 10              190           5.3           Low*             LC                            6             Negligible        Negligible
 Lanner falcon         Falco biarmicus                 11               4          275         Moderate*           LC           yes              6                 Low               Low

* MSB “broad-front” migrant. RI score treats flyway estimate as indicative of a typical seasonal maximum for many locations within the flyway and compares this with seasonal maximum at
TRWPP. If RI score below or approximately 100% = low, if RI score above 100% = medium. (Section 3.3.1. for details.)




           162 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
                                                                             TABLE H2. CATEGORY 2, RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS—RELATIVE IMPORTANCE, VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING


                                                                                                                                                                                                           ASSIGN SPECIES
                                                                                                                           RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING                    VULNERABILITY SCORING             SENSITIVITY


                                                                                                                      APPROXIMATE
                                                                                                                       MAXIMUM
                                                                                                                       SHARE OF
                                                                                                                       NATIONAL       BIOME                      IUCN
Annex H. CEA For Birds Results: Step 2 – Species Sensitivity Results | 163




                                                                                                                      POPULATION    RESTRICTED    RELATIVE     REGIONAL         SPECIES                     SENSITIVITY
                                                                                                SPECIES SCIENTIFIC USING TRWPP      SPECIES IN   IMPORTANCE    RED LIST     VULNERABILITY VULNERABILITY     PER SPECIES
                                                                              SPECIES NAME              NAME            AREA (%)     DANA IBA      SCORE       CATEGORY       INDEX (SVI)         SCORE     POPULATION

                                                                             Short-toed         Circaetus gallicus        >10           no          High         VU                7          Moderate          High
                                                                             snake-eagle
                                                                             Griffon vulture    Gyps fulvus               >10           no          High          EN              10              High          High
                                                                             Golden eagle       Aquila chrysaetos         >10           no          High          EN               9              High          High
                                                                             Verreaux’s eagle   Aquila verreauxii         >10           no          High          EN              10              High          High
                                                                             Bonelli’s eagle    Aquila fasciata           >10           no          High          LC               9          Moderate          High
                                                                             Long-legged        Buteo rufinus           >1 and ≤5       no          Low           LC               7               Low          Low
                                                                             buzzard
                                                                             Lesser kestrel     Falco naumanni            >10           no          High          NT               6               Low        Medium
                                                                             Common kestrel     Falco tinnunculus          ≤1           no        Negligible      LC               6          Negligible      Negligible
                                                                             Sooty falcon       Falco concolor            >10           no          High         VU                6               Low        Medium
                                                                             Barbary falcon     Falco pelegrinoides       >10           no          High         VU                6               Low        Medium
           ATEGORY 3, OTHER MIGRANTS AND/OR WINTERING POPULATIONS—RELATIVE IMPORTANCE,
TABLE H3. C
              VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING


                                               RELATIVE IMPORTANCE                                     ASSIGN SPECIES
                                                      SCORING            VULNERABILITY SCORING           SENSITIVITY


                                               BIRDLIFE                    IUCN
                                              BREEDING     RELATIVE       GLOBAL                         SENSITIVITY
                       SCIENTIFIC            DISTRIBUTION IMPORTANCE     RED LIST   VULNERABILITY        PER SPECIES
SPECIES NAME           NAME                   SIZE (KM2)        SCORE    CATEGORY      SCORE            POPULATION

Common quail            Coturnix coturnix     16,200,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
European nightjar       Caprimulgus            6,550,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
                        europaeus
Alpine swift            Tachymarptis           7,350,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
                        melba
Little swift            Apus affinis          22,200,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
Pallid swift            Apus pallidus          1,720,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
Common swift            Apus apus             24,800,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
Common cuckoo           Cuculus canorus       12,000,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
Glossy ibis             Plegadis              19,400,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
                        falcinellus
Eurasian bittern        Botaurus stellaris     8,150,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
Corncrake               Crex crex              3,980,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
Common hoopoe           Upupa epops           28,400,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
European bee-eater      Merops apiaster       11,000,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
European roller         Coracias garrulus     11,400,000    Negligible      NT          Low                Negligible
Eurasian wryneck        Jynx torquilla        12,700,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
Merlin                  Falco                 23,100,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
                        columbarius
Red-backed shrike       Lanius collurio        5,360,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
Woodchat shrike         Lanius senator         2,580,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
Masked shrike           Lanius nubicus           353,000    Moderate        LC        Negligible           Negligible
Eurasian golden         Oriolus oriolus       10,500,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
oriole
Sand martin             Riparia riparia       28,900,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
Eurasian crag-martin    Hirundo rupestris      9,090,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
Barn swallow            Hirundo rustica       43,400,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
Red-rumped swallow Hirundo daurica            19,100,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
Northern house-         Delichon urbicum      16,200,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible           Negligible
martin
Calandra lark           Melanocorypha          5,630,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
                        calandra
Bimaculated lark        Melanocorypha          2,580,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
                        bimaculata
Greater short-toed      Calandrella            8,080,000         Low        LC        Negligible           Negligible
lark                    brachydactyla
                                                                                                   (continued on next page)




164 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
           ATEGORY 3, OTHER MIGRANTS AND/OR WINTERING POPULATIONS—RELATIVE IMPORTANCE,
TABLE H3. C
            VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING (continued )


                                              RELATIVE IMPORTANCE                                           ASSIGN SPECIES
                                                     SCORING                VULNERABILITY SCORING             SENSITIVITY


                                              BIRDLIFE                        IUCN
                                             BREEDING        RELATIVE       GLOBAL                            SENSITIVITY
                       SCIENTIFIC           DISTRIBUTION IMPORTANCE         RED LIST    VULNERABILITY         PER SPECIES
SPECIES NAME           NAME                  SIZE (KM2)        SCORE       CATEGORY          SCORE            POPULATION

Wood lark              Lullula arborea         7,110,000        Low            LC           Negligible          Negligible
Eurasian skylark       Alauda arvensis       33,000,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
Upcher’s warbler       Hippolais              2,600,000         Low            LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       languida
Willow warbler         Phylloscopus          15,800,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       trochilus
Common chiffchaff      Phylloscopus          17,000,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       collybita
Common chiffchaff      Phylloscopus          17,000,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
(wintering)            collybita
Wood warbler           Phylloscopus          4,060,000          Low            LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       sibilatrix
Blackcap               Sylvia atricapilla     6,860,000         Low            LC           Negligible          Negligible
Garden warbler         Sylvia borin           9,650,000         Low            LC           Negligible          Negligible
Common white-          Sylvia communis       14,100,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
throat
Lesser whitethroat     Sylvia curruca        16,700,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
Common starling        Sturnus vulgaris      17,200,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
Eurasian blackbird     Turdus merula         13,900,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
Song thrush            Turdus                13,700,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       philomelos
European robin         Erithacus             10,200,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       rubecula
Bluethroat             Luscinia svecica      12,900,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
Bluethroat (winter-    Luscinia svecica      12,900,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
ing)
Black redstart         Phoenicurus           13,600,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       ochruros
Black redstart (win-   Phoenicurus           13,600,000      Negligible        LC           Negligible          Negligible
tering)                ochruros
Common redstart        Phoenicurus            5,280,000         Low            LC           Negligible          Negligible
                       phoenicurus
Whinchat               Saxicola rubetra       5,330,000         Low             LC          Negligible          Negligible
Common stonechat       Saxicola              19,500,000      Negligible         LC          Negligible          Negligible
                       torquatus
Common stonechat       Saxicola              19,500,000      Negligible         LC          Negligible          Negligible
(wintering)            torquatus
Northern wheatear      Oenanthe              10,200,000      Negligible         LC          Negligible          Negligible
                       oenanthe
                                                                                                         (continued on next page)



                                                  Annex H. CEA For Birds Results: Step 2 – Species Sensitivity Results | 165
           ATEGORY 3, OTHER MIGRANTS AND/OR WINTERING POPULATIONS—RELATIVE IMPORTANCE,
TABLE H3. C
             VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING (continued )


                                              RELATIVE IMPORTANCE                                  ASSIGN SPECIES
                                                     SCORING            VULNERABILITY SCORING       SENSITIVITY


                                              BIRDLIFE                    IUCN
                                             BREEDING      RELATIVE      GLOBAL                     SENSITIVITY
                       SCIENTIFIC           DISTRIBUTION IMPORTANCE     RED LIST   VULNERABILITY    PER SPECIES
SPECIES NAME           NAME                  SIZE (KM2)        SCORE    CATEGORY      SCORE         POPULATION

Finsch’s wheatear       Oenanthe               1,160,000        Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        finschii
Black-eared wheat-      Oenanthe              3,530,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
ear                     hispanica
Pied wheatear           Oenanthe              3,380,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        pleschanka
Isabelline wheatear     Oenanthe              11,700,000   Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        isabellina
Rufus-tailed rock-      Monticola              3,130,000        Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
thrush                  saxatilis
Blue rock-thrush        Monticola             9,790,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        solitarius
Spotted flycatcher      Muscicapa            11,800,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        striata
Spanish sparrow         Passer                5,010,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        hispaniolensis
Dead sea sparrow        Passer                  188,000    Medium          LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        moabiticus
Pale rock sparrow       Petronia                282,000    Medium          LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        brachydactyla
Yellow wagtail          Motacilla flava      28,400,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
White wagtail           Motacilla alba       39,500,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
White wagtail (win-     Motacilla alba       39,500,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
tering)
Tawny pipit             Anthus                8,450,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        campestris
Tree pipit              Anthus trivialis     12,300,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
Red-throated pipit      Anthus cervinus       3,790,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
Eurasian chaffinch      Fringilla coelebs    13,400,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
European serin          Serinus serinus       2,420,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
European greenfinch     Carduelis chloris     9,710,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
European goldfinch      Carduelis             9,920,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        carduelis
Eurasian linnet         Carduelis            10,900,000    Negligible      LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        cannabina
Corn bunting            Miliaria calandra     1,680,000         Low        LC        Negligible       Negligible
Ortolan bunting         Emberiza                627,000    Moderate        LC        Negligible       Negligible
                        hortulana




166 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
           ATEGORY 4, OTHER RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING POPULATIONS – RELATIVE IMPORTANCE,
TABLE H4. C
             VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING


                                                                                                                 ASSIGN
                                                                                                                 SPECIES
                                      RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING              VULNERABILITY SCORING          SENSITIVITY


                                  APPROXIMATE
                                   MAXIMUM
                                   SHARE OF
                                   NATIONAL        BIOME                         IUCN
                                  POPULATION RESTRICTED         RELATIVE      REGIONAL                        SENSITIVITY
SPECIES         SCIENTIFIC        USING TRWPP    SPECIES IN   IMPORTANCE       RED LIST   VULNERABILITY PER SPECIES
NAME            NAME                AREA (%)      DANA IBA        SCORE       CATEGORY         SCORE          POPULATION

Chukar           Alectoris             >10            no           High           LC          Negligible           Low
                 chukar
Sand             Ammoperdix         >1 and ≤ 5       yes          Medium          LC          Negligible        Negligible
partridge        heyi
Eurasian         Burhinus              ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
thick-knee       oedicnemus
Cream-           Cursorius             ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
colored          cursor
courser
Spotted          Pterocles         >5 and ≤10         no          Medium          LC          Negligible        Negligible
sandgrouse       senegallus
Crowned          Pterocles         >5 and ≤10         no          Medium          LC          Negligible        Negligible
sandgrouse       coronatus
Feral pigeon     Columba livia         ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
                 domestica
Rock dove        Columba livia         ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
Eurasian         Streptopelia          ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
collared dove    decaocto
Laughing         Spilopelia            ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
dove             senegalensis
Pharaoh          Bubo              >5 and ≤10        yes           High           LC          Negligible           Low
eagle-owl        ascalaphus
Hume’s owl       Strix butleri         >10           yes           High           LC          Negligible           Low
Little owl       Athene noctua         ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
Alpine swift     Tachymarptis          ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
                 melba
Woodchat         Lanius senator        ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
shrike
Masked           Lanius nubicus        ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
shrike
Brown-           Corvus                ≤1            yes           Low            LC          Negligible        Negligible
necked raven     ruficollis
Common           Corvus corax          >10            no           High           LC          Negligible           Low
raven
Greater          Alaemon               ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
hoopoe-lark      alaudipes
                                                                                                       (continued on next page)




                                                 Annex H. CEA For Birds Results: Step 2 – Species Sensitivity Results | 167
           ATEGORY 4, OTHER RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING POPULATIONS – RELATIVE IMPORTANCE,
TABLE H4. C
             VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING (continued )


                                                                                                               ASSIGN
                                                                                                              SPECIES
                                        RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING           VULNERABILITY SCORING         SENSITIVITY


                                    APPROXIMATE
                                     MAXIMUM
                                     SHARE OF
                                     NATIONAL       BIOME                       IUCN
                                    POPULATION RESTRICTED        RELATIVE     REGIONAL                      SENSITIVITY
SPECIES          SCIENTIFIC         USING TRWPP    SPECIES IN   IMPORTANCE    RED LIST   VULNERABILITY PER SPECIES
NAME             NAME                 AREA (%)     DANA IBA       SCORE       CATEGORY       SCORE         POPULATION

Desert lark      Ammomanes               ≤1           yes          Low           LC         Negligible        Negligible
                 deserti
Bar-tailed lark Ammomanes                ≤1           yes          Low           LC         Negligible        Negligible
                cinctura
Wood lark        Lullula arborea         >10          no           High          LC         Negligible           Low
Crested lark     Galerida                ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible        Negligible
                 cristata
Temminck’s       Eremophila              ≤1           yes          Low           LC         Negligible        Negligible
lark             bilopha
Dunn’s lark      Eremalauda              ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible        Negligible
                 dunni
White-           Pycnonotus              ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible        Negligible
spectacled       xanthopygos
bulbul
Pale crag-       Hirundo                 ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible        Negligible
martin           obsoleta
Streaked         Scotocerca              ≤1           yes          Low           LC         Negligible        Negligible
scrub-           inquieta
warbler
Graceful         Prinia gracilis         ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible        Negligible
prinia
Arabian          Turdoides               >10          yes          High          LC         Negligible           Low
babbler          squamiceps
Orphean          Sylvia hortensis     >1 and ≤ 5      no           Low           LC         Negligible        Negligible
warbler
Arabian          Sylvia                  >10          no           High          LC         Negligible           Low
warbler          leucomelaena
Spectacled       Sylvia               >1 and ≤ 5      no           Low           LC         Negligible        Negligible
warbler          conspicillata
Sardinian        Sylvia                  ≤1           yes          Low           LC         Negligible        Negligible
warbler          melanocephala
Tristram’s       Onychogna-              >10          no           High          LC         Negligible           Low
starling         thus tristramii
Eurasian         Turdus merula           ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible        Negligible
blackbird
                                                                                                    (continued on next page)




168 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
           ATEGORY 4, OTHER RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING POPULATIONS – RELATIVE IMPORTANCE,
TABLE H4. C
             VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING (continued )


                                                                                                                 ASSIGN
                                                                                                                 SPECIES
                                      RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING              VULNERABILITY SCORING          SENSITIVITY


                                   APPROXIMATE
                                    MAXIMUM
                                    SHARE OF
                                    NATIONAL       BIOME                         IUCN
                                   POPULATION RESTRICTED         RELATIVE     REGIONAL                        SENSITIVITY
SPECIES          SCIENTIFIC        USING TRWPP   SPECIES IN    IMPORTANCE      RED LIST   VULNERABILITY PER SPECIES
NAME             NAME                AREA (%)     DANA IBA        SCORE       CATEGORY         SCORE          POPULATION

Blue rock-       Monticola             ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
thrush           solitarius
Isabelline       Oenanthe              ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
wheatear         isabellina
Hooded           Oenanthe              ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
wheatear         monacha
Desert           Oenanthe              ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
wheatear         deserti
Black-eared      Oenanthe              ≤1            yes            Low           LC          Negligible        Negligible
wheatear         hispanica
Blackstart       Cercomela             ≤1            yes            Low           LC          Negligible        Negligible
                 melanura
White-tailed     Oenanthe              ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
wheatear         leucopyga
Mourning         Oenanthe              ≤1            yes            Low           LC          Negligible        Negligible
wheatear         lugens
Palestine        Nectarinia osea       ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
sunbird
House            Passer                ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
sparrow          domesticus
Spanish          Passer                ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
sparrow          hispaniolensis
Dead sea         Passer                ≤1             no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
sparrow          moabiticus
Pale rock        Petronia              >10            no           High           LC          Negligible           Low
sparrow          brachydactyla
Rock sparrow     Petronia               ≤1            no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
                 petronia
Tawny pipit      Anthus             >5 and ≤10        no         Moderate         LC          Negligible        Negligible
                 campestris
Long-billed      Anthus similis         ≤1            no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
pipit
Trumpeter        Bucanetes              ≤1           yes            Low           LC          Negligible        Negligible
finch            githagineus
Pale rosefinch Carpodacus               ≤1            no         Negligible       LC          Negligible        Negligible
               synoicus

                                                                                                       (continued on next page)




                                                 Annex H. CEA For Birds Results: Step 2 – Species Sensitivity Results | 169
           ATEGORY 4, OTHER RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING POPULATIONS – RELATIVE IMPORTANCE,
TABLE H4. C
             VULNERABILITY AND SENSITIVITY SCORING (continued )


                                                                                                      ASSIGN
                                                                                                      SPECIES
                                   RELATIVE IMPORTANCE SCORING           VULNERABILITY SCORING      SENSITIVITY


                               APPROXIMATE
                                MAXIMUM
                                SHARE OF
                                NATIONAL       BIOME                       IUCN
                               POPULATION RESTRICTED        RELATIVE     REGIONAL                   SENSITIVITY
SPECIES          SCIENTIFIC    USING TRWPP    SPECIES IN   IMPORTANCE    RED LIST   VULNERABILITY PER SPECIES
NAME             NAME            AREA (%)     DANA IBA       SCORE       CATEGORY       SCORE       POPULATION

European         Carduelis          ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible    Negligible
greenfinch       chloris
Desert finch     Rhodopechys        ≤1           no         Negligible      LC         Negligible    Negligible
                 obsoletus
Eurasian         Carduelis          ≤1            no        Negligible      LC         Negligible    Negligible
linnet           cannabina
European         Carduelis          >10           no          High          EN           High          High
goldfinch        carduelis
Syrian Serin     Serinus            >10          yes          High          EN           High          High
                 syriacus
Corn bunting     Miliaria           ≤1            no        Negligible      LC         Negligible    Negligible
                 calandra
Ortolan          Emberiza        >1 and ≤ 5       no          Low           NT           Low           Low
bunting          hortulana
Cretzschmar’s Emberiza              ≤1            no        Negligible      LC         Negligible    Negligible
bunting       caesia
Striolated       Emberiza           ≤1           yes          Low           LC         Negligible    Negligible
bunting          striolata




170 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Annex I. Calculating Likelihood of
Effect for Migratory Soaring Birds
and for Resident and Summer
Breeding Raptors
INTRODUCTION

This annex describes the principal method used in step 3 of the CEA for birds (Section 3.4) to assess the cumulative
likelihood of effect (LoE) of TRWPPs on migratory soaring birds (MSBs) (category 1 species populations) and
resident and summer breeding raptors (category 2 species populations). Collision with turbine blades is assumed
to be the only potentially significant adverse effect for both migrating and resident raptor populations within
each WPP site. The method therefore provides species-specific estimates of the annual likelihood of collision per
individual bird for all the WPP sites included in this CEA study, which are then used to rank the LoE between
species. The annual likelihood of collision per individual is derived from (i) the predicted annual estimates of
collision fatalities calculated using the ”Band” Collision Risk Model (CRM);63 (ii) the annual number of individuals
passing through (MSBs), or using (breeding raptors) WPP sites; and (iii) an assumed estimate of the number of
individual birds involved. The data used to conduct the analyses come from flight activity surveys conducted during
the spring and autumn migration periods at WPP sites in the study area as part of the preconstruction baseline
surveys. The output from this method provides a relative measure by which raptor populations can be ranked
according to a level of effect. This measure is used as the principal evidence for determining priority birds within
these two species population groups.

CATEGORY 1: MSB POPULATIONS – LOE

The principal LoE metric for MSBs is an estimate of the annual likelihood (in percent) of collision per individual
passing through WPP sites with any of the TRWPP turbines. It has three components:

i.	 Cumulative Collision Risk Estimate: These are species-specific annual estimates (spring and autumn migration
    periods), using CRM results from preconstruction baseline studies at each WPP, of the predicted number of
    fatalities if all five wind farms were operational. To obtain this figure estimates from individual WPPs were
    combined. Where more than one CRM estimate was available for a specific WPP, an average of those estimates
    was used. All CRM analyses were reviewed by Natural Research Projects Ltd to ensure that they were correctly
    conducted at each WPP. As a consequence, some CRM results were omitted from the LoE analysis. Results
    from the following WPPs were used: Tafila, spring and autumn 2013; LAMSA, autumn 2014 and spring 2015;
    KOSPO, spring 2015; Fujeij, spring 2014; and Abour Energy, spring 2015.

ii.	 Estimated Number of Birds Flying Through TRWPP Study Area Annually: These are species-specific annual
     estimates (spring and autumn migration periods) of the number of birds flying through the WPP sites using
     the results from the preconstruction baseline flight activity surveys. Estimates were derived from the number
     of flights recorded, corrected to account for the proportion of time during the spring and autumn migration
     periods when surveys were not taking place.


63    For details on the ”Band” CRM method for estimating annual collision fatality estimates, see Section 2.3.3.



Annex I. Calculating Likelihood of Effect for Migratory Soaring Birds and for Resident and Summer Breeding Raptors | 171
iii.	 Number of Individuals: It is possible that MSBs recorded at WPPs during a spring and an autumn migration
      period (i.e., annually) are all different individuals. However, it is likely that some individuals may pass through
      more than one of the wind farms within the TRWPP area during the course of a year (e.g., either passing
      through more than one WPP site during the same migration or passing through a site again on the return
      migration). In an attempt to account for this in the LoE estimate, it is assumed that on average each individual
      passes through two individual wind farm areas in a year. For example, if there were 1,000 birds of a particular
      species recorded passing through the wind farms annually, it is assumed this would equate to 500 individuals.

The annual likelihood (per individual) of colliding with TRWPP turbines, expressed as a percentage, was calculated
for MSB populations using the method indicated in Table I1.

TABLE I1. ANNUAL LIKELIHOOD OF COLLIDING WITH TRWPP TURBINES – LOE METHOD FOR MSB POPULATIONS
(CATEGORY 1)


                          METRIC A                   METRIC B              METRIC C

                                                                                     ANNUAL
                                                           CUMULATIVE CRM        LIKELIHOOD PER
                      ESTIMATED NO.                        ESTIMATE OF THE        INDIVIDUAL OF
                     OF BIRDS FLYING  ASSUME EACH BIRD   PREDICTED ANNUAL        COLLIDING WITH
                      THROUGH WPP      FLIES THROUGH    NUMBER OF FATALITIES    TRWPP TURBINES
                     SITES DURING SIX  ONLY TWO WIND    BASED ON SURVEY DATA
                   MIGRATION MONTHS, FARMS; THEREFORE     FOR SIX MIGRATION     METRIC C DIVIDED
                    THREE IN SPRING,   DIVIDE METRIC A MONTHS (THREE IN SPRING, BY METRIC B X 100
  SPECIES           THREE IN AUTUMN          BY 2         THREE IN AUTUMN)             (%)

 e.g., Egyptian                181                          90.5              0.071                        0.08
 vulture



The annual probability of an individual colliding with TRWPP turbines for each species population was assigned
to one of four categories: Negligible (< 0.05 percent), Low (> 0.05 and ≤ 0.1 percent), Medium (> 0.1 and ≤ 1
percent) and High (> 1 percent). Category divisions were informed by the distribution of values across all MSB
and breeding raptor species in step 3 (Figure I1).

The reliability of the collision risk estimate depends on how representative the sample flight activity data is
of the flight activity during the lifetime of the wind farm. It also depends on the accuracy of the assumptions
used in the model, most notably the proportion of occasions that a bird faced with collision avoids the turbines
(collision avoidance rate).64 For these reasons there will be uncertainty surrounding a single value for a collision
risk estimate. Furthermore, the model is unable to generate realistic confidence limits around the collision risk
estimate. Recognizing this, each estimate was compared with the broader trends analysis (see Annex E). Where
the trends analysis indicated that the annual probability of an individual of colliding with TRWPP turbines may
be higher than the calculated CRM results suggested, the LoE was increased by one category level (e.g., from
negligible to low) as a precautionary measure. Finally, the LoE category determined by the CRMs and the trends
analysis was reviewed by the ERP together with ornithologists on the CEA team, to identify any relevant factors
not otherwise captured (see Section 3.4.1).

64    For more details, see Madders and Whitfield (2006).



172 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
CATEGORY 2: RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS – LOE

As for MSBs, the LoE for resident and summer breeding raptors is the annual likelihood (in percent) per
individual using a WPP site of collision with any of the TRWPP area turbines. It is calculated using the following
components:

 i.	 Cumulative Collision Risk Estimate: This estimate uses species-specific CRM results from preconstruction
     baseline studies at the five WPP sites as derived from the Band model. The CRM estimates for each species
     are combined to obtain the predicted annual number of fatalities if all five wind farms were operational.
     These estimates are calculated for the six-month period during which survey data were collected (i.e., spring
     and autumn migration periods). To correct these estimates, this initial CRM estimate was multiplied by two
     (2 x 6 months) for year-round residents, corresponding to exposure to collision risk for 12 months and by
     1.5 for summer breeding raptors, corresponding to exposure to collision risk for approximately 9 months
     of the year.

 ii.	 Assumed Number of Resident and/or Summer Breeding Individuals Sharing Collision Risk: As with MSBs,
      the estimate of collision risk to an individual resident or summer breeding raptor requires information on the
      number of individuals exposed to the risk. Unlike MSBs, which tend to transit through WPP sites, it is likely
      that both resident and summer breeding raptor individuals will be exposed to a collision risk on multiple
      occasions a year (i.e., an individual may fly within the TRWPP area many times a year). No survey information
      is available to track individuals; therefore, an estimate of the number of individuals exposed to the risk of
      collision is based on the number of individuals likely to be present within species-specific foraging ranges of
      the WPP sites. This is an approximate and precautionary estimate of the number of breeding adults and young
      birds likely to use WPPs for foraging and other activities, and is guided by breeding survey information and
      expert opinion provided by the ERP.

The annual likelihood (per individual) of colliding with TRWPP turbines, expressed as a percentage, was calculated
for resident and summer breeding raptor populations using the method indicated in Table I2.



          ANNUAL LIKELIHOOD OF COLLIDING WITH TRWPP TURBINES – LOE METHOD FOR RESIDENT AND SUMMER
TABLE I2. 
            BREEDING RAPTORS (CATEGORY 2)



                    METRIC A                    METRIC B                                    METRIC C
                                                                                                                                  ANNUAL
                                                                                                                                LIKELIHOOD
                                                                              MODIFIED CUMULATIVE CRM
                                                                                                                              PER INDIVIDUAL
                 ASSUMED NO.   CUMULATIVE CRM                                  VALUE—TO ACCOUNT FOR
                                                                                                                               OF COLLIDING
                 OF RESIDENT    ESTIMATE OF THE                              COLLISIONS OF RESIDENT AND
                                                                                                                               WITH TRWPP
                 INDIVIDUALS PREDICTED NUMBER OF                            SUMMER BREEDERS THAT OCCUR
                                                                                                                               TURBINES (%)
                   SHARING    FATALITIES BASED ON                          OUTSIDE THE SIX-MONTH SURVEY
                  COLLISION  SURVEY DATA FROM SIX                          PERIOD: EITHER 1.5 OR 2 TIMES THE                    METRIC C/
 SPECIES             RISK     MIGRATION MONTHS                                   VALUE OF METRIC Ba                            METRIC A X 100

 e.g., Griffon           30                         2.542                                       5.084                                   16.9
 vulture

a. For year-round residents, the annual risk is assumed to be twice the estimated risk value for the combined migration seasons (six months). For sum-
mer residents and/or breeders, the annual risk is assumed to be 1.5 times the estimated risk value for the combined migration seasons. Average flight
activity and flying height outside the migration seasons are assumed to be the same during the migration season.




Annex I. Calculating Likelihood of Effect for Migratory Soaring Birds and for Resident and Summer Breeding Raptors | 173
                                                                                                                                        Annual likelihood per individual of
                                                                                                                                         colliding with TRWPP turbines




                                                                                                             0%
                                                                                                                  2%
                                                                                                                       4%
                                                                                                                            6%
                                                                                                                                 8%
                                                                                                                                      10%
                                                                                                                                             12%
                                                                                                                                                   14%
                                                                                                                                                         16%
                                                                                                                                                               18%
                                                                                                                                                                        20%
                                                                                                                                                                                22%
                                                                                                                                                                                         24%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  26%
                                                                                                                                                                                                           28%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 32%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         34%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  36%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FIGURE I1. A
                                                                       Long-legged buzzard (resident)
                                                          Lesser kestrel (if all ﬂights by breeding birds)
                                                                              Gri on vulture (resident)
                                               Short-toed Snake-eagle (if all ﬂights by breeding birds)
                                                        Lesser kestrel (if half ﬂights by breeding birds)
                                              Short-toed Snake-eagle (if half ﬂights by breeding birds)
                                                                                Golden eagle (resident)




                                                                                                                                                                0.00%
                                                                                                                                                                        0.02%
                                                                                                                                                                                0.04%
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.06%
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.08%
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.12%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.14%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.16%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.18%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.20%
                                                                               Bonelli’s eagle (resident)
                                                                                                                                              White stork
                                                                                             White stork
                                                                                                                                             Lesser kestrel
                                                                                           Lesser kestrel
                                                                                                                                                   Black kite




174 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
                                                                                               Black kite
                                                                                 Eastern imperial eagle                          Eastern imperial eagle

                                                                                   Lesser spotted eagle                            Lesser spotted eagle

                                                                                  Levant sparrowhawk                              Levant sparrowhawk

                                                                                Eurasian sparrowhawk                             Eurasian sparrowhawk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (RED), DETAIL OF VALUES FOR MSB POPULATIONS




                                                                                       Common kestrel                                  Common kestrel

                                                                                Western Marsh-harrier                            Western Marsh-harrier

                                                                                           Steppe eagle                                      Steppe eagle

                                                                    Short-toed Snake-eagle (migrant)               Short-toed Snake-eagle (migrant)

                                                                                         Steppe buzzard                                 Steppe buzzard

                                                                                           Booted eagle                                      Booted eagle
                                                                                        Egyptian vulture                               Egyptian vulture
                                                                                          Spotted eagle                                      Spotted eagle
                                                                                  Long-legged buzzard                             Long-legged buzzard
                                                                                      Red-footed falcon                               Red-footed falcon
                                                                                      Montagu’s harrier                               Montagu’s harrier
                                                                                            Pallid harrier                                    Pallid harrier
                                                                                             Black stork                                       Black stork
                                                                                         Honey buzzard                                      Honey buzzard
                                                                                             Hen harrier                                       Hen harrier
                                                                                                                                             Golden eagle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NNUAL LIKELIHOOD (%) PER INDIVIDUAL OF COLLISION WITH TWRPP TURBINES, DISTRIBUTION OF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VALUES AND ASSIGNED CATEGORIES: NEGLIGIBLE (BLUE), LOW (GREEN), MODERATE (YELLOW), HIGH




                                                                                           Golden eagle
                                                                                                  Lanner                                             Lanner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The annual likelihood of an individual colliding with TRWPP turbines for each species population was assigned


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      analysis and a review by the ERP were used to adjust the LoE category rating where appropriate (see Section 3.4.1).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to categories (negligible, low, medium, and high) based on the range values in Figure I1. As with MSBs, the trends
Annex J. CEA for Birds Results:
Step 3 – Likelihood of Effect and
Final Risk Rating




                Annex J. CEA for Birds Results: Step 3 – Likelihood of Effect and Final Risk Rating | 175
TABLE J1. CATEGORY 1, MIGRATORY SOARING BIRD POPULATIONS—LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT AND FINAL RISK RATING


                                                                                                       LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT (LOE)


                                                                                                                                                LOE PRE-
                                                                     METRIC A                                                                ADJUSTMENT ADJUSTMENT
                                                                   ESTIMATED                              METRIC C            ANNUAL             SCORE          OF LOE SCORE
                                                                      NO. OF            METRIC B            NO. OF         LIKELIHOOD          BASED ON           BASED ON
                                                                  RECORDS OF           ESTIMATED         PREDICTED        OF COLLISION          ANNUAL              TRENDS
                                                                   INDIVIDUAL            NO. OF          FATALITIES       AT TRWPP PER LIKELIHOOD ANALYSIS AND/
                                                                  BIRDS AT FIVE INDIVIDUALS               PER YEAR         INDIVIDUAL               OF            OR EXPERT           ASSIGNED
                                                                 WPP SITES PER           AT RISK        (SPRING AND              (%)           COLLISION         REVIEW (NO.        RISK RATING
                                                SENSITIVITY YEAR (SPRING                (DERIVED           AUTUMN            METRIC C/         AT TRWPP         OF LEVELS BY          FOR EACH
                       SPECIES                 SCORE FROM AND AUTUMN                      FROM          MIGRATIONS)         METRIC B X             PER            WHICH LOE            SPECIES
SPECIES NAME           SCIENTIFIC NAME             STEP 2         MIGRATIONS a         METRIC A)b        AT TRWPPc               100          INDIVIDUAL          ADJUSTED)         POPULATION

 Common craned          Grus grus                  Medium                                                                                       Negligible              0             Negligible
 Black stork            Ciconia nigra                High                  787               393               0.13               0.03          Negligible              0                Minor
 Ospreyd                Pandion haliaetus            Low                                                                                           Low                  0                Minor
 European honey-        Pernis apivorus              Low                65,753            32,877              10.59               0.03          Negligible              0             Negligible
 buzzard
 Egyptian vulture       Neophron percnop-            High                   181               90              0.07                0.08             Low                  0             Moderate
                        terus
 Short-toed             Circaetus gallicus           Low                 2,023              1,011             0.85                0.08             Low                  +1               Minor
 snake-eagle
 Lesser spotted         Clanga pomarina              Low                   260                130              0.13                0.10            Low                  0                Minor
 eagle
 Steppe eagle           Aquila nipalensis            Low                 2,302               1,151             0.97               0.08             Low                  +2            Moderate
 Eastern imperial       Aquila heliaca               High                   191               96               0.11                0.12          Medium                 0                Major
 eagle
 Booted eagle           Hieraaetus pen-            Medium                   170                85             0.05                0.06             Low                  +1            Moderate
                        natus
 Western marsh-         Circus aeruginosus           Low                   247                123              0.10               0.08             Low                  0                Minor
 harrier
 Hen harrier            Circus cyaneus             Medium                    67                33             0.00                 0.01         Negligible              0                Minor
 Pallid harrier         Circus macrourus             Low                    341              170              0.06                0.03          Negligible              0                Minor
 Montagu’s              Circus pygargus              Low                    169               84              0.03                0.04          Negligible              0             Negligible
 harrier
 Levant                 Accipiter brevipes         Medium              14,060              7,030              6.60                0.09             Low                  0                Minor
 sparrowhawk
 Black kite             Milvus migrans               Low                 2,602              1,301              1.54                0.12          Medium                 0                Minor
 Steppe buzzard         Buteo buteo                  Low                72,108           36,054              29.84                0.08             Low                  0                Minor
                        vulpinus
 Lesser kestrel         Falco naumanni               Low                 5,326             2,663               4.34                0.16          Medium                 0                Minor
 Common kestrel         Falco tinnunculus          Medium                  978               489               1.68               0.08             Low                  0                Minor
 Lanner falcon          Falco biarmicus              Low                     23                12             0.00                0.02          Negligible              0             Negligible

Note: Priority bird VECs outlined in red.
a
  This is an estimate of the total number of individual birds recorded passing through the five WPP sites per year (spring and autumn migrations), corrected for periods during the migration periods
when no surveys occurred. The figure does not account for the possibility that the same individuals were recorded at more than one WPP or that the same individuals are recorded in both spring
and autumn migrations.
b
  Some individuals may pass through more than one WWP site as they pass through the TRWPP area and/or the same individual may pass over the TRWPP area twice in the same year—once during
the spring migration and then again in the autumn. For the purpose of assessing the LoE, it was assumed that on average the same individual was recorded twice during the course of a year at the
TRWPP sites. Therefore, the estimate of the total number of individual bird records (Metric A) was halved to estimate the number of individual birds at risk.
c
  Total number of predicted fatalities per year (based on spring plus autumn migration monitoring) at all WPP sites calculated by averaging the annual CRM fatality estimate for each WWP site and
then summing the resulting five WPP site CRM estimates.
d
  No collision risk model estimates—LoE per individual determined by the ERP.




               176 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
                                                                                            TABLE J2. CATEGORY 2, RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING RAPTOR POPULATIONS—LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT AND FINAL RISK RATING

                                                                                                                                                                                                 LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT (LOE)

                                                                                                                                                     METRIC A            METRIC B             METRIC C                                           LOE PRE-         ADJUSTMENT
                                                                                                                                                    ESTIMATED       NO. OF PREDICTED ADJUSTMENT                METRIC D         ANNUAL         ADJUSTMENT        OF LOE SCORE
                                                                                                                                                      NO. OF          FATALITIES PER        FACTOR FOR         ADJUSTED       LIKELIHOOD          SCORE,            BASED ON
                                                                                                                                                  INDIVIDUALS        YEAR BASED ON          METRIC B TO          NO. OF      OF COLLISION        BASED ON            TRENDS
                                                                                                                                                       USING           MONITORING          ACCOUNT FOR PREDICTED               AT TRWPP           ANNUAL         ANALYSIS AND/
                                                                                                                                                   TRWPP SITES       DURING SPRING           EXTENDED         FATALITIES           PER         LIKELIHOOD          OR EXPERT          ASSIGNED
                                                                                                                                  SENSITIVITY       (ESTIMATE          AND AUTUMN             PRESENCE         PER YEAR       INDIVIDUAL       OF COLLISION       REVIEW (NO.        RISK RATING
                                                                                                                 SPECIES             SCORE          BASED ON            MIGRATION           OF RESIDENT          USING         METRIC D/         AT TRWPP         OF LEVELS BY        FOR EACH
Annex J. CEA for Birds Results: Step 3 – Likelihood of Effect and Final Risk Rating | 177




                                                                                                                 SCIENTIFIC        FROM STEP          EXPERT        (FROM COLLISION         AND SUMMER METRIC B X             METRIC A X            PER            WHICH LOE            SPECIES
                                                                                             SPECIES NAME        NAME                    2          OPINION)a          RISK MODEL)b        POPULATIONS         METRIC C          100 (%)        INDIVIDUAL      WAS ADJUSTED) POPULATION

                                                                                             Short-toed           Circaetus            High               8                 0.847                1.5             1.27             15.89             High                +1               Major
                                                                                             snake-eagle          gallicus
                                                                                             Griffon vulture      Gyps fulvus          High              30                  2.542                2            5.08               16.95             High                 0               Major

                                                                                             Golden eagle         Aquila               High               8                 0.016                 2            0.03                0.41           Medium                 0               Major
                                                                                                                  chrysaetos
                                                                                             Verreaux’s           Aquila               High                                                                                                         Low                  0            Moderate
                                                                                             eagled               verreauxii
                                                                                             Bonelli’s eagle      Aquila               High               8                 0.014                 2            0.03               0.34            Medium                 0               Major
                                                                                                                  fasciata
                                                                                             Long-legged          Buteo rufinus        Low                8                  1.477                2             2.95             36.92              High                 0            Moderate
                                                                                             buzzard
                                                                                             Lesser kestrel       Falco             Medium               30                 4.340                1.5            6.51              21.70             High                 0               Major
                                                                                                                  naumanni
                                                                                             Sooty falcond        Falco             Medium                                                                                                          Low                  0               Minor
                                                                                                                  concolor
                                                                                             Barbary falcond      Falco             Medium                                                                                                          Low                  0               Minor
                                                                                                                  pelegrinoides
                                                                                            Note: Priority bird VECs outlined in red.
                                                                                            a
                                                                                              Unlike in MSB populations, the number of individual resident and summer breeding raptors at risk of collision cannot be estimated from the number of birds transiting through TRWPP sites because
                                                                                            resident and/or summer breeding raptor populations may repeatedly visit WPP sites for foraging and other activities. To know the actual number of individuals of these populations would require
                                                                                            that birds be individually identifiable, which they are not. Therefore the number of individuals of each category 2 species was an estimate of the number of breeding adult, immature, and juvenile birds
                                                                                            considered likely to be using the wind farm areas for foraging and other activities, on the basis of expert knowledge of the number of pairs likely to be breeding in the area.
                                                                                            b
                                                                                              Total number of predicted fatalities per year (based on spring plus autumn migration monitoring) at all WPP sites calculated by averaging the annual CRM fatality estimate for each WWP site and
                                                                                            then summing the resulting estimates for the five WPP sites.
                                                                                            c
                                                                                              All collision risk estimates are based on monitoring that took place only during the spring and autumn migration periods. To estimate the predicted number of fatalities for resident or summer
                                                                                            breeding populations, the collision risk estimates were adjusted to take account of the extended period that these populations were potentially exposed to collision risk from TRWPP turbines. For
                                                                                            summer breeding populations, the sum of the spring and autumn collision risk was multiplied by 1.5 to account for risk during the summer period. For resident populations, the figure for the six
                                                                                            months of spring and autumn collision risk was multiplied by 2 to account for risk during the six months outside the migration period.
                                                                                            d
                                                                                              No collision risk model estimates—LoE per individual determined by the ERP.
CATEGORY 3, OTHER MIGRANTS AND/OR WINTERING BIRD POPULATIONS—LOE AND FINAL RISK RATING

All species populations in this category were scoped out in step 2.



           ATEGORY 4, OTHER RESIDENT AND SUMMER BREEDING POPULATIONS—LIKELIHOOD OF EFFECT AND
TABLE J3. C
            FINAL RISK RATING


                                                                            LIKELIHOOD OF
                                                                             EFFECT (LOE)

                                                                          (ANNUAL LIKELIHOOD
                                                            SENSITIVITY    PER INDIVIDUAL OF     ASSIGNED RISK
                                 SPECIES SCIENTIFIC         SCORE FROM    COLLISION; BASED ON  RATING FOR EACH
SPECIES NAME                     NAME                          STEP 2       EXPERT REVIEW)    SPECIES POPULATION

 Chukar                          Alectoris chukar               Low            Negligible          Negligible
 Hume’s owl                      Strix butleri                  Low            Negligible          Negligible
 Pharaoh eagle-owl               Bubo ascalaphus                Low              Low                 Minor
 Common raven                    Corvus corax                   Low            Moderate              Minor
 Wood lark                       Lullula arborea                Low            Negligible          Negligible
 Arabian warbler                 Sylvia leucomelaena            Low            Negligible          Negligible
 Arabian babbler                 Turdoides squamiceps           Low            Negligible          Negligible
 Tristram’s starling             Onychognathus tristramii       Low              Low                 Minor
 Pale rock sparrow               Petronia brachydactyla         Low              Low                 Minor
 Syrian Serin                    Serinus syriacus              High              Low               Moderate
 European goldfinch              Carduelis carduelis           High              Low               Moderate
 Ortolan bunting                 Emberiza hortulana             Low              Low                 Minor

Note: Priority bird VECs outlined in red.




178 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
  Annex K. Threshold Setting:
  Determining Estimates of
  Fatalities from External Stressors
  and Defining Thresholds for
  Priority Bird Populations
  This annex describes the process used in step 4 of the CEA Framework for birds (see Section 3.5) to estimate
  the annual number of bird fatalities 65 resulting from the effects of external stressors. This estimate was used
  to help assess whether each of the priority bird populations is likely to be viable in the long term. It was also
  used in the process of determining an appropriate threshold for each priority bird population.

  In the CEA, external stressors are human-derived non-TRWPP effects; for example, illegal killing, power line
  electrocution, and taking of live birds from the wild. Quantitative information on the number of individuals
  affected by these external stressors is geographically patchy and/or largely nonexistent for both Jordan and the
  Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway. As a consequence, the CEA relied on expert opinion from the ERP to estimate annual
  losses from external stressors.

  OBTAINING ANNUAL FATALITY ESTIMATES FOR EXTERNAL STRESSORS FROM THE ERP

  The ERP was provided with a table that included for each priority bird population the annual fatality rate from
  the PBR66 analysis, the cumulative annual fatality rate for all TRWPPs, and blank cells to provide estimates
  of annual fatalities from three component external stressors and the combined effect of all external stressors.
  Component external stressors were those considered by the ERP to be most relevant to priority bird populations
  (see the example in Table K1).



             XTRACT FROM TABLE OF INFORMATION USED TO DETERMINE ANNUAL LOSSES DUE TO EXTERNAL
  TABLE K1. E
              STRESSORS AND TO DETERMINE THRESHOLDS FOR PRIORITY BIRDS


                                                      EXTERNAL STRESSOR COMPONENT
                                                           (FATALITIES PER YEAR)
                                                                       CUMULATIVE     EXPERT
                         TRWPP                                          EFFECT OF   OPINION ON
                        COLLISION    POWER LINE                         EXTERNAL    THRESHOLD
           PBR RESULT     RISK     ELECTROCUTION         COLLECTION OF STRESSORS       (ZERO
           (FATALITIES (FATALITIES     AND/OR    ILLEGAL LIVE BIRDS OF (FATALITIES FATALITIES OR
   SPECIES PER YEAR) PER YEAR)        COLLISION  KILLING     PREY       PER YEAR) PVA NEEDED)

   e.g.,             5.2            0.07                ≥ 1 to < 5         ≥ 1 to < 5       ≥ 1 to < 5        ≥ 1 and < 5         Zero fatality
   Egyptian
   vulture



    In the context of external stressors, the term fatalities includes the capture and keeping of live birds.
  65 

    Potential Biological Removal analysis is a simple, robust, and precautionary test developed for situations in which information
  66 

  on species population biology is limited (see Wade, 1998; Neil and Lebreton, 2005; Dillingham and Fletcher, 2011). It uses species-
  specific biological and demographic parameters, specifically adult survival rate and year of first breeding, to calculate an annual rate
  of human-caused mortality that, if realized, would likely result in a nonviable population in the long term.



Annex K. Threshold Setting: Determining Estimates of Fatalities from External Stressors and Defining Thresholds for Priority Bird Populations | 179
CATEGORIES USED TO ESTIMATE FATALITY RATES                                                  ATEGORIES FOR ANNUAL
                                                                                 TABLE K2. C
                                                                                               NUMBER OF FATALITIES
For each external stressor component, the ERP was asked to collectively
agree and assign, to one of four categories, the annual number of
                                                                                       NUMBER OF FATALITIES PER YEAR
fatalities estimated to be likely within the relevant UoA67 population
(see Table K2). The ERP was also asked to estimate cumulative                     ≥ 10

fatalities from all external stressors without specifically referring to          ≥ 5 and < 10
                                                                                  ≥1 and < 5
the component scores. This cumulative fatality estimate was included
                                                                                  <1
as an informal check to see if perceptions of overall loss were being
over- or underestimated by using only the component results.

Where the cumulative fatality category agreed with the minimum
number of fatalities from the component stressors, the cumulative effects category was used to inform threshold
setting. This is the case in the example in Table K1, where the minimum number of losses estimated for the
component stressors is 1 + 1 + 1 = 3, which is within the range assigned to the cumulative number of losses (≥
1 but < 5 per year). Where this was not the case, ornithologists on the CEA team reviewed the external stressor
estimates with the ERP to better understand the reasons for the discrepancy and, where necessary, revised the
appropriate category rating.

DEFINING THRESHOLDS FOR EXTERNAL STRESSORS USING THE ERP

For each priority VEC, the ERP was asked to use the cumulative effect of external stressors category score plus
the annual TRWPP collision rate to estimate the combined number of annual fatalities. The ERP was also asked to
factor into the assessment any species-specific external stressors not accounted for by the three principal external
stressor components. The ERP compared this assessment against the annual number of fatalities given by the PBR
analysis to inform the final decision on a threshold target. A zero fatality threshold target was automatically assigned
if the cumulative fatalities from the three principal external stressors plus the TRWPP estimate exceeded the PBR.
In addition, the ERP recommended a zero fatality threshold target if the cumulative effect of external stressors
category score plus the annual TRWPP collision rate was sufficiently close to the PBR that, taking account of any
additional species-specific external stressors or other uncertainties, no WPP-related mortality was possible without
a likely adverse effect on the long-term viability of the population.

If the assessment of annual fatalities was likely to be below the PBR level, even after any additional species-specific
uncertainties were accounted for, the ERP had the option to recommend a more complex PVA. This was used to
assess future population trends under different wind farm and external stressor mortality scenarios to determine
whether a zero fatality or annual fatality threshold was most appropriate and to inform the setting of any annual
fatality threshold targets.




  For category 1 priority birds, the UoA population is the Rift Valley/Red Sea flyway population. For resident and summer breeding
67 

priority birds, the UoA is the national population estimate.



180 | Tafila Region Wind Power Projects CEA
Stay Connected


SCRIBD:

http://www.scribd.com/IFCSustainability



LINKEDIN:

http://www.linkedin.com/pub/ifc-sustainability/1b/729/1ba



CONTACT:

asksustainability@ifc.org



ACCESS THIS AND OTHER IFC SUSTAINABILITY PUBLICATIONS ONLINE AT:

http://www.ifc.org/sustainabilitypublications
2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
www.ifc.org/sustainability
asksustainability@ifc.org
