LOCAL SHARES WORKSHOP
        SUMMARY



       February 2017




                        1
This technical workshop – the third of its series – on Advancing Sustainable Hydropower in
Nepal was organized by IFC and USAID with support from the Japanese and Australian
governments on January 23 and 24, 2017 at Gokarna Village Resort, Kathmandu, Nepal.




                                                                                             2
BACKGROUND
The emerging practice in Nepal for hydropower developers has been to offer
project-affected individuals a direct stake in project equity to either raise capital
or to build local partnerships or both. This has now been encouraged by the
Government of Nepal as a unique benefit sharing mechanism for hydropower
projects with developers now expected to set aside local share offerings of up to
ten percent of project equity.

While this has the potential to provide unprecedented opportunity for project
affected communities, the mechanism also has the potential to jeopardize
desired outcomes and exacerbate risks for vulnerable groups especially in the
context of ad-hoc applications by project developers in the absence of an
overarching policy.

In this context, a workshop was organized in Kathmandu on 23 and 24 January
2017 to update and exchange information on recent developments concerning
local shares, the financial, socio-economic and fiduciary risk involved, and
identifying any outstanding issues that need resolving to ensure desired
outcomes.

OBJECTIVE
This workshop aimed to provide a platform for inter-disciplinary knowledge
exchange and a discussion on tools and models to define a framework to deliver
local shares schemes in the hydropower sector in Nepal to benefit communities
and enhance resilience, defined as their ability to continue to sustain permanent
stresses while at the same time be prepared to withstand unpredictable shocks.

The discussions during the workshop and knowledge outcomes will feed into a
public knowledge product on local shares commissioned by the IFC.

PARTICIPANTS
The workshop was attended by over 42 people including representatives from
government, development partners, civil society, independent power producers,
financial sector regulators, community based organizations and media.

DAY ONE - SESSION PRESENTATIONS
The first day was divided into four sessions. Each session discussed a particular
theme related to benefit sharing and included presentations from relevant sector
experts. Each presentation was followed by a plenary discussion, where key
points are captured under each takeaway section below.

Session 1 – Hydropower’s social impact & benefit sharing experiences
This session looked at global experiences in benefit sharing mechanisms and
tools aimed at maximizing social benefits from this potential new source of
revenue for affected communities. The session also included a landscape
assessment of benefit sharing in Nepal.

IFC’s Debra Sequeira and Sunrita Sarkar presented case studies from Pangue
Hydro Foundation, Tata Tea Amalgamated Plantation Employees Shares


                                                                                    3
Ownership Program, Newmont Mining: Ghana’s Community Development
Agreements and Local Equity Sharing in South Africa Renewable Energy
Program, which all highlighted the necessary conditions for equitable access and
distribution of benefits. Key takeaways were:

   1. Share of benefits is driven by degree of impact.
   2. Identifying poorest, vulnerable groups and ensuring they have access to
      benefits is critical to avoid elite capture.
   3. Full involvement of communities in planning, designing and
      implementation necessary to build local ownership and understanding,
      enhance accountability, and improve company-community relations.
   4. Informed investments require specialized understanding of financial
      issues, beyond common knowledge.
   5. Role of independent mediator helps manage conflicts better.
   6. Role of developer is to work with Government, not replace it.
   7. Focus on quality, not quantity - for trainings and awareness programs.

Niti Foundation’s Nirjan Rai and Saumitra Neupane shared their study findings
on benefit sharing in Nepal’s context and how the issue of local shares was
changing the political discourse and quickly emerging as a ‘rights’ based
movement. Key points identified were:

   1. Benefit sharing is an evolving process in Nepal’s hydropower
      development.
   2. Significant information asymmetry exists, critical to effectively
      communicate risks and benefits of investing in local shares with local
      communities.
   3. There is a need for a dedicated grievance mechanism to manage and
      address local expectations.
   4. This is a public policy problem and is used to fuel the political economy
      narrative that Nepal can finance its own hydro and Nepalis can afford to
      buy shares.

Session 2 – Delivery of local shares
The second session discussed the delivery of local shares via two case studies
from within the country.

Vice President of Independent Power Producers Association of Nepal (IPPAN),
Kumar Pandey opined that the issue of local shares had become a developer’s
dilemma. He shared a case study of “National Hydro Power Company” that had
offered shares to locals to invest in a new project Lower Indrawati but
shareholders never saw any dividends arrive, as unfortunately the project never
took off. Underscoring the importance of ensuring a developer’s ability to utilize
funds, need for a regulator in the sector and a need to educate the public, he
highlighted the following:

   1. Initial Public Offering (IPO) is good way to raise capital if done properly.
   2. Public shares can ensure local ownership.
   3. Regulator is vital to ensure developers properly utilize public funds.


                                                                                     4
   4. Public needs to be educated on risks and project handover to government.
   5. Policy that differentiates ‘local’ and ‘general’ public with exposure to risk
      taken by promoters is required.
   6. Policymakers should not assume that long terms funds are available for
      hydro as general enthusiasm is only for short-term premiums.

Upper Tamakoshi Hydropower Project’s Ganesh Neupane and Shankar Nepal
presented the 456MW project’s experience in addressing local expectations for
shares in the project. The project relied on a District Coordination Committee to
define the eligibility criteria for local shares and have approached banks to offer
loans to local people under the central bank’s deprived sector financing policy.
However, following a 21-day strike by local laborers, the committee set up as
task force to refine the eligibility criteria for distribution of shares. This
committee is expected to develop the criteria for local shares before the end of
the fiscal year in line with the revised SEBON regulations. A key challenge
identified here is that:

   1. Although each project and its local share provisions are unique, how
      Upper Tamakoshi decides to structure its local share allocation may
      expect to set a precedent for other projects.

Session 3: Institutional, legal, financial & corporate governance framework
This session discussed an overview of the legal framework and current practice
to issue local shares and explored potential issuing mechanism models.

SEBON’s Niraj Giri discussed the current regulatory framework around issuing,
transfer, sale and exchange of securities in private companies. He also shared
recent amendments in the revised regulations of the Securities Board of Nepal.
Key highlights of his presentation included the following:

   1. Each project’s Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) will identify
      project-affected persons, which will define the eligibility criteria for local
      shares.
   2. Regulations stipulate the timing of share offer by prescribing certain
      conditions like Power Purchase Agreement, Financial Closure (Letters of
      Intent from banks must be issued) and land acquired before going for an
      IPO.
   3. SEBON is slowly moving away from paper-based systems and using banks
      for IPO. Although not yet compulsory for local people, trading will soon
      become possible only via DeMat accounts.
   4. Challenges highlighted were a lack of corporate governance, weak
      compliance of reporting requirements, lack of effective regulatory body in
      hydro sector, investment centered on capital gain rather than company
      returns.
   5. SEBON is developing a corporate governance code for hydro companies.
   6. SEBON working with government agencies to devise policy – clarity
      required on what happens to shares at the expiry of the license period.




                                                                                  5
   7. The policy will also need to look at ways of addressing other issues – for
      e.g., after the 3-year lock in period, the tendency to sell off shares and
      then place additional demands on project – how can this be avoided.

This was followed by a presentation on the importance of balancing stakeholder
interests in securing social license by Kiran Vergis from USAID’s Nepal Hydro
Development Program. Key highlights were:

   1. Lack of financial awareness and education raises risks of project failure
      and equity risk, therefore the need for a financial awareness and
      education campaign.
   2. Non-standard processes for timing, eligibility, and pricing raises the risk
      of project delays, therefore the need for a comprehensive policy on
      shares.
   3. According to current SEBON regulation, companies that have more than
      50 shareholders must be publically listed. The challenge to accommodate
      multiple small shareholders and become a publicly listed company raises
      administrative difficulties, regulatory burden and developers and lenders
      discomfort, therefore there is a need to define different models to issue
      shares to accommodate lenders concerns and allow private companies to
      retain private status.

Session Four: Emerging trends
The fourth session looked at emerging trends in the local hydropower industry
with a presentation by ICIMOD’s Aditi Mukherji and Devesh Belbase. Key
highlights were the findings of a randomized control trial participated in by 72
local hydropower companies under various stages of construction:

   1. There is a general willingness to offer shares to locals.
   2. An overwhelming majority prefers to make a local share offering during
      the construction period for raising capital for their current project.
   3. Remaining companies that choose to offer shares during the operation
      phase did so mainly as a response to local demand.
   4. Understanding on eligibility criteria and whether or not shares could be
      sold to institutions in addition to individuals is mixed amongst the 72
      respondents.

DAY TWO – CIVIL SOCIETY REFLECTIONS

Session Five: Reflections of civil society
The final session discussion included civil society members from Nepal Forum of
Environmental Journalists (NEFEJ), National Federation of Irrigation Water
Users’ Association of Nepal (NFIWUAN), Federation of Community Forest Users,
Nepal (FECOFUN) and Himalayan Grassroots Women’s Natural Resource
Management Association (Himawanti), where participants shared personal
experiences and expectations relating to purchase of local shares.

While participants had some understanding of risks and benefits associated with
shares, the general perception was that investing in shares of hydropower


                                                                                   6
projects was seen to be highly profitable, which explains the rising expectations
of project affected people to be granted the right to purchase shares.

      “In addition to individuals, shares have to be made available to
       community groups like community forest user groups. Amendments
       should be made in CFUG working procedures to allow a portion of our
       profits to be used for share purchase for poor people as well as the forest
       users group.” – FECOFUN

      “Remittance money should be utilized for investing in hydro.” –
       HIMAWANTI

A need was also felt to give preference to community shares rather than
individual shares, as this would generate more accountability.

      “And when communities are given this privilege, also give them an
       obligation to deliver. This will make them more accountable.” - NFIWUAN

Emphasis was placed on the need for quality education on risks and benefits of
share purchase in a language and form that is easily understood by local
communities especially highly marginalized groups. Working in coordination
with local representatives would ensure objectives are met.

      “Run awareness campaigns in coordination with local committees and
       local indigenous groups that are already in existence.” - NEFIN

Participants felt that the identification of target audiences and timing was
equally relevant, meaning, there would be little advantage in educating people
who have limited access to or no immediate opportunity to participate in share
purchase and applying the classroom teaching in the field.

      “A shares programme was organised in Kalikot but afterwards, people
       had no access to any project company where they could apply for shares
       so the entire programme became irrelevant.” - FECOFUN

Participants’ also recounted personal experiences where a member had sold off
land to buy shares but unfortunately saw his investment collapse as a result of
project related delays and eventual cancellation.

      “In the villages, people are risking their livelihood by buying shares they
       cannot afford. They go to cooperatives, they go to banks and when access
       to finance from these institutions is not possible then the last resort is
       money lenders.” - NEFEJ

Participants agreed that a general lack of awareness at the local level in addition
to little or limited access to information only helped aggravate vulnerability
levels of poor project affected communities.




                                                                                    7
      “There are no pressure groups present at the local level because people
       do not know about either royalties or local shares.” - NEFIN

Participants also pointed out that a lack of elected bodies at the local level and a
lack of transparency had exacerbated mistrust and confusion and prevented
royalties from flowing back to the communities. There also seemed to be lack of
understanding of the different Benefit Sharing schemes, and thus confusion
between equity shares, royalties, and other mechanisms by which affected
communities can and do benefit from hydropower projects.

      “Many communities are not even aware that royalties flow back into their
       region from hydro projects. The Constitution requires a natural resources
       allocation commission, which is yet to be set up, that needs to revisit
       revenue allocation to affected areas...” - FECOFUN

      “Revenue from royalties is also being mismanaged and funds are being
       diverted to other areas. For e.g., a certain project is building a road
       instead of using it for watershed management.” - FECOFUN

A need was also felt to include local voices in national decision making processes
while a careful demarcation needed to be made between rights and politics.

      “Community movements are becoming highly politicized so a careful
       demarcation between what is people’s individual right and what is
       politics needs to be drawn.” - NEFEJ

But most alarmingly, the dangers of what could unfold was highlighted, if the
issue was not taken up seriously by policymakers and local people continued to
make uninformed speculative decisions lured by the promise of quick capital
gains.

      “What people need to understand is that share is an investment, not a
       right. This could be a huge political issue if it gets out of hand.” - NEFEJ

CONCLUSION
While it is clear that the current trend of local shares has been moving on an
upward trajectory as investor confidence increases, the risks of it going the other
way are equally high. Unfortunately, what is fueling local demand is based on an
uninformed and unrealistic expectation founded on stock market behavior that
is primarily driven by speculation.

With the majority of rural population lacking even the basics of financial
literacy, the need for a comprehensive education campaign so the people
understand not only the benefits but also the risks are a necessary condition to
enable informed decision making in the purchase of shares, followed by
measures that ensure easy access to affordable finance. Extra attention must be
paid to ensure free and active participation of poor, vulnerable and socially
excluded groups in the process to maximize social benefits in marginalized
communities.


                                                                                       8
Equally important is the need to create a fine distinction and appropriate
modality between publicly traded shares and private shares. The current
regulations have been devised for publicly listed companies and not private
companies, where investors and lenders may want the company to retain their
private status for various commercial reasons but are expected to make a share
offering to project affected people that constitute a portion (up to ten percent) of
their project equity.


An overarching policy that addresses current gaps and gives all stakeholders –
the local people, the developer, the lenders and relevant line agency clear
guidelines on the issuance of local shares is critical to prevent further
developments from setting bad precedents.

A need to investigate the applicability of community shares as an option to
individual shares or as a preference over individual shares from a regulatory
perspective is required. That this delivery option may ease the process of
eligibility and delivery, help raise accountability of local shareholding bodies and
in the process help retain local ownership in the project needs to be carefully
assessed and explored with key government agencies, parliamentarians, and
local leaders while gauging local appetite for the same.

Key structural issues that need further clarity include the definition of what
constitutes a project area especially in light of impending federal boundaries,
who is eligible for local shares and who is clearly not, who or what factors
contribute to or should contribute to deciding the quantum of local shares per
project, timing of offer and if and whether that has an impact on unit price, and
the fate of such shares during project handover to government. Also, assessment
of share structuring methods and financing structures to mitigate risk for
individual shareholders as well as encourage long-term ownership in the project
is critical. Similarly, there are governance issues like who bears prime
responsibility for regulating the hydropower sector and the market that needs to
be addressed.

While SEBON regulations attempt at narrowing down the eligibility criteria,
standards need to be clarified and identified so there is uniformity in
understanding and applicability across the industry.

Lack of information and communication is an area where both government and
developers need to work extremely hard at. Despite 16 years since the
introduction of the royalty distribution regime, local people are oblivious of the
hydropower royalties flowing back into the villages and districts. The role of
media as an evident intermediary to channelize accurate information, raise
awareness and make local voices heard at the national level is indispensable.
This also points to a need to assure greater understanding of the overall Benefit
Sharing plans and mechanisms required from hydropower development in Nepal
(e.g. royalties, taxes, rural electrification and other social infrastructure, local



                                                                                   9
employment, local skills training, etc.), and assure that Local Shares are
contextualized as one component of overall Benefit Sharing plans.

NEXT STEPS
Following the workshop, IFC is in the process of carrying out an in-depth study
to cover all aspects of local shares that will culminate in a public knowledge
product, which will seek to identify long-term sustainable options by assessing
current practices and lessons learned. The final product is expected to support
Nepal’s policy efforts to showcase an innovative benefit-sharing scheme that can
truly benefit and economically empower local people – particularly women and
marginalized groups – impacted by hydropower projects.




                                                                              10
ANNEX 1: Workshop Agenda




                           11
Day 1: Monday, 23 January 2017
9:00-9:15                 Registration, tea and coffee
9:15-9:30                  Opening remarks
                           Rehan Rashid, Resident Representative, IFC
                           Rob Taylor, Chief of Party, USAID funded Nepal Hydropower Development Project
9:30-10:00                 Introduction to the technical workshop objectives/purpose
                           Introductions of participants
                           Kate Lazarus, Team Leader E&S Hydropower Advisory, IFC
SESSION ONE- INTRODUCTION
HYDROPOWER’S SOCIAL IMPACT AND BENEFIT SHARING EXPERIENCES IN NEPAL
Ensuring hydropower is developed sustainably is crucial to addressing social risks upfront. This session will explore
project stakeholders and the benefit sharing mechanisms in place globally, and in Nepal.
Moderated by Pablo Cardinale, Principal Environmental Specialist, IFC
10:00-11:00                Presentation: Global Experiences in Benefit Sharing Mechanisms and tools to maximize the
                           social benefits of this potential new source of revenue for affected communities
                           Debra Sequeira, Principal Team Leader Policy, Environment, Social and Governance, IFC
                           Sunrita Sarkar, Operations Officer, IFC
11:00- 11:15               Coffee Break
11:15- 12:00                Presentation: Benefit sharing in Nepal – a landscape assessment of experiences
                           Nirjan Rai, Executive Director, Niti Foundation
                           Saumitra Neupane, Niti Foundation
12:00-12:30                Moderated discussion

12:30-13:30               Lunch
SESSION TWO- CASE STUDIES
DELIVERY OF LOCAL SHARES


This session will provide insight into two local case studies where hydropower projects have dealt with local shares.
This session will include 20 min presentation followed by 10 min discussion and exchange. Moderated by Austin Lord,
Cornell University
13:30- 14:00              Local shares in Hydropower: Developer’s dilemma
                          Mr. Kumar Pandey, Vice President, IPPAN

14:00-14:30               Case Studies for modalities of share offerings: successes and challenges in Nepal
                          Upper Tamakoshi hydropower (456MW)
                          Dr. Ganesh Neupane – Environment & Public Relations Chief
                          Mr. Shankar Nepal - LDO of Dolakha district
14:30-15:00               Moderated Discussion

15:00-15:15               Coffee break
SESSION THREE- INSTITUTIONAL, LEGAL, FINANCIAL AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK
This session will provide an overview of the legal framework and current practice, and will dive into the potential
issuing mechanism models of shares.
Moderated by Stephane Barbeau, Energy & Resource Efficiency Advisory, Clean Energy Program Manager, Nepal, IFC
15:15-15:45                 Presentation: Regulatory framework around issuing, transfer, sale and exchange of
                            securities of private companies
                            Mr. Niraj Giri, Executive Director, SEBON
15:45-16:15                 Presentation: Facilitating investment in hydropower: Balancing stakeholder interests in
                            securing social license
                            Kiran Vergis, Manager, USAID NHDP (Deloitte)
16:15-16:45                 Moderated discussion




                                                                                                              12
SESSION FOUR- EMERGING STUDIES

16:45-17:15               Presentation: Preliminary results of study on future hydropower plans announcing local
                          shares
                          Aditi Mukherji, Theme Leader, Water and Air, ICIMOD
17:15-17:30               Wrap up discussion and summary of the day’s findings
                          Louisa Zhang, IFC
17:30                     Cocktail reception


Day 2: Tuesday 24 January 2017
9:00-9:15                    Registration Day 2- Tea and Coffee
SESSION FIVE- REFLECTIONS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY
This session will be interactive with a panel discussion, before breaking into groups.
Chair: Dipak Gyawali, chair of Nepal Water Conservation Foundation
9:15-9:30                    Introduction – achieving shared prosperity
                             Dipak Gyawali, chair of Nepal Water Conservation Foundation
9:30-10:30                   Panel discussion with civil society
                             Mr. Ramesh Bhusal, General Secretary NEFEJ
                             Mr. Shambhu Dulal, General Secretary NFIWUAN
                             Mr. Birkha Bahadur Shahi, FECOFUN
                             Mr. Sulav Gauttam, Himawanti
10:30-10:45                  Coffee Break
10:45-11:45               Moderated break- out group discussions to be defined during workshop.

                          For example: Designing and implementing local shares (defining eligibility criteria;
                          Identifying key stakeholders.); Alternative approaches and models and global experiences;
                          Delivery mechanisms (distribution mechanisms; allotment of shares; financing of
                          prospective local buyers of shares, etc); Considering specific needs of women (gender).

11:45-12:15               Discussion on findings from the break out groups in plenary session
12:15- 12:30              Conclusions and workshop summary
                          Kate Lazarus, Team Leader E&S Hydropower Advisory, IFC
12:30                     Lunch




                                                                                                          13
