 TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016




TDRP Quarterly
Report
    FY16: OCTOBER- DECEMBER 2016




                                               1
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016




Table of Contents

ACRONYMS	                                                                             3	

1.	 SUMMARY	                                                                          4	

2.	 PROFILE	OF	OUR	WORK	WITH	THE	AFRICAN	UNION	                                       4	
2.1.	   THE	AFRICAN	UNION	AND	DDR	                                                    4	
2.2.	   THE	AFRICAN	UNION	DDR	PROGRAMME	PHASE	I	                                      5	
2.3.	   BUILDING	ON	ACHIEVEMENTS	–	AN	OVERVIEW	OF	PLANS	FOR	PHASE	II	                 6	
2.4.	   FEATURED	ACTIVITIES	FOR	THIS	QUARTER	                                         7	

3.	 SUPPORT	PROVIDED	TO	REINSERTION	AND	REINTEGRATION	OPERATIONS	AT	COUNTRY	LEVEL	    8	
3.1	THE	CENTRAL	AFRICAN	REPUBLIC	                                                     8	
3.2		THE	DEMOCRATIC	REPUBLIC	OF	CONGO	                                                9	
3.3			REPUBLIC	OF	MALI	                                                              10	
3.4		REPUBLIC	OF	SOUTH	SUDAN	                                                        11	

4.	KNOWLEDGE	MANAGEMENT	                                                             11	
4.1	 REPUBLIC	OF	YEMEN	                                                              11	

5.		PROGRAM	MANAGEMENT	AND	STATUS	OF	TRUST	FUND	                                     11	

6.	STAFFING	                                                                         12	

7.	FORTHCOMING	EVENTS	                                                               12	




	




                                                      2
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


ACRONYMS

 ACFPE        Agence Centrafricaine pour la Formation Professionnelle et l’Emploi
 APSA         African Peace and Security Architecture
 AU           African Union
 AUDDRCP      African Union DDR Capacity Program
 BETF         Bank Executed Trust Fund
 BICC         Bonn International Center for Conversion
 CAR          Central African Republic
 CEMAC        Central African Economic and Monetary Community
 CMU          Country Management Unit
 CoE          Center of Excellence
 DDR          Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
 DDRR         Disarmament, Demobilization, Reinsertion and Reintegration
 DPKO         UN Department of Peace Keeping Operations
 ECCAS        Economic Community of Central African States
 DRC          Democratic Republic of Congo
 FAO          Food and Agriculture Organization
 FCV          Fragility, Conflict and Violence
 ICRS         Information, Counselling and Referral System
 INPP         Institut National de Préparation Professionnelle
 JMEC         Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
 LRA          Lord Resistance Army
 MDTF         Multi Donor Trust Fund
              United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
 MINUSCA
              Republic
 MINUSMA      United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
 MIS          Management Information Systems
              United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
 MONUSCO
              Congo
 MNJTF        Multinational Joint Task Force to Fight Boko Haram
 NDDRC        National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
 NTF          Nordic Trust Fund
 OGN          Operational Guidance Note
 OMC          Operational Mechanism for Coordination
 PAD          Project Appraisal Document
 PIU          Project Implementation Unit
 PSD          Peace and Security Department
 PSO          Peace Support Operation
 RECs         Regional Economic Community
 RMs          Regional Mechanisms
 ToR          Terms of Reference
              Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et
 UEPNDDR
              Réintégration
 UNMISS       United Nations Mission in South Sudan
 UNOAU        United Nations Office to the African Union




                                                  3
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


1. Summary

During this quarter the TDRP made significant strides in supporting planning for the next phase of the
African Union DDR Program (DDRCP) and has also continued to provide technical and financial assistance
at the country level in CAR, DRC, Mali and South Sudan. Knowledge management support has also been
provided to Yemen. This report contains brief updates of work undertaken at country level over the last
quarter and a more in depth profile is provided of our work with the African Union (AU).

The task team takes this opportunity to clarify that while all activities noted below are associated with the
TDRP portfolio, not all the deliverables or outputs were directly funded by the TDRP trust fund. There are
pre-existing Bank and other trust fund allocations, through other projects, outside of TDRP that support
engagement with the African Union, CAR, DRC, Mali and South Sudan. Similarly, consultants and staff
working with TDRP are not paid entirely by the TDRP Trust Fund, but also through World Bank’s own
budget for DDR operations across and through other trust funds, such as the United Nations – World Bank
Partnership Trust Funds, and World Bank budgets made available to support implementation of activities
in CAR, DRC, Mali, and South Sudan.

2. Profile of Our Work with the African Union
2.1.THE AFRICAN UNION AND DDR
	
The AU has increasingly become involved in issues related to conflict management, resolution and post
conflict reconstruction and development. This has often been in response to specific directives from the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the UN Security Council and requests from Member States.
These have included a need to support DDR related initiatives in complex and often fluid and dynamic
political and security environments where DDR is part of wider stabilization and recovery efforts. Within
the AU work related to DDR is governed by a number of policy and operational frameworks. Some of
these are identified and briefly described in the table below.
       Framework                                              Brief Description
                           •   Adopted at a meeting of African Heads of State in 2004 the CADSP was premised
                               on a common African perception of requirements of the action needed to ensure
                               that common defense and security interests are safeguarded.
 Common African            •   On DDR the CADSP states: “The Peace and Security Council shall work towards
 Defense & Security            the consolidation of peace agreements that have been negotiated; the
 Policy (CADSP)                establishment of conditions for political, social and economic reconstruction of
                               the society and government institutions; the implementation of disarmament,
                               demobilization and reintegration programmes, including those relating to child
                               soldiers”
                           •   The 2006 AU Policy on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development (PCRD)
 Post Conflict
                               states that under the security element of the PCRD, AU Member States emerging
 Reconstruction &
                               from conflict must: “Plan and implement comprehensive and well-blended
 Development Policy
                               disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration (DDRR)
 (PCRD)
                               programmes, as a basis for consolidating safety and security”.
                           •   The APSA refers to ‘the overall set of norms, structures, capacities and procedures
 The African Peace &           established to enable the AU to carry out its tasks in the field of peace and
 Security  Architecture        security.’
 (APSA)                    •   These include; The AU Peace & Security Council, the AU Commission, Regional
                               Economic Communities, Regional Mechanisms, and the Africa Standby Force.



                                                       4
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016



2.2.THE AFRICAN UNION DDR PROGRAMME PHASE I
	
Recognizing the need to effectively support Member States, REC’s/RM’s and the Peace Support Operations,
the AU has launched a three-year DDRCP in 2013. The overall objective of DDRCP was to support and
institutionalize DDR and related capacities within the AU with the overall aim of increasing the AU
effectiveness to respond to the DDR and related needs of the APSA. In support of this three interconnected
program components and associated outcomes and activities were taken forward. These components and
their associated results are highlighted in the table below.

     Outcomes                                                 Results
 Component A: Institutionalizing DDR Capacities
                     • Establishment of a Core Team, led by the Head of the AU Defense and Security Division
                         comprised of a dedicated AU DDR Officer, other AU personnel, staff from the UN Office
 Human Resource
                         to the African Union and the World Bank (TDRP);
 Capacity
                     • Additional short term staff hired to support field offices in the AU Mission to the Central
                         African Republic (MISAC) and AU Mission for the Sahel (MISAHEL).

                       •AU expanded the mandate of the existing AU Regions Steering Committee on Small
 Steering Committee     Arms to include DDR Program; to provide strategic guidance and oversight and
                        strengthen ownership, co-ordination and participation.
 Component B: Knowledge Management
                    • Website developed, linked to the AU Peace and Security webpage and aiming to serve as
                        an access point for public information on DDR activities.
 Website &
                    • AU DDR team has produced regular DDR Newsletters published bi-annually. The
 Newsletters
                        newsletters highlight information on DDR activities undertaken in field offices and AU
                        missions as well as upcoming events and new publications.

                       •  Training to build and strengthen the capacity of personnel on DDR delivered, targeted
 Training Provision
                          towards personnel actively engaged in DDR programs drawn from the RECs, PSOs and
                          Member States.
                     • To provide practical guidance for design and delivery of DDR interventions, a series of
 Operational
                          Operational Guidance Notes (OGN) on key topics have been developed. The OGNs are
 Guidance Notes
                          accessible via the AU DDR website.
                     • A Compendium of DDR experiences in Africa has been developed, consisting of an
 DDR Compendium           online repository of reference materials organised by thematic area and country. It
                          includes summaries of lessons learned and best practice.
 Component C: Facilitating AU engagement/assistance to DDR activities of Member States and PSOs
                     • Key aspect of the interventions of Phase I of the AU DDRCP has been the provision of
                          support to Member States. Following a request from Member States, the AU responded
 Support to Member        through assessment missions and acted on findings.
 States              • During Phase I, the team responded to requests from Member States such as; CAR,
                          Comoros, Somalia, Sudan, Libya, South Sudan and Chad for support and advice and also
                          worked closely with AU PSOs including AMISOM, LRA, MNJTF and MISAC.

                       •   With an increasing number of AU led PSOs, access to advice and support on DDR has
                           been a chief concern and close collaboration with the PSOD and missions has been
 Support to PSOs
                           established with this objective in mind. This has included the provision of support to
                           AMISOM to develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) on the treatment and
                           handling for disengaged combatants and two training workshops have been convened.




                                                       5
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


Phase I of the program received support from the TDRP, the UN (DPKO and UNOAU) as well as
contributions from a number of bilateral donors.

2.3.BUILDING ON ACHIEVEMENTS – AN OVERVIEW OF PLANS FOR PHASE II
DDRCP Phase I saw important capacity in DDR established within the AU Commission, Operational
Guidance on key issues developed for those involved in policy making and implementing DDR, and
knowledge management products and processes developed. Design of Phase II of the program is now being
finalized. This will allow achievements under Phase I to be consolidated and will enable the AU, and APSA
institutions more widely, to respond effectively to emerging challenges and opportunities facing DDR and
peace support operations across the continent.

A technical mission visited the AU headquarters (2-10 December 2016) to assist with further development
and planning of Phase II of the DDRCP. It was proposed that Phase II should run over three years (2017-
2019) and should be broken down into three components with a strong focus on the development of
effective links with other APSA priorities and institutions. The three component areas proposed for Phase
II, and associated key outcomes are highlighted in the table below.


        Component                                            Expected outcomes
 A: Operational support to    Effective support provided to AU Member States, RECs/RMs and PSOs;
 Member States, PSOs,         Deployable experts roster managed by the AU to respond to emerging needs within
 REC’s & RMs                  MS, RECs/RMs and PSOs.
                              Enhanced synergies between all stakeholders;
 B: Institutional
                              Increased engagement in joint implementation within DDR contexts;
 strengthening &
                              Increased collaboration between AU Commission units, divisions and departments
 partnerships
                              in DDR contexts.
                              All Operational Guidance Notes revised and updated with human rights approaches
                              incorporated. One new OGN on M&E in DDR developed;
                              Training materials based on Operational Guidance Notes developed and DDR
 C: Knowledge Management
                              training standards harmonized;
                              Production, dissemination and sensitization of knowledge and information products
                              to key target audiences.


An important objective of Phase II will be to ensure that human rights issues and approaches are better
identified and mainstreamed within DDR responses, while efforts to strengthen inter- and cross-institutional
learning are maximized. The existing Program Core Team comprising of participants from the AU, the UN
and the World Bank will work closely with the newly formed Interagency Task Force in the Peace and
Security Department (PSD), which includes other units within the PSD and the Human Rights Division
within the Political Affairs Department, amongst others. Further, the work towards more effectively
mainstreaming of human rights responses into DDR will benefit from technical and financial support
through a support grant from the Nordic Trust Fund (NTF).

                                       What is the Nordic Trust Fund?

 The Nordic Trust Fund is a Knowledge and Learning Program launched to develop a more informed view within
 World Bank programming on how human rights relates to the Bank’s core work and mission. It is being supported
 by a US$ 20 million multi-year and multi-donor trust fund (MDTF) established with contributions from Denmark,
 Finland, Germany, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden.



                                                      6
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


In the next quarter a mission is planned for the end of February 2017 to formally agree on the final
Programme Document and to further discuss how its work plan might be operationalized. Preparatory work
outlined in the NTF Support Grant will be initiated to maintain and build on the current momentum and
support the activities of the DDRCP planned for 2017.

The DDRCP Phase II will provide an opportunity to continue the development of capacity of the AU’s
peace support operations on DDR and to maintain and strengthen relations and co-ordination between the
AU and its APSA partners. The importance of strong partnerships across the APSA is emphasized in the
APSA Roadmap covering the period 2016-2020.

For partners of the program, including the World Bank and UN, the importance of strong and effective
partnerships with regional organizations such as the AU and RECs is recognized to be a critical component
of efforts to take forward the Sustainable Development Goals and to practically deliver on commitments
for more effective joint partnership under the “Delivering as One UN” approach.
	
2.4.FEATURED ACTIVITIES FOR THIS QUARTER

2.4.1 AU Regions Steering Committee on Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) and DDR
The TDRP, participated in the AU Regions Steering Committee on Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW)
and DDR, which held its seventh meeting at the IGAD Secretariat, from 19 to 20 October 2016, in Djibouti.
The meeting was an important opportunity to review the progress achieved in 2016, consider the challenges
encountered, and strategize for the year ahead.

Going forward, the Member States’ Steering Committee took note of the priority areas presented by the AU
for the next phase of the DDRCP which are: operational support to Member States; institutional building
and partnership; and knowledge development and management. On the implementation of these priorities,
key areas of focus for 2017 will include: follow-up on joint assessment missions conducted during the first
phase (CAR, Somalia, AMISOM, South Sudan, RCI-LRA, Sudan and Comoros) and support to Member
States will expand to include interventions in Mali, MNJTF (Boko Haram) and Burundi as per requests.


2.4.2 AU DDR Newsletter Seventh Edition Published

As part of the development of knowledge and communications materials, the seventh edition of the AU
DDR Newsletter has been published and disseminated. The most recent issue highlights various events that
have taken place such as; operational support to Member States (Madagascar, Guinea Bissau, and Central
African Republic), news highlights and an article is featured on DDR steering committee meeting.


2.4.3 Review and updating of the DDR Compendium and document repository

During 2015 and 2016 a document repository and compendium on DDR experiences in Africa was
developed. The document repository and compendium have been made available and accessible via the
AUC website. The repository contains approximately 150 documents and allows for documents to be
viewed online and downloaded. Copyright problems that proved an obstacle in roll-out of V1.0 of the
Compendium were resolved in early November, 2016; V2.0 of the Compendium was uploaded which
allows for the downloading and viewing of documents.                       It is viewable at:
http://lekiworld.com/AU/index.php http://www.ddrcompendium.peaceau.org/index.php

                                                    7
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


3. SUPPORT PROVIDED TO REINSERTION AND REINTEGRATION OPERATIONS
   AT COUNTRY LEVEL

3.1 THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

As previously reported, the TDRP has undertaken a series of missions to CAR to provide technical support
to the Government on the development of a DDRR strategy, the implementation of an inclusive DDRR
program, and its corresponding CAR Reintegration of Ex-combatants Project [P160272]. During this
quarter, a number of follow-up technical assistance missions were held to take forward the planning and
program development process. The focus of activities is highlighted in the table below.

     Focus Area                                                Key activities

 Strategy development    •   Continued support to the Government in the development of a comprehensive DDRR
 & planning                  Strategy, Program Document, and a matrix of planned activities;
                         •   Capacity assessment and planning of institutional and implementation arrangements.
                         •   It has been determined that, the DDRR-Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be
                             housed within the Presidency. Cellule de Suivi des Réformes Economiques et
                             Financières (CS-REF), within the Ministry of Budget Finance and Budget and
                             Finance, will handle the fiduciary management of the project. The Government, In
                             addition, the mission, MINUSCA and the World Bank continued work Government
 Coordination &
                             on the development of a customized Management Information System (MIS).
 information gathering
                         •   Information obtained on national reconciliation activities and participation in
                             government-led mediation efforts with armed groups. This has included discussions
                             on mediation efforts led by the AU and Economic Community of Central African
                             States (ECCAS) directed towards armed groups who have not yet signed the peace
                             agreement.
                         •   Discussion of modalities for establishing a new MDTF to finance social and DDRR
                             and relevant activities.

                         •   Task Team continues to support the Government in leveraging additional financing.
 Resource                    Following the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa [CEMAC]
 mobilization                contribution of 4B FCFA for DDRR offered to the Government, the Task Team,
                             provided support for the drafting of a corresponding convention and program
                             document to be signed by both DDRR-PIU and CS-REF the purpose of which is to
                             provide the legal framework for financing project activities and operations prior to its
                             implementation, in line with the Bank’s procurement guidelines


Despite donor pledges made during the Brussels Donor Conference in November 2016, financial
commitments remain insufficient in the midst of a weak security situation. The total financing needs of the
project are estimated at US$ 30 million, of which the Bank is planning to contribute with US$ 15 million
IDA while the remainder was expected to be supported through an MDTF. According to the current plans,
the proposed Reintegration Project will be limited to only IDA financing. Upon request from the
Government, the World Bank initiated the process of establishing a new MDTF and finalized a proposal.
As soon as financing becomes available, the project will either be restructured or additional financing will
be reinitiated accordingly.

For the coming quarter, the project will deepen its assessment on preliminary profiling of ex-combatants
and host communities to finalize target beneficiaries for the project. It will also expand on coordination
between DDRR-PIU and CS-REF; implementation arrangements and potential partners; and linkages with

                                                         8
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


security sector reforms and national reconciliation efforts. Additional activities include redesigning
activities to accommodate support to host communities and initiating a draft procurement plan.


3.2 THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO
	
During this quarter, TDRP undertook implementation support missions to support the DRC Reinsertion and
Reintegration Project [P152903]. The mission objectives were to assess the progress made in the
demobilization, reinsertion and socioeconomic reintegration of ex-combatants; support vulnerable groups;
assist in the project’s fiduciary management and to provide assistance on procurement.
Despite continued disturbances in Eastern DRC and Kinshasa that cause delays in implementation, the
project is progressing. Key activities completed in relation to this are highlighted in the table below.

       Focus Area                                               Key activities
                          •   As of 2 December 2016, 554 new demobilized ex-combatants have been received
                              at the Reinsertion Processing Center in Kitona. In total, 3,878 ex-combatants have
                              been successfully demobilized and of these, 3772 ex-combatants have completed
                              reinsertion training. As of 5 December 2016, all of the 3,060 demobilized ex-
                              combatants in Kitona have been transferred to host communities for reintegration.
                          •   Three implementing partners —FAO, Caritas and INPP— are already deployed
 Progress monitoring
                              within host communities to provide livelihoods support and facilitate reintegration.
                          •   As of 2 December 2016, 551 reintegration kits for livestock, auto-mechanics,
                              aesthetics, fishing etc. have been delivered. Activities conducted by implementing
                              partners are split into a number of categories: distribution of start-up kits,
                              socioeconomic outreach and follow-up services. Support to dependents will include
                              vocational training, livelihoods and life skills training, and psycho-social support.
                          •   Technical assistance has been provided to UEPNDDR and UNICEF to develop an
                              Action Plan to support the reintegration of children associated with armed forces.
                          •   The Task Team assessed the progress of UEPNDDR in the design and integration
 Vulnerable groups            of psychosocial support into project activities. UEPNDDR is currently designing a
                              psychosocial program and a multi-level service-delivery training program for staff
                              and strategies for inclusion of mental and physical health services into projects. In
                              addition, it continues to identify implementing partners and develop indicators.
                          •   UEPNDDR has disseminated its M&E tool to liaison officers in community offices
                              and implementing partners. The Task Team developed a mechanism to monitor the
 Monitoring &
                              flow of ex-combatants and the activities participated in, and supported the
 Evaluation
                              deployment of a database to Goma and the training of staff on its management.

                          •   Support was provided to UEPNDDR to finalize its annual work plan, budget and
                              procurement plan. This included a procurement expert to provide guidance to
                              UEPNDDR on the selection of consultants, the evaluation of offers for goods, and
                              on the production of dashboards to monitor contracts and streamline recruitment
 Fiduciary management         processes. Subsequently, the project has finalized recruitment of an internal and
 & procurement                external auditor, a consultant for a baseline survey and a communications specialist.
                          •   Owing to the almost complete disbursement of the TDRP financing [TFA0087], the
                              project underwent restructuring whereupon it will only begin disbursing from the
                              IDA allocation. The Task Team has advised UEPNDDR to exercise due diligence
                              in prioritizing disbursement from TF0A0087 by 30 June 2017.


During the next quarter, planned activities include finalizing ToRs, objectives, expected results, activities
and budget for programs on children, and updating operational frameworks and standards for the

                                                       9
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


verification of children’s ages. In addition to this personnel will be trained on incorporating psychosocial
support into reintegration programs, including how to enable transition to relevant healthcare support and
follow-up for those with substantive needs.


3.3 REPUBLIC OF MALI
During this quarter, the Task Team conducted two technical missions to Bamako, Mali for the Mali
Reinsertion of Ex-Combatants Project. Key areas of focus and activities are highlighted in the table below.

       Focus Area                                              Key activities
                          •   Technical support is being provided to MINUSMA to develop an Information,
 Planning & design            Counseling and Referral System. While some features, such as registration, are
                              already available, the Management Information System is still to be finalized.
                          •   During both missions, the Task Team convened with MINUSMA to follow-up on
                              updates on the progress on the construction of cantonment sites, political
                              developments, the lists of combatants from armed groups, and a draft decree for the
                              implementation and ongoing appointments to the National Commission for DDR
                              and the Integration Commission. The construction of three cantonment sites has
 Coordination &
                              been completed; and the remaining five are operational, with access to power and
 information gathering
                              water.
                          •   In light of the flow of armed groups and growing tensions in Central Mali, upon
                              discussions with the Government and MINUSMA, the Project Appraisal Document
                              [PAD] has been updated to include Mopti, in addition to Kidal, Gao, Timbuktu,
                              Ménaka and Taoudéni as the target areas.
                          •   Significant progress has been made by the Government in establishing the
                              governance structure of the National Commission for DDR [NCDDR], housing the
 Institutional
                              DDRR-PIU. The Mission and the Government also agreed on several key
 development
                              institutional and implementation arrangements. The Project Implementation Unit
                              [PIU] will be housed within the National Commission for DDR [NCDDR].
                          •   A Government contribution of approximately 10M USD will finance the
                              establishment/staffing of NCDDR, the corresponding operating costs, as well as
                              communication and sensitization activities at national and regional levels.
                          •   However, in order to meet the financing needs for DDR programming in Mali and
                              target those beyond the current caseload of 4,000 ex-combatant’s additional
                              resources will be required. With advice and support from the Task Team a donor
 Resource mobilization
                              roundtable was held on December 8 attended by over 150 financial and technical
                              partners. Other participants including cabinet members, armed group signatories,
                              and diplomatic and donor representatives. A number of donors indicated their
                              intention to provide financial support to the program.
                          •   The Bank Task Team remains prepared to establish an MDTF, as needed, to pool
                              donor financing and initiate implementation of project activities.


In the next quarter, the task team will visit Bamako for the negotiations of Mali Reinsertion of Ex-
combatants Project. Meanwhile, the Task Team will continue to provide technical assistance to National
Commission for DDR on drafting the Project Implementation Manual and developing the MIS.




                                                      10
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016


3.4 REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN
	
Against a background of continuing insecurity and considerable challenges in South Sudan, the World Bank
continues to engage with stakeholders in terms of monitoring developments and maintaining a degree of
readiness in terms of the provision of future support when this is feasible and appropriate. The current work
program focuses on technical assistance to the National DDR Commission by updating the existing MIS.
If the security and political conditions on the ground permit, the Task Team will continue to collaborate
with the Bonn International Center for Conversion (BICC) to support the development of a new
reintegration strategy and participate in technical meetings on DDR.

4. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT

4.1 REPUBLIC OF YEMEN
Ongoing security, political and socio-economic tensions in Yemen reflects changing trends in the
involvement of populations with armed groups and the need for a unique approach to DDR. In consideration
of the World Bank’s prior involvement in facilitating demobilization, reinsertion and socio-economic
reintegration through direct operations and technical assistance in close coordination with UN agencies, the
DDR Working Group has asked the Bank to participate in its activities. As peace processes continue to be
delayed in Yemen, the Bank foresees itself reengaging during FY17-18, as there are opportunities to
establish synergies with the UN in strengthening the collective technical and financial basis for DDR and
designing a potential DDR program for the Yemeni context.

As such, the Task Team plans to coordinate with the UN to produce a roadmap and deliverables for DDR
in Yemen and prepare a presentation on prior DDR experiences and potential programming in Yemen, to
raise awareness amongst GCC donors ahead of a potential workshop in January-February 2017. Doing so
necessitates an in-depth understanding of the target beneficiaries for DDR in Yemen - armed groups,
eligible ex-combatants and host communities - and also the conflict dynamics that will provide justification
for the design of DDR programs in the nation-state. It will also require identifying possibilities for direct
technical assistance to the Government on its DDR policy framework, implementation arrangements and
fiduciary mechanisms; some of which can already be put in place with support from said donors. As the
need for engaging in DDR emerges elsewhere in Middle East and North Africa, the Task Team may extend
additional support and technical assistance for Libya as well.

5. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT AND STATUS OF TRUST FUND

During this quarter, contributions to TDRP Trust Fund remained at 42,583,887.89 USD, with disbursement
reaching 98.77 percent at 42,062,191.12 USD. The remaining balance of 679,731.49 USD includes
278,512.60 USD of the Government of Sweden’s contribution to co-finance the DRC Reinsertion and
Reintegration Project activities. The remainder of 306,703.23 USD will continue to be disbursed as
previously agreed with donor partners, as noted below.

             Program/Recipient                                                 Budget (USD)
             African Union DDR Program                                               100,000
             Technical Assistance to South Sudan DDR Process                         80,000
             Technical Assistance to CAR DDR Program                                 50,000
             Technical Assistance to Mali DDR Program                                40,000
             Additional Requests (Somalia, Libya, Yemen etc.)                        110,000


                                                     11
TDRP Quarterly Report October-December 2016



            Management and Administrative Costs                                     20,000




6. STAFFING

Daniel Owen, Sr. Social Development Specialist in the Africa Region at the World Bank in Washington,
DC took over as Manager of the TDRP during the reporting period.

7. FORTHCOMING EVENTS
	
7. 1 Trust Fund Committee Meeting
  A Trust Fund Committee Meeting for the TDRP will take place in Paris on March 8th, 2017. The objectives
of the Donors Meetings are to discuss current status of TDRP programming, country updates, institutional
capacity building results and overall lessons learned from the TDRP to date. The meeting will also canvas
opinion as to how best to ensure that the knowledge and experience generated through TDRP activities can
be used to strengthen the work of partners going forward in the interconnected fields of DDR and
stabilization more broadly.




                                                   12
