BIG DATA IN ACTION
WORKSHOP: 2017 WORLD
GOVERNMENT SUMMIT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



        Technologyandglobalizationisasourceofdisruptionandcreation...
       “
        Butthetransitionfromtechnologicalpromisetothesolutionof
        publicsectorproblemsisnotgoingtohappenautomatically.Itwill
        requireeffortonthepartofgovernmentstobetterarticulatewhat
        problemstechnologycouldhelpthemsolve,anenablingpolicy
        environmentfortechnologicalsolutions,betterpublic-private
        partnerships,andlastly,mindsetandculturalshiftstoformtheright
        attitudesforchange.”

         Renaud Seligmann, Practice Manager, World Bank Group



   e Governance Global Practice (GGP) supports client countries to help them build capable, e cient, open,
inclusive, and accountable institutions. is is critical for countries to underpin sustainable growth and is at the heart
of the World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

For the 2017 World Government Summit, e World Bank’s Governance Practice partnered with the Big Data
Program in Global Operations Knowledge Management (GOKMU) and SecondMuse to deliver a “Big Data in
Action” workshop and high-level panel. Both activities explored the opportunity to use big data applications in
government service delivery, policy-making, and citizen engagement.

  e workshop gathered 25 big data experts in public and private sector to advance thinking on these areas.
  e workshop included:

• Seven lighting talks featuring case stories of big data in government

• Exercise to identify high priority areas for applications of big data within service delivery, policy-making, and
  citizen engagement

• Team based exercises to design practical big data prototypes in areas like public health, transport, government
  integrity/accountability and Jobs




                                                                                                                           2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


MAIN INSIGHTS
• Big data is not just about the size or quantity of the data now available. It is also about how governments use
  data driven capabilities to gather citizen feedback on services and put it into action toward more responsive and
  proactive service delivery, enabling governments to continuously improve public service delivery, and build trust.

• As governments look into adopting the use of big data, we need clear regulations and guidelines developed for data
  use, data ownership, privacy, civil liberties and equality.

•     e private sector is generally the owner of the most valuable datasets. Public-private data collaboratives are
    emerging that provide access to private sector data for public and social good. ese arrangements will be critical
    moving forward to ensure that big data can be accessed and responsibly used.




                                                                                                                        3
               PART I: BIG DATA IMMERSION


                  e rst half of the workshop provided participants with a grounding in big data in Governance. Seven lightning
               talks were delivered.

               Stefaan Verhulst, Co-founder of GovLab, spoke about the role of data collaboratives in making data more
               liquid. Verhulst highlighted the impact of data collaboratives in the following ve areas: situational awareness and
               response, public service design and delivery, knowledge creation and transfer, prediction and forecasting, and
               impact assessment and evaluation. He shared examples in which big data was used for emergency response in
               Nepal, improving access to electricity in India, and preventing new outbreaks of Ebola in West Africa. Verhulst also
               noted six key incentives for the private sector to share data: reciprocity, research and insights, reputation, revenue,
               regulatory compliance, and responsibility.



               Rhiahanan Price, Director at Digital Globe spoke about the value of high resolution imagery and geospatial
               analytics for governments. Price shared Digital Globe’s work in household enumeration to help governments
               prioritize deployment of resources to curb malaria. In Zambia, this work involved crowdsourcing to narrow down the
               dataset and cover over 500,000 sq. km in four months. Price also shared her team’s work in helping the Indonesian
               government prevent forest res from spreading-- by leveraging crowdsourcing, high-resolution short-wave infrared
               imagery, and real-time analytics. She spoke about the opportunities that lie ahead in terms of machine learning and
               convergence of data, and emphasized the need for new business models and data licensing agreements.




Stefa a n  Ver h u l st                                                       Rhiahanan Pr ice




                                                                                                                                         4
                PART I: BIG DATA IMMERSION


                Steve Adler- Chief Data Strategist at IBM spoke about the importance of paying attention to culture, emphasizing
                that when we try to get culture to change with technology, our results are not as good as they would be if we adjusted
                technology to t the culture. Adler shared lessons from his time serving as Chief Data O cer for the city of Medellin,
                Colombia. His experience planning a data show for the city’s residents illustrated the importance of understanding
                and addressing the habits and characteristics of di erent segments of society. Among other things, this included
                understanding the local population’s schedules, their perception of the value of data in their lives, reasons for the
                limited engagement and understanding data analysts had with regards to the general population.



                Brooke Patridge, CEO of Vital Wave, spoke about some of the challenges that are evident in the area of public
                private partnerships in big data. ey include lack of evidence base, lack of regulatory and policy frameworks, lack of
                sustainable, scalable business models for the private sector to see opportunities, and lack of local and global capacity.
                Patridge spoke of the role governments can play in improving such partnerships—particularly by contributing to and
                requiring relevant use cases and case studies; articulating the value of data use to partners, civil servants, and citizens;
                embracing risk-mitigation strategies relating to privacy—rather than keeping a distance; and cultivating data science
                as a skill set.




S teve  Ad l e r                                                                   Bro o ke Pat r idge




                                                                                                                                               5
               PART I: BIG DATA IMMERSION


              Chan Cheow Hoe, Chief Information O cer, Government of Singapore spoke of how the Government of
              Singapore uses big data for data-driven decision making. In one case, the government estimated the level of economic
              activity in an industry by analyzing patterns in water usage, power usage, and transportation patterns to and from the
              industrial zone. In another case, the government used data aggregated from commuters travel cards to understand
              commuter travel patterns and design express bus lines—thereby reducing citizen travel times and tra c congestion.
              He spoke of the government’s challenges around data sharing, creating a data mindset, and recruiting and retaining
              talent. He also highlighted opportunities for governments and the private sector to turn data into a service and to use
              data for dynamic resource allocation.



              Daniel Szomoru, Data Scientist, Uber spoke about Uber Movement, a website that uses the constant stream of data
              generated by Uber users to help urban planners make informed decisions about their cities. Szomoru shared current
              and future capabilities and insights that such data can provide-- including zone-to-zone travel times, tra c patterns
              at di erent times of the day, street segment speeds, and data on dangerous intersections and road quality.



              Linus Bengtsson, Director at Flowminder spoke about how the organization uses big data to support vulnerable
              populations around the globe by providing data on the number of people, their characteristics, and their mobility
              through high resolution maps. Bengtsson shared how the organization combined traditional household surveys with
              micro-censuses and extrapolation to help the government of Afghanistan build population models in the absence of a
              census. He also shared the organization’s capabilities to complement traditional sources of data with estimates of land
              cover, temperatures, night lights, tweets, mobile movements etc.




C h anC h eow  Ho e                               D a n i e l  Szo mo r                                 Linus Be ngt sso n




                                                                                                                                        6
PART 2: SOLUTION PROTOTYPING


   e second half of the workshop involved participants working through hands-on group exercises. Participants rst
worked through a series of questions to identify priority areas for using big data in government. is was followed
by a hands on exercise where the group assembled into four teams to develop prototype solutions within high-
priority areas.




                                                                                                                    7
PART 2: SOLUTION PROTOTYPING


GROUP EXCERSIZE:
MAPPING OPPORTUNITIES AND PRIORITY AREAS
Q U EST I O N 1:
W h at v i s i o n d o es yo u r o rgan ization have with regards to big data for the
n ex t 3 ye ars?




                                                                                        8
PART 2: SOLUTION PROTOTYPING


GROUP EXCERSIZE:
MAPPING OPPORTUNITIES AND PRIORITY AREAS
Q U EST I O N 1:
W h at v i s i o n d o es yo u r o rgan ization have with regards to big data for the
n ex t 3 ye ars?




                                                                                        9
PART 2: SOLUTION PROTOTYPING


Q U EST I O N 2:
W h at gover n ment ser v ic es h ave the potential to be changed most
p ro fo u n d ly t h ro u g h b ig d ata in the nex t 3 years?




                                                                         10
PART 2: SOLUTION PROTOTYPING


Q U EST I O N 3:
H ow w i l l t h ese ser v ic es c h a n ge in the four selected areas?


                                                                                F OCUS AREA: ACCOUNTABILITY,
             FOCUS AREA: JOBS AND SKILLS
                                                                                    TAXATION, AND FRAUD:

          Changes in focus of education and skills training                                   Change in burden
      Shifting if means if production to user with smartphones        Increased citizen engagement and feedback loops to encourage
   Education standards changing rapidly when a new competence                                   transparency
                                is needed                            Radical transparency increasing the cost of engaging in corruption
                   New Skills needed for new jobs                                 Accountability and greater transparency
  Careers giving way to robust short-term engagement marketplace                     Automatic reports on transactions
                      Mapping of jobs and skills                             Decisions based more on facts and less on politics
       Dynamic capability to match industry needs with skills                        Rise of E – services in government
             More fluidity introduced to the labor market                                   Budget Transparency
  Social Media and online jobs website as new source of labor data      Move from statistics to precise measurement and reporting
                        Digital transformations                        More effective delivery of services to vulnerable populations
                  Clear understanding of job marker
                 Better policy planning and decisions.



                   FOCUS AREA: HEALTH                                           FOCUS AREA: TRANSPORTATION

          Better understanding of the cause of pathology                Private sector involvement to improve public transportation
                  Central aggregation of records                                     Better insight on mobility patterns
           More personalized Diagnosis and Medication                                          Dynamic Planning
    Improved causal indicators or predictors of health outcomes                   Rise of innovative products and services
                         Precision health                                                      More transparency
            Evidence-based performance management                                                Fast feedback
             Move towards using generic information                                     Intelligent traffic management
       Improved interoperability around healthcare systems                               Better public transportation
                   Move to preventive medicine                                Optimization of private transportation services
  Improved matching of demand and supply of product and services                Minimized congestion and optimized routes
                        Health monitoring                                        Data-driven optimization of public transit
             Reduced pressure on curative treatments
                    Electronic patient records




                                                                                                                                          11
TEAM DESIGN SESSIONS


TEAM 1: SOLUTION AREA: JOBS AND SKILLS
  e big data for jobs and skills group considered a few areas for exploration at the outset—from how big data can
help mitigate automation’s impact on jobs to understanding why some jobseekers may be more adaptable than
others. e group eventually gravitated towards an approach that was broad enough to encompass speci c areas
individual group members wanted to explore. e question the group chose was: “How can we use Big Data to better
understand labor market dynamics?”

D ATA G E N E R AT I O N
  e group explored how granular, real-time data from big data sources could complement existing macro-level
data from the government. In this case, such data would include information that can be obtained from job boards,
employer websites, professional networking sites, other social media, call detail records (CDR), etc. Data on
vacancies, industry, skills needed, and salary would be critical on the demand side, while data on available skills,
educational backgrounds, location, current salaries, activity on professional networking sites, network size, and
member’s chances of nding opportunities would be critical on the supply side.

ACTIONS
A key action item in this area would be standardization of data—particularly on skills. is would be followed by
gathering and aggregating data on demand- and supply-side factors from the various sources.

   is would allow for the creation of a database/data-sharing platform that can be used by governments, businesses,
skills providers (universities and vocational training institutes), and individual job-seekers. e group also discussed
how actions to address data privacy need to complement each of these steps.

INSIGHTS
First, the data-sharing platform would provide governments, businesses, and individuals with information on the
number, type, and location of jobs; salaries; and the ow of jobs within and between regions and countries. is
would also provide key information on the supply side—on what skills are available and where, and allow for the
matching of jobs and skills. In addition, this would allow governments and businesses the opportunity to answer
more complex questions such as: How can the labor market be made more resilient to change (globalization,
automation of jobs)? How can the country/city best prepare for changing demand for skills? Which markets/skills
are most likely to be viable/transferable? Which ones are most at risk? What characterizes individuals that are easily
able to adapt to new labor market conditions? Why do workers with certain skills respond better to change than
others?

R E S U LT S
   e solution prototype would allow for better matching of jobs and skills. Governments could use these insights
to anticipate demand for skills and allocate resources to skills-training and education accordingly, resulting in a
dynamic, proactive, highly competitive, and resilient labor force.




                                                                                                                         12
TEAM DESIGN SESSIONS




T E A M  2 :  S O L U T I O N  A R E A :  A C C O U N T A B I L I T Y ,
TA X AT I O N , A N D  F R A U D
   e big data for accountability group chose the following question for exploration: “How can we improve the
integrity of Government Civil Servants” Other notable questions that were not selected included: How can big data
be used to improve civic trust? How can big data be used to detect illicit nancial ows? How can big data be used to
detect bene ts fraud?

   e group’s solution focused on issues of reporting, under-reporting, nancial disclosure, and integrity of civil
servants.

D ATA G E N E R AT I O N
Cadaster data, Financial Transaction Data, Travel Data, Satellite Data, Social Media, Video

INSIGHTS
  e solution would use machine learning algorithms to detect patterns and instances of collusion, non-compliance
and corruption in civil servants. For instance, we would be looking for property that was undeclared, luxury gi s or
purchases, patterns in networks between individuals and entities that suggest collusion or clientelism. We discussed
importance of putting checks in the data and algorithms to protect individuals through anonymization, or to report
not on individuals, but on properties of the network or system (not at the individual level) that characterize illegal,
non-compliant behavior, and to have processes with checks and balances to follow up.

ACTIONS
One action item is to create indicators for monitoring and to ag instances for follow up. Another action item is to
address the challenge of making the disincentive strong enough while keeping the data anonymized.

R E S U LT S
Making this data accessible to the public would serve as a deterrent for civil servants to engage in non-compliance.


                                                                                                                          13
TEAM DESIGN SESSIONS


T E A M 3: S O LU T I O N A R E A : H E A LT H
   e big data for health group began with a scoping discussion, which focused on whether the end state should be
an incremental improvement on existing approaches (e.g. make the existing model quicker, more e cient, and
less costly) or a transformational approach, which would seek to move emphasis and incentives from a focus on
interventions (treatments) to a focus on preventative health maintenance.     e group decided to focus on the more
aspirational e ort to refocus on preventative measures.    e group noted that for the rst time in history, food-related
health problems were more about poor quality than insu cient quantity. Simply put, junk calories were a bigger
health risk than malnutrition.

D ATA G E N E R AT I O N
In exploring data sources, the group focused on proxies for poor preventative health measures and highlighted
Google Online Marketing Challenge. Some of the challenge winners could provide useful location proxies for
where to target new approaches. For example, ResQ , which helps consumers “rescue” le overs from restaurants and
acquire quality meals at a cheap price, could provide heat maps of areas where preventative measures could be better
received.

By combining more traditional data sources (e.g. social media, mobile data, senor data, city, county, national
government data, etc.) with proxies from partners such as ResQ, the group sought to create a “health data ecology.”

INSIGHTS
   is could inform targeted e orts to improve health maintenance in demographic and geographic outliers (e.g. urban
food deserts and rural smoking and obesity clusters in the U.S.).  e health data ecology could be mapped to the
disease/health burden (where and why life expectancies are below national averages), both to inform programmatic
activities as well as to nd where new data sources/proxies are needed.

Other insights can be found by exploring intersections between health outcomes and exogenous factors such as
con ict, migration, natural disasters, climate change, etc. is analysis is important to help identify factors that could
swamp otherwise successful preventative health initiatives.

ACTIONS
A key actions item identi ed by the group included data driven advocacy materials focused on in uencing country-
level health care policy change from interventions (treatments) to preventative health maintenance.    e group
acknowledged that incumbents in the intervention eld (pharma, insurance, “medical industrial complex”) have deep
pockets and a strong vested interest in the status quo.   e case study on how European activists out maneuvered
the ag biotech industry (e.g. capturing the public’s mindshare with the image of “frankenfood”) could help inform a
successful campaign. Data without “sticky” and relatable stories will not be enough to achieve change.

   e group also highlighted the need for successful behavior change programs, citing the success in smoking
reduction, which was as much a factor of socially ostracizing smokers as convincing people of the health hazards of
smoking.

Another important data driven strategy for policy makers would be return on investment modeling as well as
performance management and tracking to demonstrate the possible impact achievable by scaling successful pilots.




                                                                                                                           14
TEAM DESIGN SESSIONS


R E S U LT S
   e group identi ed key results, such as improved health outcomes, reduced healthcare costs and wider health
insurance coverage.    ey also agged an important bene t of changing an asymmetric and sometimes adversarial
relationship between heath care providers and patients into a peer-partnership approach that created more trust.




                                                                                                                   15
TEAM DESIGN SESSIONS


T E A M 4: S O L U T I O N A R E A : T R A N S P O R TAT I O N
   e big data for transportation group selected the following question for exploration: “How do we optimize the use
of transportation in dense cities?” Other notable questions that were not selected were: How does big data inform public
transportation options in a city? How can big data support regional transportation infrastructure and services? How can
big data be utilized to forecast transportation services?

Big Data in Action Solution prototype: e solution focused on adapting pricing and transportation choices using
big data derived insights to deliver more responsive transportation services to end-users going from A to B locations.

D ATA G E N E R AT I O N
Key data sources considered were bus data (when, where), private sector data (needs to be shared with governments),
surcharge data from car sharing, beacon data, private car data (less available), GPS data. e case of Uber Movement
was presented as potentially valuable as an example from the private sector. Uber Movement is a platform that shows
recent data regarding travel times and time ranges from Uber rides. Sharing of data needs to be done increasingly
through APIs to encourage usage.

ACTIONS
• Optimize transportation usage by spreading the tra c load through adjusted incentives.        ese incentives will be
  informed by insights derived from transportation and related data.

• Pricing adjustments (a city delivering public transportation services cannot price accurately without the
  appropriate data).

• Arrangements with private sector organizations to open critical datasets towards pricing adjustments.

• Mobility as a service, all public modes of transport need to be increasingly connected.

    e conversation led to a focus on dense cities given that populations are increasingly moving towards cities, and it
is in dense cities speci cally where big data can have the most impact regarding transportation. Locations such as
Singapore are already utilizing big data to optimize the usage of transportation services and movement of end-users.
However, there is much yet to achieve, as a large amount of critical data is still in hands of the private sector. Cities
can work towards integrated, multimodal transportation service solutions by utilizing data insights from across
di erent transportation services, which can lead to an optimization of transportation usage across a city. Incentives
such as transportation pricing adjustments are a key lever to allow for optimization to happen. Additionally,
improving the enabling environment towards public-private arrangements can lead to critical datasets being utilized
for transportation improvement. Optimizing the usage of transportation services will lead to more sustainable and
less congested cities.




                                                                                                                            16
TEAM DESIGN SESSIONS


INSIGHTS
   e solution would be looking to increase the e ciency of public transportation systems in dense cities by delivering
a platform that allows end-users to plan and optimize their trips from A to B. e solution would need to map
intermodal tra c ow to optimize the choices of users by combining the best options across transportation modes.
Additionally, through big data insights, public transportation such as buses would be able to deliver express routes
where most convenient. Data insights can also provide critical information about pain points such as intersections
with the most accidents or bus stations that have peak ow at speci c times. City level interventions were also
considered such adjusting pricing at speci c peak hours to alleviate the usage of speci c modes of transport and
compensate by delivering others at the same time.

R E S U LT S
Two key outcomes that the prototype seeks to in uence:
1) Using big data and pricing adjustments to help deliver better transportation choices to end users,
2) Making the transportation system in dense cities more responsive through the use of adequate data.




                                                                                                                         17
APPENDIX


1.      PA R T I C I PA N TR O S T E R

Rhiannan Price                                            Richard Wood
Director, Digital Globe                                   Researcher, Flowminder

Steven Adler                                              Brandon Barnett
Chief Data Strategist, IBM                                Director Corporate Strategy, Intel Corporation

Brooke Partridge                                          Hatem El Sherif
Chief Executive O cer, Vital Wave                         Data Analytics Expert,
                                                          Federal Competitiveness and Statistics Authority UAE
Syed Raza
Senior Director, Mobile Data Digital Impact Alliance      Todd Khozein
                                                          Partner, SecondMuse
Bruno Lepri
Data Scientist, DataPop Alliance                          Neisan Massarrat
                                                          Director - Strategic Programs, SecondMuse
Daniel Szomoru
Data Scientist, Policy Research and Economics, Uber       Richard Boly
                                                          Consultant, World Bank Group
Enda Ginting
Assistant Deputy, O ce of the President of the Republic   Dharana Rijal
of Indonesia                                              Consultant, World Bank Group

Marian Panganiban                                         Trevor Monroe
Regional Policy and Research Manager, Grab                Senior Operations O cer, World Bank Group

Bruno Sanchez                                             Rachel Winter-Jones
Data Scientist, Global Leader and WBG Data Scientist      Communications Lead, Governance Global Practice
                                                          World Bank Group
Vasiliy Pushkin
Deputy Head of Analytical Center, Government              Edouard Al-Dahdah
of the Russian Federation                                 Senior Public Sector Specialist,
                                                          Governance Global Practice, World Bank Group
Chan Cheow Hoe
Government Chief Information O cer, Government            Renaud Seligmann
of Singapore                                              Practice Manager, Governance Global Practice
                                                          World Bank Group
Karen Kee
Advisor to Government Chief Information O cer,
Government of Singapore

Stefaan Verlhust
Co-founder, Govlab

Linus Bengtsson
Executive Director, Flowminder




                                                                                                                 18
APPENDIX


2. B I G  D ATA  I N  A C T I O N  F R A M E W O R K
  is framework helps participants delve more deeply into how big data can be used to advance a solution. Starting
with a question(s), each team moves toward a desired future state. is involves thinking through a number of
questions at each stepL

Question: What is the right question

Data Generation: What data can be applied to answer this question?

Data Insights: What insights to we expect to nd from this data?

Action Implementation: What actions can be taken based on the insights?

Results: What outcomes or behaviors do we want to in uence?




3.LINKSTOWORKSHOPRESOURCES
• 2017 World Government Summit: https://worldgovernmentsummit.org/home

• Workshop Collateral: Issues Paper, Presentations, Pictures, Posters -
  https://wbg.box.com/s/ozq261thgmhh3hs7wc7whsjujr86n9bg


                                                                                                                    19
