Implementing	Multi-Hazard	Impact-based	
Forecast	and	Warning	Services		
    A	report	on	a	Workshop	organized	by	China	Meteorological	Administration	–	Shanghai	
     Meteorological	Service	and	the	Global	Facility	for	Disaster	Reduction	and	Recovery	
	
	
	




                                                                                           	
	
	
	
                                     PART	I	Summary		

                                  12	–	15	December	2016	

                                      Shanghai,	China	


	                            	
	
Acknowledgements	
This	 workshop	 was	 made	 possible	 with	 the	 financial	 support	 of	 World	 Bank	 and	 the	 Global	 Facility	 for	
Disaster	Reduction	and	Recovery	(GFDRR).	The	Organizers	are	grateful	to	Wuyun	Qiqige	from	the	Shang-
hai	 Meteorological	 Service	 (SMS)	 of	 the	 China	 Meteorological	 Administration	 (CMA),	 Anna-Maria	 Bog-
danova	and	Lucy	Hancock	from	GFDRR	for	the	logistical	arrangements.		
The	 Organizers	 would	 also	 like	 to	 thank	 Haleh	 Kootval	 from	 the	 World	 Meteorological	 Organization	
(WMO)	for	her	leadership	in	developing	the	concepts	of	impact-based	forecasting	and	warnings	services	
and	 multi-hazard	 early	 warning	 systems;	 and	 thank	 colleagues	 from	 the	 Shanghai	 Typhoon	 Institute	 of	
CMA	 and	 the	 UK	 Met	 Office	 for	 materials	 and	 guidance	 on	 the	 operational	 implementation	 of	 impact-
based	warning	services.	
	
	
	                                    	




	                                                                                                                 2	
	
Table	of	Contents	

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	                                                                           2	

PREFACE	                                                                                    5	

SUMMARY	                                                                                    6	
FORECASTING	IMPACTS	                                                                        6	
PROBABILISTIC	PREDICTIONS	                                                                  6	
RISK	MATRIX	                                                                                6	
VISUALIZING	WARNINGS	                                                                       6	
TRANSITIONING	WARNING	SERVICES	                                                             7	
WORKSHOP	FINDINGS	                                                                          7	
FEEDBACK	                                                                                   7	

INTRODUCTION	                                                                               9	

WORKSHOP	FORMAT	                                                                          10	

WORLD	BANK/GFDRR	AND	SHANGHAI	METEOROLOGICAL	SERVICE	ACTIVITIES	                          10	
OVERVIEW	OF	THE	WORLD	BANK	AND	GFDRR	PROGRAMS	SUPPORTING	MODERNIZATION	OF	HYDROMET	AND	EARLY	
WARNING	SYSTEMS	                                                                           10	
OVERVIEW	OF	SHANGHAI	MULTI-HAZARD	EARLY	WARNING	SYSTEM	(MHEWS)	                            11	
OPERATIONS	OF	THE	METEOROLOGICAL	SERVICE,	HYDROLOGICAL	SERVICE	AND	DISASTER	MANAGEMENT	IN	
SHANGHAI	                                                                                  14	

IMPACT-BASED	FORECAST	AND	WARNING	SERVICES	                                               16	
WHAT	IS	AN	IMPACT-BASED	FORECAST	AND	WARNING	SERVICE?	                                    16	
IMPLEMENTING	IMPACT-BASED	FORECAST	AND	WARNING	SERVICES	                                  20	
STEP	1:	DEVELOP	THE	RISK	MATRIX	                                                          21	
STEP	2:	IDENTIFY	EVENTS	AND	HAZARDS	                                                      23	
STEP	3	ASSESS	VULNERABILITIES	RELATED	TO	THE	IDENTIFIED	HAZARDS	                          24	
STEP	4	DEVELOP	IMPACT	TABLES	                                                             25	
STEP	5	DEVELOP	ADVISORY	TABLES	                                                           25	
KEY	ELEMENTS	OF	AN	IMPACT-BASED	FORECAST	AND	WARNING	SERVICE	                             26	
PARTNERSHIPS	                                                                             26	
JOINT	DEVELOPMENT	OF	INFORMATION	AND	SERVICES	                                            26	
DEVELOPING	CAPACITY	OF	NMHSS’	AND	DISASTER	MANAGEMENT	STAFF,	PARTNERS	AND	USERS	          26	
VALIDATION	                                                                               27	
PUBLIC	WEATHER	SERVICE	AND	STANDARD	OPERATING	PROCEDURES	                                 27	
THE	PRACTICE	OF	IMPACT-BASED	FORECAST	AND	RISK-BASED	WARNING	SERVICES	IN	SHANGHAI	        28	
THE	CASE	OF	URBAN	FLOODING	                                                               28	
EXPOSURE	AND	VULNERABILITY	                                                               29	
URBAN	FLOOD	IMPACT-BASED	FORECAST	AND	RISK-BASED	WARNING	SYSTEM	                          29	
URBAN	FLOODING	ASSESSMENT	MODEL	                                                          31	
VERIFICATION	                                                                             31	
DETERMINING	URBAN	FLOODING	IMPACT	LEVELS	AND	RELEVANT	HAZARD	THRESHOLDS	                  32	
WARNING	ICONS	                                                                            32	
SERVICE	INTERFACES	                                                                       32	

CHINA	NATIONAL	PERSPECTIVE	                                                               34	

METEOROLOGICAL	OPERATIONS	AT	SHANGHAI	METEOROLOGICAL	SERVICE	                             36	

PARTICIPANT	CASE	STUDIES	                                                                 37	
BANGLADESH	                                                                               38	

	                                                                                           3	
	
CHILE	                                                                       40	
DEMOCRATIC	REPUBLIC	OF	CONGO	                                                41	
GHANA	                                                                       43	
LAO	PEOPLES	DEMOCRATIC	REPUBLIC	                                             45	
MALI	                                                                        46	
MYANMAR	                                                                     47	
NEPAL	                                                                       49	
PACIFIC	–	FIJI,	SAMOA	AND	TONGA	                                             50	
TONGA	                                                                       50	
SAMOA	                                                                       51	
SRI	LANKA	                                                                   54	

IMPACT-BASED	FORECASTING	EXERCISES	                                          57	
EXERCISE	1	                                                                  57	
EXERCISE	2	                                                                  57	
EXERCISE	3	                                                                  57	
EXERCISE	4	                                                                  57	

CONCLUSIONS	                                                                 58	

REFERENCES	                                                                  59	

ANNEX	1	WORKSHOP	PARTICIPANTS	                                               60	

ANNEX	2	WORKSHOP	AGENDA	                                                     62	

ANNEX	3	EXAMPLES	OF	IMPACT	MATRICES	FOR	MYANMAR,	MOZAMBIQUE	AND	MAURITIUS	   66	

ANNEX	4	IMPACT	FORECAST	AND	WARNING	TEMPLATE	                                71	

ANNEX	5	PARTICIPANT	FEEDBACK	                                                73	
	



	
	                              	




	                                                                             4	
	
Preface	
The	workshop	described	here	is	part	of	a	series	of	activities	conducted	by	the	World	Meteorological	Or-
ganization	(WMO)	and	the	Global	Facility	for	Disaster	Reduction	and	Recovery	(GFDRR)	to	share	concepts	
and	 practices	 on	 the	 implementation	 of	 impact-based	 forecast	 and	 warning	 services.	 The	 GFDRR	 orga-
nized	events	are	focused	on	introducing	these	concepts	in	countries	where	the	World	Bank	is	making	or	
planning	to	make	investments	to	modernize	National	Meteorological	and	Hydrological	Services	(NMHSs)	
and	 disaster	 management	 organizations.	 GFDRR	 and	 the	 Shanghai	 Meteorological	 Service	 (SMS)	 of	 the	
China	Meteorological	administration	(CMA)	have	a	long-standing	partnership,	which	started	with	the	in-
troduction	 of	 Multi-Hazard	 Early	 Warning	 Systems	 (MHEWS)	 to	 World	 Bank	 clients	 and	 to	 the	 World	
Bank	staff	in	2012	and	2013	and	has	evolved	to	include	the	newest	ideas	on	impact-based	forecasting	and	
warning	services.		
The	Workshop	brought	together	practitioners	from	World	Bank	client	countries,	World	Bank	Task	Team	
Leaders	(TTLs)	and	experts	from	SMS	and	GFDRR	to	share	best	practices	in	transforming	early	warning	
systems	 into	 multi-hazard	 impact-based	 forecast	 and	 warning	 services.	 	 An	 impact-based	 forecast	 and	
warning	service,	at	its	simplest,	is	the	translation	of	hazard	jargon	into	clear	information	about	the	likely	
impact.	 Supplementing	 the	 forecast	 of	 “60	 knot	 winds”	 with	 the	 likely	 impact	 on	 homes,	 for	 example,	
would	raise	awareness	of	the	actual	threat	to	life	and	property.	More	quantitative	impact-based	forecasts	
explicitly	consider	vulnerability	specific	locations	–	elevation	and	risk	of	flooding;	quality	of	buildings	and	
bridges	to	withstand	wind,	mudslides,	flood	water;	the	resilience	of	critical	infrastructure,	such	as	electri-
cal	power,	water	and	sanitation;	the	resilience	of	hospitals,	schools	and	other	public	services,	as	well	as	
the	capacity	of	government	and	people	to	respond.	The	timing	and	location	of	livelihood	activities,	such	as	
farming	and	fishing,	which	expose	people	directly	to	hazards,	such	as	winds,	lightning	and	waves,	need	to	
be	quantified	so	that	impact-based	forecasts	are	tailored	to	those	at	risk.		
Implicit	 in	 this	 approach	 is	 the	 need	 to	 shift	 from	 deterministic	 to	 probabilistic	 forecasting	 techniques	
that	highlight	not	only	the	most	likely	impact,	but	also	reasonable	worst	case	scenarios,	which	are	often	
the	 cause	 of	 avoidable	 disasters.	 Also,	 there	 needs	 to	 be	 greater	 emphasis	 on	 coupling	 meteorological,	
hydrological,	hydraulic	and	ocean	models	within	decision-support	systems	that	facilitate	critical	decision-
making.		
Successful	implementation	of	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	requires	a	significant	change	in	
working	practices	among	meteorologists,	hydrologists,	disaster	managers	and	those	responsible	for	criti-
cal	decision-making.	Close	operational	cooperation	is	essential.		

	                                     	




	                                                                                                                    5	
	
Summary	
Forecasting	impacts	
Impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	have	been	identified	as	a	high	priority	by	WMO	Members	to	
increase	 the	 relevance	 and	 utility	 of	 their	 National	 Meteorological	 and	 Hydrological	 Services’	 (NMHSs)	
forecasts	and	warnings.	Impact-forecasts	emphasize	what	a	hazard	will	do	rather	than	what	a	hazard	will	
be.	 Achieving	 this	 requires	 NMHSs	 to	 increase	 their	 emphasis	 on	 delivering	 risk-based1	forecast	 and	
warning	 services.	 WMO,	 World	 Bank-	 and	 GFDRR-	 supported	 modernization	 efforts	 already	 emphasize	
service	 delivery.	 Moving	 beyond	 hazard	 forecasting	 is	 a	 significant	 step-up,	 requiring	 effective	 partner-
ships	 with	 many	 different	 government	 agencies,	 as	 well	 as	 volunteer	 organizations	 and	 non-
Governmental	organizations,	which	have	access	to	relevant	data.	This	is	perhaps	one	of	the	most	difficult	
things	 to	 achieve	 and	 where	 the	 World	 Bank	 Group	 (WBG)	 has	 a	 role	 through	 its	 convening	 power	 to	
bring	 together	 many	 of	 the	 actors	 and	 stakeholders	 to	 help	 NMHSs	 and	 disaster	 management	 agencies	
create	 the	 necessary	 partnerships	 and	 data	 sharing	 arrangements;	 and	 encouraging	 other	 development	
partners	to	support	this	approach.	
Impact-based	forecasting	and	warning	services	focus	on	translating	meteorological	and	hydrological	haz-
ards	 into	 sector-	 and	 location-	 specific	 impacts,	 and	 the	 development	 of	 sectorial	 responses	 to	 mitigate	
those	impacts.	By	focusing	on	impacts,	it	is	expected	that	those	exposed	to	a	hazard	will	have	a	better	un-
derstanding	of	the	risk	and	will	more	likely	take	appropriate	action.	

Probabilistic	predictions	
Successful	implementation	depends	on	good	working	relations	among	all	stakeholders	and	close	coopera-
tion	between	stakeholders	and	the	NMHS.	In	turn,	to	generate	risk-based	meteorological	and	hydrological	
forecasts,	 the	 NMHS	 must	 have	 access	 to	 the	 best	 available	 probabilistic	 weather	 prediction	 guidance	
from	numerical	models.	This	is	often	the	most	challenging,	but	increasingly	possible	as	higher	resolution	
ensemble	numerical	weather	predictions	become	available	from	the	WMO	global	production	centres	and	
the	WMO	Regional	Specialized	Meteorological	Centres	(RSMCs),	which	are	tasked	to	support	NMHSs.	This	
can	be	taken	a	step	further	nationally	if	the	country	has	the	capacity	and	capability	to	run	very	high	reso-
lution	models	(better	than	2km	resolution),	which	incorporate	assimilation	of	local	data	from	radar	and	
other	observing	systems.	If	this	is	not	possible	reliance	on	the	global	and	regional	centres	may	be	a	suffi-
cient	meaningful	first	step.	

Risk	matrix	
The	level	of	risk	relates	the	likelihood	of	a	hazard	happening	and	the	anticipated	level	of	impact.	The	like-
lihood	of	the	hazard	is	an	output	of	an	ensemble	prediction,	while	the	expect	impact	is	estimated	based	on	
time	of	day,	time	of	year,	past	occurrences,	expert	knowledge	and	a	wide	range	of	societal	and	economic	
parameters	related	to	the	resilience	of	people	and	infrastructure.	A	climatology	of	risk	can	be	built	using	
historical	data.		

Visualizing	warnings	
While	not	essential	for	the	successful	implementation	of	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services,	it	is	
highly	desirable	to	develop	map-based	warning	systems.	One	approach	divides	a	country	into	a	conven-
ient	grid	and	uses	colours	to	represent	warning	levels	within	each	of	the	grid	boxes.	This	was	originally	
developed	 by	 MétéoFrance	 and	 has	 been	 adopted	 Europe-wide	 through	 the	 MeteoAlarm	 portal.	 Other	
countries	are	following	this	example,	which	enables	stakeholders	to	visualize	at-a-glance	the	geographical	
extent	and	type	of	warning.	Updated	frequently,	warnings	evolve	during	an	event	and	in	response	to	ac-
tions	taken	to	mitigate	risks.	This	tool	has	been	used	to	display	traditional	meteorological	warnings	and,	
more	 recently,	 sector-specific	 impact-warnings.	 It	 also	 highlights	 the	 importance	 of	 common	 colour-
coding	for	specific	levels	of	risk	regardless	of	the	hazard,	impact	or	sector.	This	way	a	better	“feeling”	for	
risk	is	established	across	all	sectors.	


																																																																				
1	“Risk-based”	considers	the	socio-economic	impacts	of	a	hazard	integrating	hazard	uncertainty	with	vul-

nerability	 and	 exposure	 information.	 The	 terms	 “risk-based”	 and	 “impact-based”	 are	 often	 used	 inter-
changeably.	


	                                                                                                                   6	
	
Transitioning	warning	services	
WMO	and	the	WBG	are	playing	a	key	role	in	promulgating	best	practices	from	the	leading	practitioners	of	
impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	to	their	Members	and	clients,	respectively.		
The	workshop,	hosted	by	the	SMS	with	the	support	of	the	WBG,	provided	an	opportunity	for	meteorolo-
gists,	hydrologists	and	disaster	managers	from	WBG	client	countries	to	share	experiences	and	learn	about	
new	practices	in	the	delivery	of	warning	services.	The	curriculum	was	developed	in	partnership	with	the	
WMO	Weather	and	Disaster	Risk	Reduction	Services	Department	(WMO/WDS),	SMS	and	GFDRR.	It	intro-
duced	participants	to	the	Shanghai	Multi	Hazard	Early	Warning	System	(MHEWS)	and	best	practices	im-
plemented	 by	 the	 City	 of	 Shanghai	 for	 the	 management	 and	 mitigation	 of	 multiple	 hazards	 through	 the	
combined	 efforts	 of	 the	 SMS,	 the	Shanghai	 Water	 Affairs	 Bureau,	 and	 the	 Shanghai	 Emergency	 Manage-
ment	Office.	Methods	to	implement	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	were	shared	with	partic-
ipants	and	exercises	were	conducted	to	demonstrate	risk-based	warning	techniques.	

Workshop	Findings	
    •    Participants	agreed	that	there	is	a	need	for	warnings	to	emphasize	the	impact	of	hazards	by	con-
         sidering	the	vulnerability	of	people	and	assets.	
    •    Impact-based	forecast	and	warnings	services	need	to	be	based	on	ensemble	predictions	to	cap-
         ture	 and	 exploit	 the	 uncertainty	 in	 the	 forecast	 to	 improve	 decision-making.	 A	 lot	 of	 effort	 is	
         needed	to	explain	the	concept	of	uncertainty	in	weather	and	hydrological	forecasts.	The	use	of	a	
         risk-based	warning	matrix	based	on	likelihood	of	occurrence	and	level	of	impact	provides	useful	
         guidance.	
    •    Risk-based	 warnings	 should	 consider	 the	 impact:	 time	 of	 day;	 time	 of	 year;	 the	 hazard;	 non-
         meteorological	and	non-hydrological	factors;	antecedent	conditions;	rural	versus	urban	factors;	
         and	the	likelihood:	forecast	uncertainty,	most	likely	scenario;	and	reasonable	worst	case	scenar-
         io.	
    •    Emergency	 Managers	 agreed	 that	 the	 concept	 of	 likely	impact	 and	 reasonable	worst	case,	 intro-
         duced	by	the	UK	Met	Office,	is	a	useful	way	of	conveying	information	on	low	likelihood,	but	high	
         impact	events,	and	this	approach	could	facilitate	better	decisions.	
    •    Colour-coding	 the	 risk	 matrix	 and	 mapping	 improves	 communication	 of	 the	 warnings.	 The	 risk	
         matrix	should	always	accompany	the	warning	because	it	provides	additional	information	on	the	
         likelihood	and	severity	of	the	impact.	Warnings	are	generally	issued	only	if	the	impact	is	likely	to	
         be	medium	or	high.		
    •    Good	 communication	 among	 meteorologists	 and	 hydrologists,	 disaster	 managers	 and	 other	
         stakeholders	is	essential	for	proper	actions	in	response	to	impact-based	forecasts	and	warnings.	
         Warning	systems	should	be	developed	with	the	participation	of	all	stakeholders.	
    •    NMHSs	need	staff	specialized	in	advising	partners	by	providing	the	interface	between	the	tech-
         nical	meteorological	and	hydrological	forecasts	and	the	interpretation	of	the	impact-based	warn-
         ings	 by	 emergency	 managers	 and	 other	 decision-makers.	 The	 human-to-human	 interaction	 is	 a	
         critical	component	of	effective	warning	services.	
    •    The	resilience	of	individuals,	communities,	infrastructure,	etc.	determines	the	level	of	impact	and,	
         therefore,	the	severity	of	risk.	High	resilience	may	occur	within	an	otherwise	vulnerable	location	
         because	of	preparedness,	quality	of	infrastructure,	access	to	shelters,	etc.	Two	adjacent	commu-
         nities	may,	therefore,	experience	different	levels	of	risk	for	the	same	hazard.		
    •    Emphasizing	impacts	means	that	warnings	tend	to	be	more	localized	–	geographically-specific	or	
         related	to	an	activity.	
    •    A	flood	forecast	is	a	secondary	hazard	derived	from	meteorological	conditions;	a	flood	forecast,	
         therefore,	is	not	an	impact-based	forecast.	River	levels	and	warning	thresholds	on	their	own	do	
         not	convey	sufficient	information	about	the	impact	of	the	flood,	which	must	take	into	considera-
         tion	vulnerability	and	exposure	factors.	The	same	approach	to	impact-based	forecast	and	warn-
         ing	services	applies	equally	to	meteorological	and	hydrological	hazards.	
    •    Meteorological	and	hydrological	models	need	to	be	coupled	to	ensure	the	hydrological	forecast	is	
         updated	as	the	meteorological	situation	evolves.	
    •    Historical	data	on	hazards	and	their	impacts	is	needed	to	create	a	robust	risk	matrix.	

Feedback	
Based	on	feedback	from	the	participants,	the	workshop	was	successful	in	sharing	ideas	on	implementing	
impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services.	Teams	from	countries	and	regions	that	included	meteorolo-

	                                                                                                                    7	
	
gists,	 hydrologists,	 and	 disaster	 managers	 benefited	 the	 most	 from	 exercises.	From	 the	 forecasters	 per-
spective,	the	participants	highlighted	that	“what	the	weather	will	do	is	the	fundamental	question	that	all	
weather	forecasters	should	be	concerned	about”.	

	                                   	




	                                                                                                                8	
	
Introduction	
Each	year	the	impacts	of	severe	hydro-meteorological	events	around	the	world	give	rise	to	multiple	casu-
alties	 and	 significant	 damage	 to	 property	 and	 infrastructure,	 with	 adverse	 economic	 consequence	 for	
communities,	which	can	persist	for	many	years.	All	this	happens	despite	good	forecasts	of	many	of	these	
severe	 events,	 with	 accurate	 warning	 information	 disseminated	 in	 a	 timely	 fashion	 by	 the	 responsible	
NMHSs	and	disaster	management	agencies.	
The	 reasons	 for	 this	 apparent	 disconnect	 lie	 in	 the	 gap	 between	 forecasts	 and	 warnings	 of	 hydro-
meteorological	events	and	an	understanding	of	their	potential	impacts,	by	the	NMHSs,	by	the	authorities	
responsible	for	civil	protection	/	emergency	management,	by	the	sectors	impacted,	and	by	the	population	
at	large.	Put	simply,	while	there	is	a	realization	of	what	the	hazard	might	be,	there	is	frequently	a	lack	of	
understanding	of	what	the	hazard	might	do.	
If	this	gap	is	to	be	closed,	then	an	all-encompassing	approach	to	observing,	modelling	and	predicting	se-
vere	hydro-meteorological	events,	and	the	consequent	cascade	of	hazards	through	to	impacts,	is	needed.	
Tackling	this	problem	requires	a	multi-disciplinary	approach	to	access	the	best	possible	science,	and	the	
optimum	services,	to	manage	multi-hazard	events	today,	and	to	provide	the	best	possible	evidence	base	
on	which	to	make	the	costly	decisions	on	infrastructure	investments	to	protect	the	population	in	the	fu-
ture.	This	is	a	key	component	to	achieving	the	goals	of	the	Sendai	framework	for	disaster	risk	reduction	
(United	Nations	2015).	
All	 countries	 should	 provide	 their	 citizens	 and	 economic	 sectors	 actionable	 information	 that	 wherever	
possible	 identifies	 the	 timing	 and	 anticipated	 impacts	 of	 specific	 hazards.	 An	 informed	 population	 that	
fully	understands	what	a	hazard	will	do	is	more	likely	to	take	the	necessary	actions	that	protect	their	lives	
and	livelihoods.		
Until	now,	most	WBG	projects	for	NMHSs	have	focused	on	institutional	strengthening,	improving	observ-
ing	 and	 forecasting	 systems	 and	 the	 quality	 of	 warnings,	 which	 is	 a	 necessary	 but	 not	 sufficient	 step	 to	
mitigating	 the	 adverse	 consequences	 of	 hydrometeorological	 hazards.	 NMHSs	 must	 also	 work	 closely	
with	emergency	services,	disaster	reduction	and	civil	protection	agencies	to	share	data	and	to	interpret	
forecasts	into	a	form	that	results	in	appropriate	actions	by	everyone	(Rogers	and	Tsirkunov	2013).	This	is	
a	 new	 area	 for	 many	 NMHSs,	 since	 it	 requires	 extensive	 knowledge	 of	 how	 meteorology	 and	 hydrology	
affects	day-to-day	activities,	the	vulnerability	of	infrastructure,	and	the	likely	behaviour	of	people	during	
an	emergency.	None	of	which	may	be	available	within	NMHSs	in	developing	countries,	some	of	which	al-
ready	struggle	to	produce	basic	meteorological	and	hydrological	forecasts	and	services.	
Impact-based	forecasting,	at	its	simplest,	is	the	translation	of	hazard	jargon	into	clear	information	about	
the	likely	impact.	Supplementing	the	forecast	of	“60	knot	winds”	with	the	likely	impact	on	homes,	for	ex-
ample,	 would	 raise	 awareness	 of	 the	 actual	 threat	 to	 life	 and	 property.	 More	 quantitative	 impact-based	
forecasts	explicitly	take	into	consideration	location-specific	vulnerability	–	elevation	and	risk	of	inunda-
tion;	quality	of	buildings	and	bridges	to	withstand	wind,	mudslides,	flood	water;	the	resilience	of	critical	
infrastructure,	such	as	electrical	power,	water	and	sanitation;	the	resilience	of	hospitals,	schools	and	oth-
er	public	services,	as	well	as	the	capacity	of	government	to	respond.	The	timing	and	location	of	livelihood	
activities,	 such	 as	 farming	 and	 fishing,	 which	 expose	 people	 directly	 to	 hazards,	 such	 as	 floods,	 winds,	
lightning,	and	waves,	need	to	be	quantified	so	that	impact-based	forecasts	are	tailored	to	those	at	risk.	In	
many	countries,	these	data	are	more	and	more	routinely	acquired	as	a	part	of	extensive	risk	mapping	pro-
jects,	often	supported	by	development	partners	and	the	Global	facility	for	Disaster	Reduction	and	Recov-
ery	(GFDRR).	
This	has	several	implications	for	the	future	of	NMHSs;	the	need	to	develop	the	kind	of	skills	required	to	
understand	 how	 the	 weather	 impacts	 society	 and	 the	 necessary	 tools	 to	 more	 effectively	 inform	 users.	
Some	may	argue	that	forecasting	disaster	risk	and	forecasting	hydrometeorological	impacts	is	beyond	the	
remit	of	meteorologists	and	hydrologists;	however,	since	the	risks	and	impacts	associated	with	extreme	
weather	events	are	dynamic	and	significant,	NMHSs	are	probably	best	equipped	to	predict	their	impact.	
And,	in	many	countries,	those	affected	are	demanding	more	than	statements	of	expected	weather	condi-
tions	from	their	NMHSs	(WMO	2012).	Impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	are	being	pioneered	by	
NMHSs	 in	 collaboration	 with	 disaster	 management	 agencies.	 The	 techniques	 apply	 equally	 to	 weather,	
climate	and	hydrological	hazards,	as	well	as	their	consequential	effects.	
WMO	has	responded	by	developing	guidelines	for	the	staff	of	NMHSs	on	multi-hazard	impact-based	fore-
casting	and	warning	services	(WMO	2015).	The	workshop,	reported	here,	builds	on	this	work	focusing	on	


	                                                                                                                      9	
	
the	steps	needed	to	implement	these	services	as	a	part	of	NMHSs	modernization	projects	often	supported	
by	NMHSs’	development	partners.	



Workshop	Format	
The	 workshop	 was	 organized	 by	 the	 Shanghai	 Meteorological	 Service	 (SMS)	 and	 GFDRR	 with	 the	 assis-
tance	 of	 World	 Meteorological	 Organization’s	 Weather	 and	 Disaster	 Risk	 Reduction	 Services	
(WMO/WDS)	 Department.	 The	 aim	 was	 to	 share	 new	 techniques	 and	 knowledge	 on	 implementing	 im-
pact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	with	technical	staff	from	WBG	client	countries’	NMHSs	and	dis-
aster	management	agencies	and	with	WBG	Task	Team	Leads	responsible	for	modernization	projects.	The	
participants	are	listed	in	Annex	1.	The	workshop	was	also	an	opportunity	for	participants	to	share	their	
national	experiences	and	exchange	ideas	to	improve	forecast	and	warning	services.	The	full	agenda	can	
be	found	in	Annex	2.	All	of	the	presentations	referred	to	here	can	be	found	in	Part	2	of	this	report.	



World	Bank/GFDRR	and	Shanghai	Meteorological	Service	Activities	
Overview	 of	 the	 World	 Bank	 and	 GFDRR	 programs	 supporting	 modernization	 of	
Hydromet	and	early	warning	systems		
The	 first	 session	 focused	 on	 introducing	 the	 participants,	 the	 objectives	 and	 expected	 outcomes	 of	 the	
workshop.	Vladimir	Tsirkunov	and	Makoto	Suwa	provided	an	overview	of	the	WBG	and	GFDRR	programs	
supporting	 the	 modernization	 of	 meteorological	 and	 hydrological	 services	 and	 early	 warning	 systems.	
Based	on	the	capacity	of	hydrometeorological	services,	the	status	of	early	warning	systems	in	small	island	
developing	states	(SIDS)	and	least	developed	countries	(LDCs)	is	of	concern	(Figure	1).	
                    Figure	1	Early	Warning	Systems	status	in	SIDS	and	LDCs	(Source	Tsirkunov	and	Suwa)	




                                                                                                                    	




	                                                                                                                10	
	
	This	 is	 being	 addressed	 in	 a	 growing	 number	 of	 countries	 through	 investments	 in	 hydromet	 and	 early	
warning	system	modernization	projects	(Figure	2).	These	projects	emphasize	national	capacity	building	
and	 institutional	 strengthening;	 modernization	 of	 infrastructure;	 and	 service	 delivery.	 It	 is	 also	 recog-
nized	that	strengthening	relations	between	advanced	and	developing	NMHSs	through	operational	twining	
arrangements	is	an	important	step	in	rapidly	improving	weaker	institutions.	


        Figure	2	Selected	WBG/GFDRR	Hydromet	and	early	warning	system	projects	(Source:	Tsirkunov	and	Suwa)	




                                                                                                               	


Overview	of	Shanghai	Multi-Hazard	Early	Warning	System	(MHEWS)	
	Chen	 Zhenlin,	 Director-General,	 of	 the	 Shanghai	 Meteorological	 Service,	 CMA	 described	 the	 Shanghai	
Multi-Hazard	Early	Warning	System	(MHEWS)	and	the	practice	of	integrated	urban	weather	and	climate	
         Figure	3	Severe	weather	disasters	in	Shanghai	(Source:	Chen	Zhenlin)	   services.	 Shanghai	 is	 a	 show	
                                                                                 case	for	a	multi-hazard	warn-
                                                                                 ing	 system	 and	 weather	 and	
                                                                                 climate	 services	 because	 of	
                                                                                 its	size	(population	exceeding	
                                                                                 24	million),	its	importance	in	
                                                                                 the	 Chinese	 economy	 as	 a	
                                                                                 financial,	 trade,	 transporta-
                                                                                 tion	and	shipping	centre,	and	
                                                                                 its	 vulnerability	 to	 weather	
                                                                                 events	(Figure	3).	
                                                                                       	
                                                                                       	
                                                                                       	
                                                                             	
                                                                                       	




	                                                                                                                  11	
	
In	 response,	 Shanghai	 has	 devel-          Figure	4	Shanghai	Integrated	Urban	Weather	and	Climate:	Two	Integrations	(Source:	
oped	 an	 integrated	 urban	 weather	                                           Chen	Zhenlin)	
and	 climate	 service	 that	 links	 a	
“seamless”	 weather	 and	 climate	
forecasting	 system	 from	 hours	 to	
weeks	 with	 an	 integrated	 impact-
based	 forecast	 and	 risk	 warning	
system	(Figure	4).	
	
	
	
	
	
                                                                                                                                   	
	
This	has	been	put	into	practise	as	part	of	the	Shanghai	urban	flood	impact	forecast	and	warnings	(Figure	
5).	Similar	approaches	are	used	for	health,	environment,	rail	and	air	transport.	
                                                             	
                     Figure	5	Impact-based	forecasting	and	warning:	Urban	Flood	(Source:	Chen	Zhenlin)	




                                                                                                          	
                 	


	
	




	                                                                                                                        12	
	
                                                         Figure	6	Mechanisms:	Shanghai	Emergency	Warning	Centre	
A	 feature	 of	 the	 Shanghai	 system	 is	 the	
decision	 by	 the	 government	 to	 use	 the	
SMS	 early	 warning	 system	 platform	 for	
the	 dissemination	 of	 all	 warnings.	 This	
ensures	 close	 cooperation	 between	
emergency	management	committee	and	
the	SMS,	and	all	related	agencies	(Figure	
6)	
The	 benefit	 of	 this	 system	 is	 illustrated	
in	 Figure	 7.	 By	 shifting	 to	 a	 risk	 based	
system,	 warning	 efficiency	 and	 effec-
tiveness	 has	 improved	 with	 both	 num-
ber	of	warnings	and	time	spent	decreas-
ing	 by	 nearly	 50%.	 The	 structure	 has	
established	 the	 meteorological	 service	
as	 the	 first	 link	 in	 the	 Disaster	 Risk	 Re-                                                                       	
duction	chain.	
Future	 plans	 include	 estab-
                                                    Figure	7	Benefit	Assessment	(Source:	Chen	Zhenlin)	
lishing	 a	 big	 data	 platform	
accessible	 by	 related	 de-
partments,	 enterprises	 and	
social	 media;	 establishing	
an	 intelligent	 meteorologi-
cal	system,	including	digital	
tools	 to	 integrate	 simula-
tions,	 observations	 and	 im-
pact-based	 weather	 fore-
casts	 and	 risk	 warnings;	
and	establishing	the	Shang-
hai	 e-weather	 service	 plat-
form	 (E3	 platform),	 includ-
ing	Early	warning	triggered	
service	      for	    decision-
making;	 Enterprises	 tai-
lored	 service	 for	 economic	                                                                                  	
activity,	 and	 Everyone	 em-
powered	service	for	the	general	public.	A	high	resolution	regional	numerical	modelling	innovation	centre	
will	 focus	 on	 impact-based	 forecasts	 and	 risk-informed	 warnings	 for	 urban	 flooding,	 aviation,	 marine	
navigation	health	and	land	transportation	based	on	high	resolution	numerical	weather	forecasting	prod-
ucts;	transitioning	from	basic	forecasts	to	impact-based	forecasts	using	impact	assessment	models	in	co-
operation	 with	 partners;	 and	 transitioning	 from	 warnings	 based	 on	 fixed	 meteorological	 thresholds	 to	
those	based	on	users’	risk	matrices	with	the	integration	of	user	decision-making	mechanisms.	Other	ef-
forts	will	focus	on	building	community	resilience,	and	risk	reduction	and	risk	transfer	through	construc-
tion	standards	and	insurance.	




	                                                                                                                  13	
	
Operations	 of	 the	 Meteorological	 Service,	 Hydrological	 Service	 and	 Disaster	 Man-
agement	in	Shanghai	
A	more	detailed	description	of	the	Shanghai	meteorological	and	hydrological	services,	and	disaster	man-
agement	was	presented	by	Kong	Chunyan	from	SMS,	Zhang	Zhenyu,	Shanghai	Water	Affairs	Bureau	and	
Yang	 Xiaodong,	 Shanghai	 Emergency	 Management	 Office2.	 Kong	 Chunyan	 described	 the	 public	 weather	
service	 in	 Shanghai.	 She	 highlighted	  Figure	8	High	Frequency	of	meteorological	Hazards	(Source:	Kong	Chunyan)	
the	 high	 frequency	 of	 meteorological	
hazards	 (Figure	 8).	 The	 greatest	 eco-
nomic	 losses	 typhoons	 are	 caused	 by	
typhoons,	 but	 lightning	 causes	 the	
most	civilian	casualties.	
The	city	is	highly	sensitive	to	meteor-
ological	 factors.	 For	 example,	 during	
the	 summer,	 a	 1°C	 increase	 in	 tem-
perature	can	result	in	a	610,	000	Kil-
owatt	 increase	 in	 the	 daily	 maximum	
power	 supply	 load	 and	 up	 to	 58,000	
cubic	metres	increase	of	water	supply	
in	the	downtown	(Figure	9).	
	
	
	                                                                                                                         	

	
	
                      Figure	9	Sensitivity	of	Shanghai	to	meteorological	factors	(Source	Kong	Chunyan)	




	
The	 public	 weather	 service	 of	 the	 SMS	 has	 built	 differentiated	 services	 for	 its	 government,	 public	 and	
economic	sector	stakeholders.	The	government	service	focuses	on	guaranteeing	the	safe	operation	of	the	
city	through	a	command	support	system	to	provide	data	and	technology	for	policy	makers	to	deal	with	
emergencies.	 This	 includes	 the	 development	 of	 the	 emergency	 warning	 platform	 described	 earlier.	 An	
important	aspect	of	the	service	for	government	decision-makers	is	the	concept	of	“early	briefing”,	which	
has	 proved	 effective	 in	 reducing	 the	 impacts	 of	 disastrous	 weather	 events.	 Early	 briefings	 are	 given	 to	
special	users	and	agencies	well	in	advance	of	releasing	public	warnings	so	that	the	agencies	have	enough	
time	to	react	and	prepare	(Figure	10).	

																																																																				
2	Two	of	the	presentations	were	in	Chinese	only	and	are	not	included	in	this	summary.	




	                                                                                                                  14	
	
	The	 service	 for	 produc-                 Figure	10	Early	briefing	of	government	agencies	in	advance	of	public	warnings		
                                                                         (Source	Kong	Chunyan)	
tion	 sectors	 focuses	 on	
boosting	 the	 economy	 of	
the	 city.	 SMS	 provides	 tai-
lored	 weather	 services	 to	
customers	 based	 on	 data	
fusion	 and	 impact-based	
weather	 products	 to	 re-
duce	 production	 loss	 and	                                                                                                  	

    Figure	11	SMS	Atmosphere	Perception	Program	(Source:	Kong	Chunyan)	
                                                                     increase	 benefits.	 Customers	 include	
                                                                     traffic,	 power,	 agriculture	 and	 travel.	
                                                                     For	the	public,	the	goal	of	the	service	is	
                                                                     to	 improve	 quality	 of	 life.	 SMS	 cooper-
                                                                     ates	 with	 social	 media	 and	 uses	 multi-
                                                                     dissemination	 channels	 to	 provide	
                                                                     comprehensive	 services	 to	 the	 public.	
                                                                     Short	 messages	 for	 the	 whole	 city	 can	
                                                                     be	sent	to	all	mobile	phones,	and	new-
                                                                     generation	 multiplex	 broadcasting	
                                                                 	
                                                                     technology	 has	 been	 developed	 to	 dis-
                                                                     seminate	 information	 via	 all	 public	
                                                                     media	outlets.	The	services	to	the	pubic	
also	promote	social	participation	interaction	and	public	innovation.	For	example,	SMS	is	cooperating	with	
social	media	to	run	an	“atmosphere	perception	program”.	Using	a	portable	mobile	sensor,	basic	meteoro-
logical	data	is	shared	via	a	public	interaction	platform	(Figure	11).		
	Figure	12	illustrates	how	the	public	weather	              Figure	12	Public	Weather	Service	in	action	(Source:	Kong	Chunyan)	
services	serves	all	sectors	during	a	typhoon	
Information	is	collected	from	various	sources	
–	 weather,	 water	 levels,	 air	 quality,	 traffic,	
waterlogging,	 etc.	 These	 data	 are	 pooled	 and	
analysed	to	understand	the	impact	of	changes	
in	 the	 weather	 conditions.	 This	 enables	 im-
pact-based	forecasts	and	risk	warnings	about	
waterlogging,	 health,	 air	 pollution,	 aviation,	
metro,	the	expressway,	etc.	(Figure	13).	
	
	
                                                                                                                              	
	
                                  Figure	13	Integrated	urban	weather	and	climate	service	based	
	                                                     on	risk	management	

	
	                                       	




                                                                                             	




	                                                                                                                             15	
	
Impact-Based	Forecast	and	Warning	Services	
What	is	an	Impact-based	Forecast	and	Warning	service?	
David	Rogers,	GFDRR,	introduced	the	necessary	steps	to	implement	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	
services.	Unlike	objective	weather,	climate	and	hydrological	forecasts,	which	can	be	developed	with	one	
or	 two	 disciplines,	 impact-based	 forecasts	 require	 access	 to	 a	 wide-range	 of	 new	 data	 including	
crowdsourced,	 behavioural	 and	 livelihood	 information,	 and	 the	resilience	 of	 infrastructure	 systems	 and	
services.	 Thus,	 there	 are	 many	 more	 actors,	 including	 communities,	 which	 play	 a	 role	 through	 their	 re-
sponse	to	impact-based	forecasts	and	provide	feedback	to	the	forecasters.	In	effect	“last-mile”	connectivi-
ty	 between	 the	 communities	 affected	 and	 information	 providers	 becomes	 much	 stronger.	 Information	
users	 drive	 the	 requirements	 for	 information	 and	 therefore	 receive	 it	 in	 a	 form	 they	 are	 expecting	 and	
understand.	
Scaling	up	the	introduction	of	multi-hazard	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	should	be	viewed	
as	a	central	part	of	the	effort	to	modernize	NMHSs.	This	requires	a	significant	change	in	NMHSs’	opera-
tions,	 responsibilities,	 training	 and	 partnerships	 with	 other	 national	 and	 international	 actors.	 The	 ex-
pected	benefit	would	be	a	significant	increase	in	the	capacity	of	communities	to	take	appropriate	action	to	
protect	their	families,	livelihoods	and	property	and	therefore	a	reduction	in	disasters.	It	would	reach	far	
beyond	the	technical	improvement	in	services	to	strengthen	resilience	within	communities.	
In	 many	 places,	 meteorological	 and	 hydrological	 hazards	 are	 likely	 to	 become	 more	 dangerous	 due	 to	
climate	change.	Existing	community	experience	and	knowledge	alone	will	not	be	sufficient	to	handle	the-
se	new	threats.	However,	the	capacity	to	cope	can	be	improved	if	the	public	are	consulted	and	engaged	in	
the	development	of	warning	services	that	are	adapted	to	their	needs.		
The	 WMO	 guidelines	 define	 three	 forecasting	 paradigms	 –	 Weather	 forecasts	 and	 warnings,	 which	 in-
clude	information	about	the	hazard	only;	impact-based	forecasts	and	warning,	which	include	information	
about	 the	 hazard	 and	 vulnerability	 to	 that	 hazard;	 and	 impact	 forecast	 and	 warnings,	 which	 include	 in-
formation	about	the	hazard,	vulnerability	and	exposure.		
Vulnerability	and	exposure	may	be	defined	in	several	ways	–	for	the	present	purposes	and	in	the	context	
of	meteorological	and	hydrological	hazards,	by	vulnerability,	we	mean	the	susceptibility	of	exposed	ele-
ments,	such	as	people,	their	livelihoods	and	property,	to	suffer	adversely	when	affected	by	a	hazard.	Vul-
nerability	is	related	to	predisposition,	sensitivities,	fragilities,	weaknesses,	deficiencies,	or	lack	of	capaci-
ties	 that	 favour	 adverse	 effects	 on	 the	 exposed	 elements.	 Vulnerability	 is	 situation	 specific,	 interacting	
with	the	hazard	to	generate	disaster	risk.	By	exposure,	we	mean	who	and	what	may	be	affected	in	an	area	
in	which	hazardous	events	may	occur.	If	the	population	and	its	economic	resources	were	not	located	in	
(exposed	to)	potentially	dangerous	setting,	no	risk	would	exist.	
Exposure	is	a	necessary,	but	not	sufficient	determinant	of	risk.	It	is	possible	to	be	exposed	but	not	vulner-
able,	 for	 example,	 by	 living	 on	 a	 floodplain	 but	 having	 the	 means	 to	 modifying	 building	 structures	 and	
behaviour	to	mitigate	potential	loss.	However,	to	be	vulnerable	it	is	necessary	to	be	exposed.	
Knowledge	of	individuals’	exposure	to	a	hazard	is	limited	at	present.	We	make	decisions	based	on	general	
knowledge	and	experience,	rather	than	on	knowing	the	specific	circumstances	of	everyone	at	risk.	Hence	
even	impact	related	warnings	remain	quite	generic	with	the	onus	on	the	individual	to	assess	their	expo-
sure	and	vulnerability	to	the	hazard	or	on	civil	protection	to	act	on	behalf	of	those	at	risk.		
Soon,	 we	 can	 expect	 communication	 tools	 and	 social	 media	 to	 advance	 to	 a	 point	 where	 personalized	
warnings	will	be	the	norm	in	developed	and	developing	countries	alike,	and	direct	feedback	from	people	
will	be	possible	as	they	act	to	reduce	their	exposure.	In	addition,	we	can	expect	these	tools	to	be	available	
in	 developing	 countries	 as	 well	 as	 developed.	 But	 for	 now,	 we	 focus	 primarily	 on	 developing	 impact-
based	forecast	and	warning	services,	which	only	consider	the	hazard	and	vulnerability	to	the	hazard	with	
more	generic	assumptions	about	exposure.		
	
	
	
	



	                                                                                                                   16	
	
The	evolution	of	weather	forecasts	to	impact	forecasts	is	summarized	in	Table	1,	which	is	adapted	from	
the	WMO	guidelines	for	the	specific	case	of	a	tropical	cyclone.	
                                      Table	1	Evolving	Warning	Paradigm	using	a	tropical	cyclone	as	an	example	

    Type	of	Forecast	and	                                           Description	of	forecast	or	warning	                                                     Factors	incorporated	
          warning	
General	Forecast	                     In	the	next	24	hours,	the	tropical	cyclone	is	likely	to	impact	or	has	already	had	an	impact	on	the	target	area.		   Hazard	

Warnings	with	fixed	thresholds	       In	the	next	24	hours,	the	tropical	cyclone	is	likely	to	impact	the	target	area.		                                   Hazard	

                                      Average	wind	speeds	of	118-133	km/h	on-	and	off-shore	or	gusts	of	150-166	km/h;	this	condition	is	to	
                                      continue	

Warnings	with	user	defined	thresh-    Rainfall	accumulations	of	200	to	300	mm	expected,	with	a	high	probability	of	the	overflow	of	drainage	              Hazard,	Vulnerability	
olds	                                 system	in	District	A	

                                      (This	warning	would	be	issued	by	a	municipal	authority	only)	

Warnings	with	spatial	and/or	         Spatial	differences:	Tropical	cyclone	warning,	gusts	of	150	km/h	generally,	with	local	gusts	in	District	B	         Hazard,	Vulnerability	
temporal	variations	in	thresholds	    expected	to	exceed	180	km/h	

                                      Temporal	differences:	Tropical	cyclone	warning	–	rainfall	accumulations	of	200	to	300	mm	expected	
                                      tomorrow	afternoon	during	the	peak	rush	hour	

Impact-based	warning	                 Rainfall	accumulations	more	than	200	mm	are	expected	tomorrow,	expect	road	closures	and	rerouting	of	               Hazard,	Vulnerability	
                                      traffic	to	avoid	flood	prone	areas.	

                                      (Here	the	impact	is	road	closures)	

Impact	warning	                       Based	on	the	risk	of	flooding	along	your	normal	commute	from	workplace	to	home	tomorrow,	follow	the	                Hazard,	Vulnerability,	exposure	
                                      alternative	route…	flexible	time	will	be	implemented	–	Based	on	your	usual	work	schedule,	leave	work	at	
                                      least	1	hour	earlier	than	normal	to	avoid	significant	delays.	

                                      (Here	the	information	is	intended	to	reduce	exposure,	while	still	permitting	productive	activity)	


	
The	importance	of	this	shift	from	weather	forecasts	and	warnings	to	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	
services	is	illustrated	in	the	following	case	from	Uttarakhand,	India	(Box	1).		


                                     Box	1	The	case	for	impact-based	warnings:	Uttarakhand	Floods	2013,	India	

    In	the	Indian	 State	of	 Uttarakhand,	the	monsoon	in	 June	 2013	 arrived	almost	two	weeks	 earlier	than	expected.	
    From	 June	 15	to	 17,	 2013,	 heavy	rainfall,	 375	percent	above	the	rainfall	that	the	 State	would	normally	 receive	
    during	the	monsoon,	hit	several	parts	of	the	higher	reaches	of	the	Himalayas.	This	resulted	in	a	rapid	increase	in	
    water	levels	that	gave	rise	to	flash	floods	in	the	Mandakini,	Alakananda,	Bhagirathi	and	other	river	basins,	caus-
    ing	 extensive	 landslides.	 Continuous	 rains	 caused	 Chorabari	 Lake	 to	 rise	 and	 the	 lake’s	 weak	 moraine	 barrier	
    gave	way	causing	a	huge	volume	of	water	along	with	large	boulders	came	down	the	channel	to	the	east,	devastat-
    ing	the	towns	of	Kedarnath,	Rambara,	Gaurikund	and	others	in	its	wake.		
    The	floods	were	well	forecast	by	the	Indian	Meteorological	Department	(IMD)	and	timely	warnings	of	extremely	
    heavy	 rainfall	 were	 issued.	 However,	 lack	 of	 understanding	 of	 how	 to	 interpret	 the	 information	 led	 to	 an	
    inadequate	 response	 and	 significant	 loss	 of	 life.	 The	 published	 reponse	 from	 the	 Vice	 Chair	 of	 the	 National	
    Disaster	Management	Authority	typifies	the	problem	“We	get	a	copy	of	the	IMD	bulletin	but	action	has	to	be	tak-
    en	by	state	government	only.	They	put	out	bulletin	(this	time)	and	said	“very	heavy	rain”.	What	does	“heavy	rain”	
    mean?	“Very	heavy	rain”	means	very	heavy	rain.	But	it	doesn’t	mean	that	in	such	a	short	time	so	much	rain”” 1		
    According	to	official	sources,	over	 900,000	people	were	 affected	by	the	 event	in	Uttarakhand	with	official	esti-
    mates	 of	 fatalities	 in	 excess	 of	 5700,	 the	 majority	 of	 them	 tourists	 on	 pilgrimage	 to	 the	 State’s	 Sikh	 and	 Hindu	
    holy	sites.	
    1Interview	by	Rediff.com	with	M.	Shashidhar	Reddy,	Vice	Chair	of	NDMA,	immediately	following	the	Uttarakhand	flood	(see	complete	transcript	
    here	-	http://www.rediff.com/news/slide-show/slide-show-1-uttarakhand-more-than-4000-deaths-are-expected/20130705.htm#1)	




	
The	case	of	Uttarakhand	demonstrates	that	unless	warnings	are	issued	with	adequate	knowledge	of	the	
impact	 of	 the	 hazard,	 the	 desired	 response	 from	 the	 public	 or	 disaster	 managers	 will	 not	 happen.	 This	
means	 that	 more	 effort	 is	 needed	 to	 use	 impact-based	 forecasts	 and	 analyses	 to	 build	 scenarios,	 and	 to	
use	 these	 to	 train	 and	 educate	 the	 public,	 communities	 and	 sectors	 on	 what	 actions	 must	 be	 taken	 to	
avoid	disasters.	In	Tonga,	following	the	devastation	caused	by	Tropical	Cyclone	Ian	in	January	2014,	the	
Meteorological	Service	surveyed	the	areas	worst	affected	by	the	event.	They	found	that	people	evacuated	
only	when	their	homes	were	destroyed	putting	themselves	at	great	risk	of	injury,	which	highlighted	their	
lack	 of	 understanding	 of	 the	 severity	 of	 the	 weather	 warning.	 Since	 then	 Tonga	 has	 made	 some	 simple	

	                                                                                                                                                                                            17	
	
first	steps	by	asking	communities	what	information	would	help	them	make	the	right	decisions	to	protect	
their	lives,	livelihoods	and	property.	Warnings	need	to	relate	to	familiar	elements	of	their	communities	–	
the	effect	of	wind	on	banana	trees	and	coconut	trees,	for	example,	is	more	readily	understood	than	wind	
speed.		
Tang	et	al.	(2012)	highlighted	the	importance	and	effectiveness	of	a	multi	hazard	approach	to	reducing	
disasters	 by	 understanding	 how	 a	 meteorological	 or	 hydrological	 hazard	 can	 produce	 a	 series	 of	 social	
consequences,	which	are	also	public	hazards.	The	emphasis	on	impacts,	therefore,	also	implies	the	warn-
ings	should	be	related	to	multiple	hazards	since	the	initial	event	can	cause	a	series	of	cascading	threats	or	
consequential	 effects	 –	 public	 health,	 accidents,	 infrastructure	 damage,	 civil	 unrest,	 food	 insecurity,	 etc.	
Ideally,	each	of	these	should	also	be	considered	and	the	means	to	predict	their	likelihood	developed.	Ob-
viously,	these	are	not	necessarily	the	responsibility	of	NMHSs;	however,	an	inclusive	approach	to	coping	
with	multiple	hazards	would	be	more	effective.	This	highlights	not	only	the	technical	requirements,	but	
also	the	need	for	an	effective	operational	partnership	among	stakeholders.	It	also	highlights	the	need	to	
distinguish	between	forecasting	an	event,	such	as	a	tropical	cyclone,	from	the	numerous	hazards	resulting	
from	that	event	–	flash	floods,	riverine	floods,	storm	surges,	high	winds	and	wind	gusts.	It	is	to	the	latter	
that	we	want	to	relate	to	impact-based	forecasts	and	warnings	(Table	2).		
                                  Table	2	Examples	of	multiple	hazards	resulting	from	meteorological	events		

                 Event	                 Primary	hazard	                Secondary	hazard	                                   Tertiary	hazard	
     Tropical	Cyclones	             •   Strong	winds	       •   Riverine	and	coastal	flooding	                •   Loss	of	infrastructure	systems	and	services	
                                    •   Lightning	          •   Surface	water	flooding	                           (shelter,	transportation,	schools,	hospitals,	
                                    •   Heavy	rainfall	     •   Flash	flooding		                                  energy	supply,	communication)	
                                    •   Tornados	           •   Land	instability		                            •   Infectious	diseases	
                                                            •   Storm	surge	                                  •   Water	insecurity	
                                                                	                                             •   Widespread	economic	losses	
                                                                	
     Monsoons	                      •   Strong	winds	       •   Riverine	and	coastal	flooding	                •   Loss	of	infrastructure	systems	and	services	
                                    •   Heavy	Rainfall	     •   Surface	water	flooding		                          (shelter,	transportation,	schools,	hospitals,	
                                    •   Thunderstorms	      •   Flash	flooding	                                   energy	supply,	communication)	
                                                            •   Land	instability	                             •   Infectious	diseases	
                                                                                                              •   Widespread	economic	losses	

     Convective	rainstorms	         •   Strong	winds	       •   Riverine	flooding	                            •   Loss	of	infrastructure	systems	and	services	
                                    •   Tornados	           •   Surface	water	flooding		                          (shelter,	transportation,	schools,	hospitals,	
                                    •   Lightning	          •   Flash	flooding		                                  energy	supply,	communication)	
                                    •   Heavy	rainfall	     •   Land	instability	                             •   Infectious	diseases	
                                                                	                                             •   Local	economic	losses	

     Prolonged	period	of	hot	       •   Heat	               •   Thunderstorms	(and	their	associated	hazard	   •   Land	instability	
     weather	                                                   phenomena)	                                   •   Non-infectious	diseases	
                                                            •   Drought	                                      •   Algal	blooms	
                                                            •   Dust/smog/haze	                               •   Food	insecurity/nutrition	
                                                                                                              •   Water	insecurity	
                                                                                                              •   Widespread	economic	losses	

     Prolonged	period	of	dry	       •   Reduced	rainfall	   •   Dust/smog/haze/fog	                           •   Loss	of	infrastructure	systems	and	services	
     weather	                                               •   Reduced	ground	water	flow	                        (energy	supply)	
                                                            •   Deteriorating	water	quality	                  •   Non-infectious	diseases	
                                                            •   Drought	                                      •   Infectious	diseases	
                                                                                                              •   Food	insecurity/nutrition	
                                                                                                              •   Water	insecurity	
                                                                                                              •   Subsidence	
                                                                                                              •   Widespread	economic	losses	

     Excessive	cold	with	frost	     •   Cold	               •   Wind	chill	                                   •   Loss	of	infrastructure	systems	and	services	
                                    •   Frost	                                                                    (energy	supply)	
                                                            	                                                 •   Non-infectious	diseases	


	
Table	2	illustrates	that	the	cascade	of	hazards,	which	transform	from	purely	meteorological	and	hydro-
logical	 into	 hazards	 related	 to	 infrastructure	 systems	 and	 services,	 human	 health	 and	 economic	 disrup-
tion.	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	



	                                                                                                                                                                  18	
	
Understanding	 sectorial	 interdependencies	 (Table	 3)	 is	 also	 necessary	 to	 determine	 vulnerabilities	 and	
therefore	in	developing	the	appropriate	impact-based	forecasts	and	warnings.	Addressing	these	vulnera-
bilities	is	a	way	to	increase	resilience	and	reduce	the	risk	of	disaster	stemming	from	a	failure	to	cope	ade-
quately	with	the	primary	and	secondary	meteorological	and	hydrological	hazards	(Rogers	et	al.	2016).		
                            Table	3	Examples	of	sectorial	interdependencies	for	7	sectors	(source	Rogers	et	al.	2016)	

       Sector	                       Dependencies	on	Infrastructure	                                                          Impacts	on	other	sectors	
Food	               •   Water	for	irrigation	                                                         •   Domestic	is	dependent	on	food	supply	
                    •   Transport	infrastructure	for	agricultural	activities	and	food	supply	
                    •   Energy	for	storage	and	agricultural	activities	
Energy	             •   Water	for	cooling	in	power	stations,	fuel	refining	and	energy	production	     •   Transport	is	dependent	on	energy	
                    •   Transport	for	fuel	supply	and	workforce	                                      •   Food	production	is	dependent	on	energy	
                    •   ICT	for	control	and	management	systems	of	electricity	                        •   Water	is	dependent	on	energy	for	pumping,	treatment	and	supply	
                                                                                                      •   Domestic	is	dependent	on	energy	for	heating	and	cooling	and	many	other	
                                                                                                          functions	

Social	and	Domes-   •   Food,	Water	ICT,	Transport,	Energy	for	all	aspects	of	life	and	livelihoods	   •   All	sectors	dependent	on	workers	and	efficient	domestic	consumption	of	secto-
tic	                •   Emergency	services	providing	continuity	to	operate	while	recovering	from	         rial	resources		
                        an	event	                                                                     •   Health	is	dependent	on	general	well-being	of	population	to	avoid	overwhelming	
                                                                                                          sector	
                    	                                                                                 •   Water	depends	on	well-managed	sanitation	systems	to	avoid	contamination	of	
                                                                                                          water	supply	
                                                                                                      •   Emergency	services	infrastructure	depends	on	people	for	effective	response	

ICT	                •   Energy	for	all	services	                                                      •   All	sectors	dependent	on	ICT		
                    •   Transport	for	maintenance	workers	
Transport	          •   Domestic	infrastructure	for	travel	to	and	from	work,	school,	etc.	            •   All	sectors	depend	on	transport	
                    •   Energy	infrastructure	for	fuel	and	electricity		
                    •   Drainage	infrastructure	to	prevent	flooding	
                    •   Internal	dependencies	with	and	across	modes	(road,	rail,	sea,	and	air)	
Water	              •   Energy	for	treating,	pumping	and	processing	                                  •   All	workplaces	and	domestic	homes	require	water	for	people	and	sanitation	
                    •   ICT	for	control	systems	                                                      •   Cooling	water	for	some	energy	infrastructure	
                    •   Transport	for	workers	and	supplies	for	processing		                           •   Energy	infrastructure	may	depend	on	water	for	generation	
                                                                                                      •   Food	production	requires	water	

Emergency	          •   Transport	(all	modes)	for	safe	and	rapid	evacuation,	and	emergency	sup-       •   All	sectors	depend	on	emergency	services	for	safety	and	security	during	emer-
  Services	             plies	                                                                            gency	situations	
                    •   Energy	to	manage	emergency	pumps	to	relieve	flooding	and	operate	flood	       •   Health	infrastructure	for	emergency	response	
                        controls	
                    •   Health	infrastructure	to	respond	to	emergency	situations	
                    •   Water	infrastructure	to	extinguish	fires	
                    •   ICT	to	respond	effectively	to	emergency	situations	
                    •   Domestic	infrastructure	to	provide	security	for	population	

	
By	understanding	the	vulnerability	of	the	infrastructure	system	and	services	to	the	primary	and	second-
ary	hazards,	it	is	possible	to	provide	more	accurate	and	timely	warnings	that	would	protect	a	population	
from	existing	weaknesses	in	infrastructure	that	compound	the	threat	of	mortality	and	morbidity	posed	by	
the	initial	hazards.	Collapse	of	buildings,	bridges,	and	roadways,	loss	of	ICT,	electricity,	transportation	and	
sanitation	frequently	contribute	to	creating	the	circumstances	of	subsequent	disasters.	
The	structure	of	a	warning	system,	incorporating	impact-based	forecasts,	is	shown	in	Figure	14.	The	me-
teorological	or	hydrological	hazard	forecast	depends	on	global,	regional	and	local	observations,	assimila-
tion	of	these	data	in	numerical	models	operated	locally,	regionally	or	globally	and	climate	records,	espe-
cially	the	climatology	of	extreme	events,	which	provide	guidance	to	the	forecasters.	In	a	traditional	sys-
tem	 based	 on	 weather	 warnings	 only,	 early	 briefings	 can	 be	 given	 to	 government	 stakeholders,	 which	
enables	adequate	preparation	ahead	of	public	warnings	(Tang	et	al.	2012).	The	weather	warning	system	
may	also	include	some	assessment	of	the	consequences	of	the	hazard,	which	can	be	used	to	develop	the	
early	briefing.		
Impact	forecasts	are	tailored	to	the	needs	of	different	stakeholders;	for	example,	emergency	responders,	
highways	authorities,	water	resources	agencies,	municipal	authorities	and	domestic	and	industrial	energy	
suppliers,	as	well	as	the	public	at	risk.	Early	briefings,	based	on	impact	forecasts,	are	used	to	assess	the	
likely	effect	of	the	hazard	over	time	at	specific	geographical	locations,	highlighting	when	and	where	the	
impacts	 may	 be	 dangerous	 or	 disruptive	 to	 society.	 Early	 briefing	 enables	 government	 agencies	 to	 pre-
pare	for	contingencies	to	protect	the	public	and	critical	infrastructure.	Public	warnings	follow	early	brief-
ings	per	standard	operating	procedures	(Tang	et	al.	2012).	
In	 summary,	 effective	 impact-based	 forecast	 and	 warning	 services	 should	 inform	 about	 the	 cascading	
threats	caused	by	meteorological	and	hydrological	events	to	prevent	the	hazards	from	becoming	human	
disasters.	This	requires	the	capacity	to	predict	the	onset	of	specific	meteorological	and	hydrological	haz-
ards	 and	 the	 subsequent	 impact	 based	 on	 the	 vulnerability	 of	 a	 society	 to	 those	 hazards,	 the	 ability	 to	
communicate	and	inform,	and	for	society	to	understand	the	threats	and	be	able	take	appropriate	mitigat-
ing	actions.		
	

	                                                                                                                                                                                   19	
	
Figure	11	Schematic	of	information	flows	from	basic	meteorological	and	     The	NMHS	may	or	may	not	be	responsible	
 hydrological	hazard	forecasting	to	impact	forecasting	to	early	briefing	
  and	warning	to	action.	The	figure	highlights	the	importance	of	early	     for	 issuing	 the	 impact-based	 warning.	 In	
 briefing	to	key	stakeholders	prior	to	issuing	public	warnings	to	ensure	   some	countries,	this	may	be	the	purview	of	
an	effective	response	from	public	agencies.	The	standard	meteorological	    the	 disaster	 management	 agency	 or	 other	
  process	is	shown	in	blue;	the	additional	impact-based	forecasts	and	
                      warnings	are	shown	in	green.	                         designated	authority.	In	all	cases,	however,	
                                                                            there	should	be	very	close	and	continuous	
                                                                            cooperation	 among	 the	 responsible	 agen-
                                                                            cies	including	the	NMHS.	This	is	particular-
                                                                            ly	 important	 where	 the	 hazardous	 situa-
                                                                            tion	 may	 evolve	 rapidly	 escalating	 the	
                                                                            threat	and	the	need	to	update	warning	in-
                                                                            formation	frequently.	

                                                                            Implementing	Impact-based	Fore-
                                                                            cast	and	Warning	Services	
                                                                            Based	 on	 the	 practical	 experience	 of	 the	
                                                                            World	Bank	and	the	Global	Facility	for	Dis-
                                                                            aster	 reduction	 and	 recovery	 (GFDRR),	
                                                                            Rogers	 and	 Tsirkunov	 (2013)	 recommend	
                                                                            that	 design	 and	 implementation	 of	 mod-
                                                                            ernization	 projects	 for	 NMHSs	 have	 three	
                                                                            basic	 components	 –	 Institutional	 strength-
                                                                            ening,	 capacity	 building	 and	 implementa-
                                                                            tion	 support;	 modernization	 of	 observing	
                                                                            infrastructure	 and	 forecasting;	 and	 en-
                                                                            hancement	of	the	service	delivery	system.	
                                                                    Fundamental	 to	 the	 introduction	 of	 im-
                                                               	    pact-based	 forecast	 and	 warning	 services	
                                                                    is	 ability	 to	 provide	 timely	 and	 accurate	
forecasts	 of	 meteorological	 and	 hydrological	 hazards.	 Thus,	 there	 is	 no	 short	 cut	 to	 the	 transformation	
from	the	forecasting	of	“what	the	hazard	will	be	to	what	the	hazard	will	do”.	It	requires	a	rethink	of	the	
structure	of	the	organization	and	the	way	it	operates,	an	expansion	of	training	to	strengthen	capacity	both	
within	the	NMHSs	and	with	partner	organizations	and	users,	and	new	operational	partnerships.		
It	 requires	 investment	 in	 observing	 networks,	 including	 rehabilitation	 and	 reequipping	 meteorological,	
hydrological	and	other	networks	as	required,	introducing	ground-based	remote	sensing	systems	for	now-
casting	and	very-short	range	forecasting,	upper	air	measurements,	quality	control	and	calibration	facili-
ties.	It	requires	the	modernization	of	communication	and	ICT	systems,	which	meet	WMO	information	sys-
tem	standards,	archiving,	data	management	and	digitizing,	and	in	the	more	advanced	NMHSs	it	may	in-
clude	capacity	for	limited	area	numerical	weather	prediction.	However,	it	is	recommended	to	encourage	
greater	reliance	on	regional	specialized	centres	for	routine	NWP	support,	which	also	entails	the	willing-
ness	to	share	national	data	to	provide	more	precise	and	accurate	model	products.	The	forecasting	system	
requires	 computer	 and	 visualization	 systems	 to	 process	 observations	 and	 model	 products	 that	 provide	
the	forecaster	with	guidance.	Climatology-based	regional	and/or	seasonal	specific	thresholds	can	provide	
a	valuable	starting	point	of	discussions	for	the	forecaster	in	estimating	the	severity	and	the	impact	of	an	
event.	
Enhancing	 service	 delivery	 starts	 with	 strengthening	 the	 public	 weather	 service	 function,	 particularly	
support	for	disaster	management,	the	public,	and	the	main	economic	sectors.	It	is	within	this	component	
that	weather,	climate	and	hydrological	forecasts	would	be	transformed	into	impact-based	forecasts	and	
warnings,	distributed	and	communicated	with	stakeholders.	It	is	also	the	primary	means	to	obtain	feed-
back	on	the	effectiveness	of	the	forecasts	and	warnings	and	the	actual	situation	in	disaster	affected	areas,	
and	 the	 means	 to	 update	 information	 on	 vulnerability	 and	 exposure.	 The	 relationship	 between	 the	
NMHSs	service	delivery	system	and	emergency/disaster	management	should	be	as	close	as	possible,	ide-
ally	with	joint	responsibility	for	issuing	impact-based	warnings	(Rogers	and	Tsirkunov	2013).	It	is	essen-
tial	that	this	relationship	is	based	on	trust	and	mutual	understanding	of	respective	roles	and	responsibili-
ties	 of	 each	 partner	 agency.	 Similarly,	 close	 working	 relations	 should	 be	 established	 with	 other	 sectors	
based	on	the	development	of	shared	standard	operating	procedures	(SOPs).	


	                                                                                                                      20	
	
The	following	is	a	step-by-step	guide	to	help	NMHSs	and	development	partners	in	setting	up	an	impact-
based	warning	system.		

Step	1:	Develop	the	Risk	Matrix	
The	basic	tool	of	an	impact-based	warning	system	is	the	 Risk	Matrix	(Figure	15).	The	matrix	relates	the	
expected	 impact	 of	 a	 hazard	 to	 the	 likelihood	 of	 occurrence	 of	 the	 hazard.	 The	 likelihood	 is	 best	 deter-
mined	 from	 a	 probabilistic	 forecast	 using	 ensemble	 techniques.	 The	 level	 of	 the	 impact	 is	 determined	
from	 knowledge	 of	 vulnerability	 and	 exposure.	 Together,	 these	 determine	 the	 severity	 of	 the	 warning	
using	a	four-colour	system	–	green,	yellow,	orange,	red.		
                     Figure	15	The	risk	matrix	(source:	Met	Office)	                      The	 arrangement	 of	 colours	
                                                                                          in	the	matrix	is	based	on	the	
                                                                                          experience	 of	 the	 UK	 Met	
                                                                                          Office,	 and	 should	 be	 fixed.	
                                                                                          It	 is	 recommended	 that	
                                                                                          warnings	 should	 only	 be	
                                                                                          issued	 when	 the	 impact	 is	
                                                                                          expected	 to	 be	 Medium	 or	
                                                                                          High.	The	impact	of	a	hazard	
                                                                                          may	 increase	 without	 alter-
                                                                                      	   ing	 the	 likelihood	 of	 the	
                                                                                          hazard:	 this	 occurs	 when	
there	 is	 a	 forecast	 change	 in	 timing	 of	 the	 hazard;	 for	 example,	 a	 shift	 from	 night	 time	 to	 the	 morning	
“rush	hour”.	It	is	therefore	important	for	decision-makers	to	have	access	to	the	risk	matrix	as	well	as	the	
colour-coded	 level	 of	 the	 warning.	 A	 red	 warning	 is	 limited	 to	 high	 likelihood,	 high	 impact	 only.	 There-
fore,	we	should	expect	this	to	be	a	relatively	rare	occurrence.	Warnings	for	different	hazards	should	be	
consistent;	it	is	recommended,	therefore,	to	avoid	creating	alternative	classifications	for	warnings	since	
we	want	to	minimize	the	risk	of	confusion	among	those	at	risk.		
	In	 the	 case	 of	 a	 warning	 affecting	 a	 Figure	16	Example	of	the	vigilance	map	used	by	MétéoFrance	to	display	
                                                    warnings	of	meteorological	hazards	and	associated	advice	
region,	 it	 is	 useful	 to	 map	 the	 warn-
ing.	 One	 approach	 to	 visualizing	 me-
teorological	 warnings	 is	 the	 “Vigi-
lance	 météorologique”	 system	 devel-
oped	by	MétéoFrance	(Figure	16)	and	
utilized	 as	 the	 framework	 for	 the	 Eu-
ropean	 MeteoAlarm	 (Figure	 17).	 The	
vigilance	 system	 utilizes	 a	 gridded	
map	based	on	administrative	bounda-
ries	 –	 100	 French	 Departments.	 Al-
ternatively,	 geographical	 divisions	
could	 be	 used.	 The	 advantage	 of	
matching	 administrative	 boundaries	
is	 the	 presence	 of	 public	 officials	 in	
each	 of	 the	 “grid	 cells”,	 which	 have	
responsibility	for	the	first	response	to	
a	 warning.	 Colours	 –	 green,	 yellow,	                                                                            	
orange	 and	 red	 –	 are	 used	 to	 repre-
sent	the	severity	of	the	warning,	while	symbols	for	each	of	the	meteorological	hazards	–	wind,	rain,	light-
ning/thunderstorms,	heat	and	snow/ice	are	displayed	to	show	the	type	of	hazard.	This	has	mostly	been	
used	for	hazard	warnings,	but	may	be	adapted	to	impact-based	warnings.		
Each	grid	cell	may	have	its	own	granular	structure	depicting	a	much	finer	mesh	and	more	detailed	warn-
ing	information.	This	is	particularly	important	where	there	are	terrain	features,	which	may	influence	the	
meteorology	or	vulnerable	infrastructure,	requiring	very	high-resolution	forecasts.	This	finer	scale	will	be	
determined	 largely	 by	 the	 resolution	 and	 accuracy	 of	 the	 available	 numerical	 weather	 prediction	 guid-
ance	–	ideally	1km	or	better	in	areas	of	critical	infrastructure.	
	



	                                                                                                                      21	
	
                  Figure	17	Example	of	the	graphical	output	from	the	MeteoAlarm	portal.	The	colour	coding	
                                 is	consistent	across	all	participating	European	countries.	




                                                                                                             	
A	potential	limitation	of	this	approach	is	that	it	is	not	easy	to	represent	alternative	scenarios	–	the	rea-
sonable	worst	case	versus	the	most	likely	scenario.		In	which	case,	additional	information	may	be	needed	
(see	for	example,	Figure	18).	
Establishing	 a	 uniform	 colour-           Figure	18	Displaying	most	likely	and	alternative	tracks	of	a	storm	system	(Source:	
                                             Met	Office).	Areas	impacted	could	be	shown	for	each	scenario.	This	type	of	infor-
coding	 system	 across	 different	            mation	is	most	useful	for	sectors,	which	are	highly	sensitive	to	impacts	and	re-
countries	 is	 not	 easy,	 particularly	                   quired	to	act	even	if	the	likelihood	is	low	or	very	low.	
if	a	country	has	established	differ-
ent	 warning	 systems	 for	 different	
threats,	which	may	have	their	own	
unique	 combination	 of	 colours,	
symbols	and	numbers.		
In	 the	 MeteoAlarm	 Programme	 of	
EUMETNET,	 led	 by	 ZAMG,	 this	
was	 overcome	 by	 focusing	 not	 on	
meteorological	parameters,	but	on	
the	 priority	 of	 the	 impact	 of	 ex-
treme	 weather	 and	 the	 necessary	
actions	 to	 be	 taken	 by	 emergency	
responders	and	people	concerned.	
This	gave	a	clear	guideline	for	me-
teorological	 thresholds,	 which	
must	differ	very	much	per	the	cli-
matology	 of	 the	 different	 regions,	
vulnerability	 and	 exposure	 of	 en-                                                                                             	
dangered	people	and	goods.	
The	level	red	is	therefore	primarily	defined	by	the	success	criteria	on	the	advice:	“follow	the	order	of	au-
thorities	 under	 all	 circumstances	 and	 be	 prepared	 for	 extraordinary	 measures”	 and	 in	 this	 way,	 result	
orientated,	instead	of	being	focused	on	meteorology.	
The	 homogenization	 of	 the	 MeteoAlarm	 system	 process	 took	 several	 years	 and	 required	 close	 coopera-
tion	 and	 exchange	 of	 knowhow	 with	 Civil	 Protection	 and	 first	 responders.	 Within	 the	 participating	 Met	
Services,	collaborative	decision-making	was	a	way	to	involve	forecasters,	climatologists,	civil	protection	
and	media	experts	both	in	the	planning	and	the	actual	decision	making	process.	
As	European	cross	country	investments,	exchange	of	work	force	and	tourist	movements	increased	signifi-
cantly	 during	 the	 last	 15	 years,	 a	 homogenized	 warning	 system	 of	 well-coordinated	 National	 Weather	
Services	provides	the	best	available	information	for	any	user	outside	his	own	country.	The	output	of	the	
MeteoAlarm	system	is	presently	reused	by	more	than	1000	information	providers	across	the	globe.	A	se-
cond	important	user	emerged	during	the	last	3	years	with	the	ERCC	(Emergency	Respond	and	Coordina-



	                                                                                                                           22	
	
tion	Centre)	of	the	European	Commission,	who	used	the	MeteoAlarm	system	is	primary	input	for	a	Euro-
pean	overview	and	funded	several	of	additional	features.	

Step	2:	Identify	Events	and	Hazards	
	The	 identification	 of	 all	 events	 impacting	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 country,	 and	 the	 primary,	 secondary	 and	
tertiary	hazards	(Table	4)	is	required.	The	primary	hazards	are	caused	directly	by	the	event	and	cannot	
be	mitigated	to	any	significant	extent	(e.g.,	rain	will	fall).	The	secondary	hazards	are	related	to	the	prima-
ry	hazard	and	can	often	be	partially	mitigated	(e.g.,	structural	works	can	reduce	the	possibility	of	a	sur-
face	flood	in	an	urban	area).	The	tertiary	hazards,	which	are	generally	non-meteorological	or	hydrologi-
cal,	are	caused	by	the	primary	and	secondary	phenomena	or	may	be	a	consequence	of	human	failure.	The	
latter	have	the	greatest	scope	for	mitigation	by	either	structural	measures	to	reduce	vulnerability	or	ex-
posure	or	both.	An	example	of	a	cascade	hazards	and	the	impact	is	a	warning	of	illness	(risk	of	impact),	
which	 could	 occur	 in	 the	 population	 vulnerable	 and	 exposed	 to	 an	 infectious	 disease	 (tertiary	 hazard)	
caused	 by	 contaminated	 floodwater	 (secondary	 hazard)	 resulting	 from	 a	 flood	 caused	 by	 monsoon	
(event)	 rains	 (primary	 hazard).	 Based	 on	 this	 information,	 sector-by-sector	 hazard	 matrices	 can	 be	 de-
veloped	(Figure	19).		The	distinction	between	an	event	and	a	hazard	is	important	because	a	single	event	
     Figure	19	Example	of	a	hazard	matrix	hierarchy.	This	illustrates	the	cascading	     may	 include	 multiple	 hazards.	 A	
   nature	of	hazards	where	there	is	a	causal	relationship	among	primary,	secondary	      tropical	 cyclone	 is	 often	 mistak-
   and	tertiary	hazards.	The	distinction	between	a	tertiary	hazard	and	impact	is	sub-    enly	referred	to	as	a	hazard;	it	is	
  tle.	Tertiary	hazards	have	wide	ranging	social	and	economic	impacts.	For	example,	
  we	consider	a	disease	is	a	tertiary	hazard	–	a	resulting	illness	is	an	impact	because	 the	high	wind,	rainfall,	floods	and	
            it	is	a	consequence	of	exposure	and	vulnerability	to	that	disease.	          storm	 surge	 within	 the	 cyclone	
                                                                                         that	 causes	 the	 damage.	 The	 in-
                                                                                         tensity	of	these	hazards	is	highly	
                                                                                         variable	 in	 time	 and	 space	 re-
                                                                                         quiring	 precise	 location-specific	
                                                                                         forecasts.	 The	 use	 of	 the	 various	
                                                                                         scales	 to	 estimate	 tropical	 cy-
                                                                                         clone	 intensity	 is	 at	 best	 only	
                                                                                         indicative	 of	 the	 strength	 of	 the	
                                                                                         winds,	 it	 does	 not	 say	 anything	
                                                                                         about	 the	 specific	 impact	 of	 the	
                                                                                         meteorological	 and	 hydrological	
                                                                                         hazards.	 This	 can	 be	 misleading.	
                                                                                         Hurricane	 Sandy	 in	 the	 United	
                                                                                         States	 illustrates	 the	 problem:	 in	
                                                                                    	    this	 case,	 responders	 and	 com-
                                                                                         munities	 lowered	 their	 guard	
interpreting	the	meteorological	downgrading	of	the	storm	from	a	hurricane	to	an	extratropical	cyclone	by	
the	National	Weather	Service	as	a	weakening	of	the	intensity	of	the	overall	system.	In	fact,	the	winds	re-
mained	strong	resulting	in	extensive	damage	that	might	have	been	averted	had	the	communities	and	re-
sponders	remained	more	vigilant.		
	
                                                               	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	


	                                                                                                                           23	
	
Identifying	each	hazard	with	a	unique	symbol	can	help	establish	its	importance.	Table	4	shows	the	haz-
ards	identified	by	stakeholders	in	Myanmar	during	a	workshop	in	2015.	
    Table	4	Multiple	hazards	resulting	from	meteorological	events	defined	by	stakeholders	at	a	workshop	led	by	the	Department	of	
                                               Meteorology	and	Hydrology,	Myanmar	

            Event	      Primary	hazards	               Secondary	hazards	                                             Tertiary	hazards	
       Cyclone	        •   Strong	wind	            •   River	flood	                      •   Damage	in	Dams	and	appurtenant	structures,	embankment,	irrigation	and	
                       •   Lightning	              •   Surface	water	flooding	               drainage	facilities,	pumping	facilities	
                       •   Heavy	rainfall	         •   Flash	flood	                      •   Submerging	paddy	fields	
                       •   Tornado	                •   Landslides		                      •   Migration	
                                                   •   Storm	surge	                      •   Food	shortage	
                                                   •   Water	level	rise	in	reservoirs	   •   Loss	of	infrastructure	systems	and	services	(shelter,	transportation,	schools,	
                                                   •   River	bank	erosion	                   hospitals,	energy	supply,	communication)	
                                                   •   Muddle	                           •   Waterborne	diseases	
                                                       	                                 •   Environmental	degradation	
                                                       	                                 •   Snake	bite	
                                                                                         •   High	sediment	transport	into	reservoirs	

       Monsoon	        •   Strong	wind	            •   River	flood	                      •   Damage	in	Dams	and	appurtenant	structures,	embankment,	irrigation	and	
                       •   Heavy	Rainfall	         •   Coastal	flood		                       drainage	facilities,	pumping	facilities	
                       •   Lightning	              •   Flash	flood	                      •   Submerging	paddy	fields	
                       •   Monsoon	break	          •   Landslides	                       •   Insect	and	pest	problems	
                                                   •   Less	rainfall	amount	             •   Loss	of	infrastructure	systems	and	services	(shelter,	transportation,	schools,	
                                                                                             hospitals,	energy	supply,	communication)	
                                                                                         •   Infectious	diseases	
                                                                                         •   Waterborne	diseases	
                                                                                         •   High	sediment	transport	into	reservoirs	
                                                                                         •   Snake	bite	
                                                                                         •   Sand	and	silt	deposition	

       Heat	wave	      •   Extreme	tempera-        •   Heat	stroke	                      •   Socio-economic	impacts	
                           ture	                   •   Widespread	Fire	                  •   Hydro	power	shortage	
                       •   Heat	related	compli-    •   Urban	Fire	                       •   Changes	in	ground	water	level	
                           cations	in	livestock	   •   Biological	Hazards	               •   Water	borne	diseases	(eg.	Conjunctivitis)	
                           and	animals	            •   Stress	on	vegetation	             •   Food	shortage	
                                                   •   Water	insecurity	
       Drought	        •   High	temperature	       •   Water	scarcity	                   •   High	evaporation	loss	in	reservoirs	
                       •   Heat	wave	              •   Low	flow	(low	river	flow)	        •   Shortage	of	storage	water	in	Reservoirs	
                       •   Less	rainfall	amount	   •   Lesser	inflow	                    •   Insufficient	diversion	in	weirs	
                                                   •   Forest	fire	and	surface	fire	     •   Salt	affected	soil										
                                                   •   Damage	to	crops	                  •   Food	Shortage	
                                                                                         •   Energy	Shortage	
                                                                                         •   Pumping	System	Difficulties	
                                                                                         •   Air	pollution/haze	
                                                                                         •   Smog/Dust	
                                                                                         •   Sand	dunes	

       Earthquake	     •   Shake	                  •   Landslides	                       •   Damage	in	Dams	and	appurtenant	structures,	embankment,	irrigation	and	
                       •   Shifting	 Geological	   •   Tsunami	                              drainage	facilities,	Pumping	Facilities,	
                           Formation	              •   Fire	                             •   Loss	of	Infrastructure	System	and	Services	(shelter,	transportation,	schools,	
                                                                                             hospitals,	energy	supply,	communication)	
                                                                                         •   Coastal	Flood	
                                                                                         •   Changes	in	Ground	water	formation	
                                                                                         •   Psychological	problems	


	

Step	3	Assess	Vulnerabilities	Related	to	the	Identified	Hazards	
Various	tools	exist	to	carry	out	vulnerability	assessments.	They	should	be	infrastructure	system	and	ser-
vice	 specific.	 For	 example,	 the	 vulnerability	 of	 bridges	 and	 roads	 to	 inundation	 or	 destruction	 due	 to	
flooding	 should	 be	 estimated.	 Understanding	 the	 interdependencies	 of	 the	 infrastructure	 systems	 and	
services	is	essential	–	for	example,	the	vulnerability	of	transportation	networks	to	flooding	and	to	the	de-
struction	of	bridges,	roads,	rail	should	be	assessed	(Rogers	et	al.	2015).	A	good	reference,	among	many	
examples,	 is	 the	 data	 base	 created	 for	 the	 Pacific	 Catastrophe	 Risk	 Assessment	 and	 Financing	 Initiative	
(PCRAFI)	 (World	 Bank	 2012,	 2013).	 GFDRR	 supports	 the	 development	 of	 risk	 assessments	 in	 several	
ways,	including	conducting	risk	assessment	studies,	developing	guidelines	for	risk	assessment	methodol-
ogies,	 supporting	 the	 development	 and	 distribution	 of	 spatial	 risk	 datasets	 and	 setting	 up	 platforms	 as	
risk	analysis	and	communication	tools	for	decision-makers.	
However,	 to	 date,	 these	 data	 have	 been	 used	 primarily	 for	 planning	 and	 infrastructure	 investment,	 but	
have	not	been	used	routinely	to	improve	forecasts	and	warnings.	The	GFDRR	Innovation	Lab	can	provide	
additional	guidance	on	this.	A	useful	approach	is	the	Open	Data	for	Resilience	Initiative	(OpenDRI),	which	
provides	 a	 guide	 to	 the	 collection	 of	 the	 appropriate	 disaster	 risk	 management	 data	 and	 the	 use	 of	
InaSAFE	to	visualize	potential	impacts	of	hazards	on	specific	infrastructure.	In	its	simplest	form,	InaSAFE	
can	 be	 used	 to	 establish	 geographical	 specific	 thresholds	 for	 impact-based	 warnings.	 A	 more	 advanced	
form	would	use	the	vulnerability	data	within	a	time	dependent	model	to	forecast	the	evolving	situation,	
which	would	have	the	potential	to	target	the	generally	limited	civil	protection	resources	to	maximum	ef-
fect.	 Given	 the	 request	 by	 many	 NMHSs	 to	 access	 digital	 forecast	 data,	 this	 model	 approach	 may	 be	 the	
most	appropriate.	However,	at	its	simplest,	vulnerability	information	can	be	based	on	expert	knowledge,	
which	can	be	used	to	develop	qualitative	statements	about	impacts.		

	                                                                                                                                                                              24	
	
Step	4	Develop	Impact	Tables	
An	impact	table	needs	to	be	developed	for	each	hazard	and	for	each	sector.	It	requires	knowledge	of	the	
hazard	and	expert	knowledge	of	the	likely	impact	on	a	specific	sector.	This	may	or	may	not	be	informed	
by	 a	 formal	 vulnerability	 assessment.	 At	 its	 most	 basic	 it	 would	 rely	 on	 expert	 knowledge	 rather	 than	
quantitative	data.	In	the	case	of	flood	risk,	this	may	involve	water	resource	managers,	irrigation	experts,	
dam	operators	as	well	as	disaster	managers.	An	example	developed	for	the	UK	by	the	Met	Office	is	shown	
in	Table	5.	In	this	case	the	information	is	still	general,	but	can	be	more	geographically	specific	and	target-
ed	to	specific	groups	at	risk.		
                                             Table	5	Example	of	a	flood	impacts	table	for	the	public	(Source:	Met	Office)	

                                                                   Flood	Impacts	Table	for	the	public	
              Very	Low	                                              Low	                                          Medium	                                               High	
• Generally,	no	impact	expected	                  • Localized	flooding	of	land	and	roads	          • Flooding	affecting	properties	and	parts	of	        • Widespread	flooding	affecting	significant	
• Isolated	and	minor	flooding	of	low	lying	       • Localized	flooding	could	affect	individual	      communities	                                         numbers	of	properties	and	whole	com-
  land	and	roads	                                   properties	                                    • Damage	to	buildings/infrastructure	is	               munities	
• Isolated	instances	of	spray/wave	over-          • Individual	properties	in	coastal	locations	      possible	                                          • Collapse	of	buildings/infrastructure	is	
  topping	on	coastal	defences	                      affected	by	spray	and/or	wave	overtop-         • Possible	danger	to	life	due	to	fast	flow-            likely	
• Little	or	no	disruption	to	travel	although	       ping	                                            ing/deep	water/wave	and	storm	surge	               • Danger	to	life	due	to	fast	flowing	water/	
  wet	road	surfaces	or	waterlogging	could	        • Localized	disruption	to	key	infrastructure	      overtopping/wave	inundation,	landslides	             deep	water/	wave,	storm	surge	overtop-
  lead	to	difficult	conditions	                     identified	in	flood	plans	(e.g.	rail	and	        and	wind	                                            ping	and	wave	inundation,	landslides	and	
• Isolated	damage	to	vegetation	due	to	             utilities)	                                    • Disruption	to	key	infrastructure	services	           wind	
  wind	                                           • Local	disruption	to	travel		                     identified	in	flood	plans	(e.g.	rail,	utilities	   • Widespread	disruption	caused	by	loss	of	
                                                  • Localized	damage	to	properties	due	to	           and	hospitals)	                                      infrastructure	identified	in	flood	plans	
                                                    wind	                                          • Disruption	to	travel	is	expected.	Several	         • Large	scale	evacuation	of	properties	may	
                                                                                                     roads	are	likely	to	be	closed		                      be	required	
                                                                                                   • Outbreaks	of	illnesses	caused	by	water-            • Severe	disruption	to	travel.	Risk	of	
                                                                                                     borne	diseases	possible	                             motorists	becoming	stranded.		
                                                                                                   • Isolated	food	shortages	                           • Large	scale	evacuation	of	people	may	be	
                                                                                                   • Localized	water	contamination	                       required	
                                                                                                                                                        • Severe	disruption	to	travel.		
                                                                                                                                                        • Outbreaks	of	illnesses	caused	by	water-
                                                                                                                                                          borne	diseases	expected	

	

Step	5	Develop	Advisory	Tables	
A	 final	 component	 of	 the	 warning	 system	 is	 to	 provide	 advice	 on	 what	 actions	 to	 take.	These	 messages	
will	be	tailored	to	specific	needs	of	each	stakeholder.	Typically,	this	will	involve	disaster	management	and	
other	key	stakeholders.		Examples	of	alerts	and	warning	advisories	and	actions	are	shown	in	Table	6.		
    Table	6	Advisory	Table	for	the	public,	which	relates	warnings	and	actions	to	the	probability	of	an	impact	based	on	an	impact	risk	
                       matrix.	The	levels	reflect	the	colour	coding	of	the	risk	matrix	(Adapted	from	Met	Office)	

                                                                                   Advisory	Table	
          Very	low	risk	                                         Low	risk	                                     Medium	risk	                                           High	risk	
1.	Example	of	flood	risk	for	the	public	associated	with	a	Tropical	Cyclone	event	
ALERT:	Unlikely	the	Tropical	Cyclone	             ALERT:	Likely	the	tropical	cyclone	will	         WARNING:	Likely	the	tropical	cyclone	will	           WARNING:	Certain	tropical	cyclone	will	
(Event)	will	affect	the	designated	region	        cause	some	limited	flooding	and	wind	            cause	widespread	flooding	and	wind	                  cause	widespread	flood	and	wind	damage	in	
                                                  damage	in	the	designated	region	                 damage	in	the	designated	region	                     the	designated	region	
ACTION:	Keep	an	eye	on	the	weather	and	
flood	forecasts	                                  	                                                	                                                    	

                                                  ACTION:	Remain	alert	and	ensure	you	             ACTION:	Secure	property	and	livelihood	              ACTION:	Evacuate	if	ordered	to	do	so	by	
                                                  access	the	latest	weather	forecast	for	up	to	    assets.	Be	prepared	to	evacuate.		                   civil	protection	
                                                  date	information.	Prepare	to	act	to	protect	
                                                  life,	livelihood	and	property	in	the	designat-   Be	aware	of	the	potential	risk	of	landslides	        Be	prepared	for	extraordinary	measures	to	
                                                  ed	region.	                                      and	flash	floods	in	your	area.	                      protect	life	and	property	

                                                  	                                                Follow	civil	protection	orders.	

                                                                                                   Maintain	radio/media	watch	for	latest	
                                                                                                   updates.	


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	                                                                                                                                                                                              25	
	
An	advisory	table	for	a	specific	sector	would	include	more	detailed	information	(Table	7)	
    Table	7	Advisory	table	for	dam	operations,	which	relates	warnings	and	actions	to	the	probability	of	an	impact	based	on	an	impact	
                                                              risk	matrix.	

                                                                            Advisory	Table	
          Very	low	risk	                                   Low	risk	                                 Medium	risk	                                      High	risk	
1.	Example	of	flood	risk	for	dam	operations	associated	with	a	Tropical	Cyclone	event	
ALERT:	Unlikely	the	Tropical	Cyclone	        WARNING:	Likely	the	tropical	cyclone	will	   WARNING:	Likely	the	tropical	cyclone	will	     WARNING:	Certain	tropical	cyclone	will	
(Event)	will	affect	the	designated	region	   cause	some	limited	flooding	and	wind	        cause	widespread	flooding	and	wind	            cause	widespread	flood	and	wind	damage	in	
                                             damage	in	the	designated	region	             damage	in	the	designated	region	               the	designated	region	
ACTION:	Keep	an	eye	on	the	weather	and	
flood	forecasts	                             	                                            	                                              	

                                             ACTION:	Expected	inundation	levels	do	not	   ACTION:	Activate	standard	operating	           ACTION:	Activate	standard	operating	
                                             require	any	action,	but	beware	of	the	       procedures	associated	with	an	orange	alert	    procedures	associated	with	a	red	alert	to	
                                             potential	for	the	risk	to	increase	          to	mitigate	the	risk	of	damage	to	the	dam	     mitigate	the	risk	of	damage	to	the	dam	and	
                                                                                          and	appurtenant	structures	and	mitigate	the	   appurtenant	structures	and	mitigate	the	risk	
                                             	                                            risk	of	exacerbating	flooding	downstream	of	   of	exacerbating	flooding	downstream	of	the	
                                                                                          the	dam	                                       dam.	

                                                                                          SOPs	will	include	all	measures	to	warning	     SOPs	will	include	all	measures	to	warning	
                                                                                          others	potentially	impacted	by	the	dam	        others	potentially	impacted	by	the	dam	
                                                                                          operations	                                    operations	


	
Effective	standard	operating	procedures	are	a	critical	component	of	the	successful	management	of	risk.	
This	is	discussed	in	more	detail	below.	Key	elements	are	good	communication	among	the	relevant	stake-
holders	and	timely	action.	

Key	elements	of	an	Impact-based	Forecast	and	warning	Service	
Partnerships	
A	 successful	 impact-based	 forecasting	 service	 will	 require	 close	 operational	 cooperation	 with	 the	 agen-
cies	 responsible	 for	 meteorology,	 climatology,	 hydrology,	 disaster	 management,	 and	 first-responders	 as	
well	as	other	sectors	with	access	to,	and	ownership	of,	data	on	infrastructure	systems	and	services	(e.g.,	
energy,	 transportation,	 health,	 water	 resources).	 This	 would	 require	 a	 high-level	 agreement	 that	 de-
scribes	the	commitment	of	the	agencies	to	work	closely	together	to	share	data,	information,	expertise	and	
responsibility.	The	sectors	with	information	on	their	own	vulnerability	will	also	be	the	ones	that	would	
benefit	the	most	from	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services.		
There	should	be	flexibility	to	expand	this	partnership	as	required	to	achieve	the	objective.	The	partner-
ship	would	benefit	from	the	inclusion	of	media,	NGOs	and	others	responsible	for	direct	interaction	with	
communities.	 The	 partnership	 may	 also	 include	 WMO	 regional	 centres	 and	 representatives	 of	 other	
NMHSs	 and	 flood	 forecasting	 agencies.	 The	 details	 need	 to	 be	 developed	 during	 initial	 definition	 of	 the	
partnership	within	a	country.		
Given	the	importance	of	reducing	the	impact	of	meteorological	and	hydrological	hazards	on	societies,	the	
partners	may	expect	to	have	high	visibility	nationally	and	internationally.	The	partners	will	have	access	to	
technologies	and	training	to	enable	them	to	communicate	the	results	of	the	project	effectively.	

Joint	Development	of	Information	and	Services	
The	partnership	is	a	perquisite	for	the	joint	development	of	services.	This	would	include	using	24/7	op-
erational	 forecasting	 capabilities	 of	 the	 NMHS,	 joint	 development	 of	 flood	 forecasting,	 and	 joint	 opera-
tions	combining	the	expertise	of	meteorologists,	hydrologists,	disaster	managers.	The	implementation	of	
a	joint	operations	centre	should	be	considered.	

Developing	capacity	of	NMHSs’	and	disaster	management	staff,	partners	and	users	
Frequent	training	is	essential	to	increase	and	maintain	the	skills	of	an	NMHS’s	staff	in	different	areas	of	
their	 work.	 Such	 training	 should	 be	 viewed	 as	 a	 continuous	 process,	 in	 which	 all	 staff	 members	 are	 in-
volved	in	a	long-term	program	to	improve	their	skills.	As	part	of	the	twinning	arrangements,	study	tours	
and	 familiarization	 visits	 should	 be	 organized	 to	 expose	 senior	 management	 and	 forecasters	 to	 specific	
advanced	technologies	that	could	be	implemented	to	improve	forecast	production	and	delivery.	Priorities	
for	 technical	 training	 should	 focus	 on	 modern	 forecasting	 methods	 and	 application	 of	 technologies	 that	
are	fit	for	purpose	for	the	level	of	capacities	that	exist	in	individual	NMHSs.	For	example,	in	the	absence	of	


	                                                                                                                                                                               26	
	
radar	which	would	allow	more	reliable	and	accurate	forecast	of	rainfall	due	to	convective	activities,	other	
technologies	or	techniques	could	be	employed	by	the	forecasters	to	help	them	with	this	kind	of	predic-
tion.		
However,	 in	 the	 case	 of	 impact-based	 forecasting	 and	 warning	 services,	 forecasting	 skills	 alone	 are	 not	
sufficient.	A	very	important	part	of	such	training	should	be	on	relationship	building	and	developing	skills	
in	collaboration	and	communication	with	staff	from	other	organizations.	For	the	NMHS,	this	could	be	ac-
complished	 by	 designating	 staff	 as	 warning	 advisors	 with	 counterparts,	 sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 lead	
resilience	advisors	located	in	emergency	management	or	emergency	operations.		
Building	 trust	 among	 all	 involved	 in	 impact-based	 forecasting	 is	 a	 key	 to	 ensure	 that	 all	 participating	
agencies	 and	 individuals	 realize	 the	 crucial	 role	 that	 each	play	 towards	 maximizing	 public	 safety	 in	 the	
face	of	severe	events.	Sharing	of	information	and	data	is	a	specific	aspect	of	such	a	relationship	building.	
In	the	case	of	many	countries	special	authorization	needs	to	be	granted	by	higher	levels	of	government	
for	different	organizations	to	share	their	data.	In	country	training	on	impact-based	forecasting	techniques	
should	be	conducted	for	all	members	of	the	operational	team,	which	would	include	designated	staff	from	
the	 NMHS	 and	 emergency	 management.	 Ideally,	 DRM	 specialists	 and	 hydrological	 specialists	 would	 be	
temporarily	 assigned	 to	 work	 within	 the	 forecast	 office	 of	 the	 NMHS.	 These	 specialists	 would	 have	 the	
responsibility	for	the	development	of	the	impact-based	forecasts	and	warnings,	based	on	the	meteorolog-
ical	and	hydrological	information	provided	by	the	NMHS.	Alternative	approaches	should	also	be	explored	
to	determine	the	optimum	arrangements.	The	initial	training	would	focus	on	the	qualitative	translation	of	
weather	forecasts	to	impact-based	forecasts	and	warnings.	
Twinning	with	one	or	more	advanced	NMHSs,	which	have	already	developed	impact-based	forecast	and	
warning	services	would	also	be	desirable.	The	pairing	arrangement	would	provide	operational	backup	for	
the	 forecasters,	 enabling	 them	 to	 receive	 guidance	 on	 complex	 weather	 situations,	 and	 with	 public	
weather	service	divisions	to	assist	in	the	translation	of	meteorological	and	hydrological	information	into	
impact-based	 forecasts	 and	 warnings.	 The	 twining	 arrangements	 would	 also	 enable	 the	 NMHS	 to	 focus	
more	attention	on	impacts	and	service	delivery	and	less	on	the	details	of	the	production	of	the	weather	
forecast.	

Validation	
	Validation	and	verification	are	important	components	of	any	forecasting	system.	However,	impact-based	
forecasting	and	warning	systems	need	different	methods	to	those	applied	to	objective	forecasts.	Here	the	
emphasis	is	on	the	 utility	of	the	forecast,	not	just	the	 accuracy	of	the	underlying	meteorological	or	hydro-
logical	prediction.	This	requires	agreement	among	stakeholders	and	partners	on	what	constitutes	utility	
and	cooperation	to	analyse	and	evaluate	events	to	improve	the	warning	system.		

Public	Weather	Service	and	Standard	Operating	Procedures	
The	framework	for	the	provision	of	services	is	usually	a	separately	defined	group	within	the	NMHS,	which	
is	referred	to	as	the	Public	Weather	Service	(PWS)	(WMO	2012).	Weather	forecast	production	is	the	pur-
view	of	forecasters.	The	PWS	function	translates	those	forecasts	into	actionable	information.	In	the	case	
of	impact-based	forecasts	this	is	done	by	combining	the	weather	forecast	with	vulnerability	information	
stored	in	a	database.	The	database	platform	consists	of	historical	and	real-time	data	supplied	by	all	agen-
cies	and	sectors.	The	number	of	agencies	involved	is	likely	to	be	large.	In	the	case	of	Shanghai,	for	exam-
ple,	more	than	17	departments	support	this	database.	In	the	UK,	more	than	11	agencies	provide	data	es-
sential	to	produce	impact-based	forecasts.	
	Key	components	of	effective	impact-based	warning	services	are	Standard	Operating	Procedures	(SOPs),	
which	 codify	 the	 roles	 and	 responsibilities	 of	 all	 stakeholders	 and	 actors	 in	 all	 possible	 scenarios.	 In	
Shanghai,	there	are	at	least	36	joint-response	mechanisms	among	25	government	departments.	An	exam-
ple	of	the	public	weather	services	workflow	developed	by	the	Shanghai	Meteorological	Service	is	shown	
in	Fig.	10	(Rogers	and	Tsirkunov	2013).	Early	briefing	(see	Fig.	4)	prepares	the	departments	to	act	ahead	
of	joint-response	mechanisms	and	prior	to	issuing	public	warnings.		
Another	important	element,	highlighted	by	Rogers	and	Tsirkunov	(2013),	is	the	inclusion	of	the	warning	
system	within	the	public	weather	service	operations.	The	person	in	charge	of	the	public	weather	service	
is	responsible	for	disseminating	routine	weather	information	and	impact-based	forecasts	and	warnings.	It	
should	be	noted	that	the	final	dissemination	of	warnings	to	the	public	may	be	governed	by	the	govern-
mental	structures	and	practice	which	determine	the	flow	of	the	information.	For	example,	while	in	some	
countries	the	NMHS	is	responsible	for	and	authorized	to	disseminate	the	warnings	directly	to	public,	in	

	                                                                                                                   27	
	
some	others,	the	warnings	are	disseminated	through	the	disaster	management	organizations.	While	the	
structures	 and	 legal	 mechanisms	 in	 each	 country	 should	 be	 respected,	 the	 most	 important	 point	 is	 that	
procedures	 should	 not	 introduce	 delays	 and	 hinder	 the	 dissemination	 of	 highly	 perishable	 information	
(e.g.,	warnings	of	a	flash	flood	expected	to	impact	 a	 city	 at	 rush	 hour),	 hence	 putting	 the	 public	 and	 re-
sponders	in	unnecessary	danger.	
	
                          Figure	20	Public	Weather	Service	Workflow	(from	Rogers	and	Tsirkunov	2013)	




                                                                                                                	

The	Practice	of	Impact-based	Forecast	and	Risk-based	Warning	Services	in	Shanghai	
The	Case	of	Urban	Flooding	
Wang	Qiang	described	the	evolution	of	forecasting	services	in	Shanghai.	The	impetus	for	the	focus	on	im-
pact-based	forecasting	and	warnings	is	related	to	the	need	to	strengthen	urban	flood	forecasting.	The	fol-
lowing	highlights	the	issue	(Figure	21).		
Heavy	 rainfall	 can	 lead	 to	 quite	 different	 impacts	 depending	 on	 the	 specific	 time	 and	 location	 of	 the	
events.	In	the	first	instance	(Figure	21a),	rainfall	accumulations	of	up	179	mm	and	maximum	intensity	of	
25.7	mm/h	resulted	in	1390	flood	related	calls	to	the	operations	centre.	In	contrast,	an	apparently	more	
intense	system	with	rainfall	accumulations	exceeding	228	mm	and	maximum	intensity	of	60.1	mm/h	re-
sulted	in	on	68	emergency	calls	to	the	operations	centre	(Figure	21b).	
    Figure	21	Comparison	of	two	heavy	rainfall	events	in	Shanghai:	a)	July	16-17,	2015	&	b)	July	2-3,	2015	(Source:	Wang	Qiang)	




                                                                	                                                                    	




	                                                                                                                                  28	
	
Exposure	and	Vulnerability	
	Figure	22	illustrates	three	approaches	to	impact-based	forecasting	based	on	access	to	vulnerability	and	
exposure	 data:	 1)	 the	 ideal	 approach	 where	 impacts	 are	 quantitatively	 determined	 based	 on	 exposure	
  Figure	22	Urban	flood	impact-based	forecast	and	risk-based	warning	should	be	based	on	 and	 vulnerability	 data;	 2)	
        quantitative	evaluation	of	exposure	and	vulnerability	(Source:	Wang	Qiang)	      impacts	 are	 determined	
                                                                                         subjectively;	and	3)	impacts	
                                                                                         are	 determined	 by	 weather	
                                                                                         conditions	 alone.	 With	 the	
                                                                                         capacity	 to	 acquire	 exten-
                                                                                         sive	 vulnerability	 and	 expo-
                                                                                         sure	 data,	 Shanghai	 has	 de-
                                                                                         veloped	 an	 urban	 flood	 im-
                                                                                         pact-based	forecast	and	risk	
                                                                                         based	 warning	 system	
                                                                                         based	 on	 quantitative	 eval-
                                                                                         uation	 of	 exposure	 and	 vul-
                                                                                         nerability.	

                                                                                             Urban	 Flood	 impact-based	
                                                                                             forecast	 and	 risk-based	
                                                                                             warning	system	
                                                                                        	
                                                                                   The	 resulting	 forecast	 sys-
                                                                                   tem	 flow	 chart	 is	 shown	 in	
                                                                                   Figure	 23.	 It	 is	 comprised	 a	
rainfall	 forecast;	 flood	 evaluation;	 impact-based	 forecast	 and	 risk	 warning;	 and	 response.	 The	 rainfall	
forecast	is	based	on	a	combination	of	rainfall	observations,	data	assimilation	and	quantitative	precipita-
tion	forecasts,	which	drive	a	hydrodynamic	flood	model.	With	access	to	digital	elevations,	data	on	assets,	
etc.,	risk	thresholds,	which	underpin	the	warning	system,	are	calculated.	These	outputs	feed	into	the	me-
teorological	hazard	monitoring	and	risk	warning	system,	which	enables	distribution	of	alerts	and	warn-
ings	via	mobile	phones,	WeChat,	public	terminals,	outdoor	screens,	etc.	with	standard	procedures	for	an	
effective	response	to	the	situation.	
               Figure	23	Impact-based	forecast	and	risk-based	warnings	service	flow	chart	for	urban	flooding	




                                                                                                                 	
	

	                                                                                                                    29	
	
	
	The	 system	 combines	 rainfall	 forecast	 products,	 supported	 by	 high	 resolution	 regional	 models	 (Figure	
         Figure	24	Rainfall	forecast	products:	support	from	high	resolution	models	
                                                                                     24)	with	data	on	potential	
                                    	(Source	Wang	Qiang)	                            high	 risk	 points,	 such	 as	
                                                                                     roads	 and	 living	 quarters	
                                                                                     and	 important	 sites,	 such	
                                                                                     as	 primary	 and	 secondary	
                                                                                     schools	(Figure	25).	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                           	
                                                                                                 	
                                                                                                 	
    Figure	25	Building	data	sharing	mechanism	for	long-term	data	sharing	and	regular	updating	
                                      (source:	Wang	Xiang)	




                                                                                                     	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	



	                                                                                                              30	
	
	Data	 from	 authoritative	
                                       Figure	26	Building	data	sharing	mechanism	for	real	time	information	(source	Wang	Qiang)	
and	 crowd	 sources	 are	
combined	in	the	emergen-
cy	 centre	 providing	 real-
time	 monitoring	 of	 an	
emergency	(Figure	26).	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
                                                                                                                              	
	


                 Figure	27	Urban	Flooding	Assessment	model	(Source:	Wang	Qiang)	                  	

                                                                                                  	Urban	 Flooding	 Assess-
                                                                                                  ment	Model	
                                                                                                  	The	 Shanghai	 Urban	
                                                                                                  flooding	       assessment	
                                                                                                  model	 (SUM)	 simulates	
                                                                                                  rainfall	 runoff	 processes	
                                                                                                  within	the	city	and	calcu-
                                                                                                  lates	surface	water	depth	
                                                                                                  and	 water	 distribution	
                                                                                                  based	 on	 digital	 eleva-
                                                                                             	    tion,	etc.	(Figure	27).	
	

Verification	
	Verification	 of	 assessment	 results	                  Figure	28	Verification	of	assessment	results	(Source:	Wang	Qiang)	
are	 carried	 out	 by	 8	 teams,	 which	
conduct	 field	 surveys	 of	 disaster	
areas	 immediately	 after	 a	 hazard-
ous	event	(Figure	28).	
	
	
	
	
	
	                                                                                                                                 	

    Figure	29	urban	flood	impact	levels	and	hazard	thresholds	(Source:	Wang	Qiang)	




	                                                                                                                             31	
	
                                                                                      	Determining	 urban	 flooding	 im-
                                                                                      pact	 levels	 and	 relevant	 hazard	
                                                                                      thresholds	
                                                                                      Figure	 29	 illustrates	 the	 urban	
                                                                                      flood	 impact	 levels	 and	 surface	
                                                                                      water	 area	 ratio	 and	 water	
                                                                                      depth	 used	 to	 determine	 the	
                                                                                      level	of	impact.	
                                                                                      	
                                                                                      	
                                                                                      	
                                                                               	      	

Warning	Icons	
An	important	aspect	of	impact-based	warnings	is	the	evolution	of	signals	from	warnings	based	on	mete-
orological	thresholds	to	warnings	based	on	impacts	(Figure	30).	Icons	are	a	very	useful	way	to	convey	the	
level	of	risk.	
               Figure	30	Comparison	of	a)	meteorological	and	b)	impact-based	warnings	(Source:	Wang	Qiang)	

a)   Warnings	based	on	fixed	meteorological	thresh-           b)   Urban	flooding	impact-based	warnings	
     olds	                                                         	




                                                          	                                                             	

Service	interfaces	
	SMS	 has	 developed	 several	            Figure	31	Urban	flood	forecasting	displays	in	the	Community	Grid	Management	Centre	
new	 service	 interfaces	 to	 com-                                        (source:	Wang	Qiang)	
municate	 differentiated	 warn-
ing	 information	 to	 stakehold-
ers.	 The	 community	 meteoro-
logical	 risk	 warning	 service	
system,	which	is	based	on	a	3-d	
realisation	 of	 the	 city,	 is	 used	
by	 the	 Community	 Grid	 Man-
agement	 Centre	 to	 manage	
flood	risks.	The	system	displays	
the	meteorological	disaster	risk	
analysis,	 real-time	 meteorolog-
ical	 information	 and	 tailored	                                                                                               	
warning	 information	 (Figure	
31).	
	
	
	


	                                                                                                                           32	
	
New	tools	using	“smart	media”	are	also	available	to	the	public	through	“My	weather	station”	app,	which	
provides	 warnings,	 real-time	 data,	 5-day	 forecasts	 and	 typhoon	 track	 forecasts.	 Meteorological	 services	
are	also	embedded	in	a	smart	TV	information	system	(Figure	32).	Smart	Songjiang	information	platform	
has	currently	about	300,000	cable	TV	users,	broadband	users	and	mobile	phone	users.		
                              Figure	32	Smart	Songjiang	Platform	(Source:	Wang	Qiang)	




                                                                                                          	
In	summary	for	Shanghai,	compared	with	the	traditional	weather	forecast,	the	impact-based	forecast	and	
risk-based	warning	is	more	practical	as	they	meet	the	needs	of	users,	while	they	also	require	close	coop-
eration	 with	 users.	 In	 different	 areas	 and	 periods	 of	 impact-based	 forecasting	 and	 risk-based	 warning,	
different	 methods	 should	 be	 adopted	 to	 collect,	 estimate	 and	 use	 exposure	 and	 vulnerability	 data.	 The	
uncertainty	of	the	weather	forecast	and	flooding	evaluation	affects	the	accuracy	of	impact-based	forecasts	
and	risk-based	warnings.	Thus,	ensemble	forecasts	and	probability	forecasts	should	be	used.	New	com-
munication	 techniques	 and	 tools	 are	 used	 to	 promote	 the	 understanding	 and	 use	 of	 impact-based	 fore-
casts	and	risk-based	warnings.	
	                                   	




	                                                                                                               33	
	
China	National	Perspective	
	Chan	 Xiao	 from	 the	 National	 Cli-
                                                       Figure	33	Main	meteorological	hazards	impacting	China	(Source:	Chan	Xiao)	
mate	 Centre,	 CMA	 provided	 a	 na-
tional	perspective	on	meteorolog-
ical	 disaster	 and	 disaster	 risk	
management.	 	 China	 is	 prone	 to	
frequent	 disasters	 caused	 by	 me-
teorological	 hazards	 –	 drought;	
heat	 waves;	 heavy	 rain;	 strong	
winds;	floods;	typhoons;	thunder-
storms;	 and	 dust	 storms	 (Figure	
33).	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	                                                                                                                                   	
    Figure	34	Annual	mean	temperature	anomalies	in	China	during	1901-2014	(relative	to	       China	 has	 experienced	 a	
                             1971-2000)	(Source:	Chan	Xiao)	
                                                                                              warming	of	the	land	averaging	
                                                                                              1.09°C	 between	 1901	 and	
                                                                                              2014	(Figure	34).	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                              	
                                                                                          	
                                                                                              	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	


	                                                                                                                            34	
	
	Figure	 35	 shows	 the	 annual	
                                                Figure	35	Losses	due	to	meteorologically-related	disasters	(Source:	Chan	Xiao)	
losses	in	China	due	to	meteoro-
logically-related	 disasters.	 The	
annual	 number	 of	 casualties	 is	
about	3600;	the	direct	econom-
ic	 losses	 are	 about	 230	 billion	
RMB,	 which	 corresponds	 to	
71%	 of	 the	 entire	 economic	
losses	from	natural	disasters.	
	
	
	
	
	
	                                                                                                                                  	
	


    Figure	36	Drought	events	and	area	exposed	are	increasing	(Source:	Chan	      	
                                    Xiao)	
                                                                                 Drought	 is	 one	 of	 the	 major	 causes	 of	
                                                                                 disasters	 facing	 the	 agricultural	 sector.	
                                                                                 Every	 year	 grain	 losses	 total	 between	
                                                                                 25	 and	 30	 billion	 kg.	 Since	 1961,	 the	
                                                                                 frequency	 of	 droughts	 has	 increased	
                                                                                 along	 with	 the	 area	 affected	 (Figure	
                                                                                 36).	
                                                                                 	
                                                                                 	
                                                                                 	
                                                                         	

                                                      Figure	37	Torrential	rain	days	have	increased	significantly	(Source:	Chan	
                                                                                        Xiao)	

	
	The	 frequency	 of	 heavy	 rain	 events	
has	 also	 increased	 since	 1961	 with	
floods	 affecting	 40%	 of	 the	 popula-
tion,	 35%	 of	 arable	 land	 and	 50%	 of	
industrial	 and	 agricultural	 output	
value	(Figure	37).	
	
	
	
	
	                                                                                                                             	
	
	
	


	                                                                                                                                 35	
	
Cold	waves	are	generally	decreasing	in	China;	however,	anomalous	cold	periods	in	the	south	cause	signif-
icant	impacts	to	people	and	the	economy.	In	contrast	heat	waves	are	increasing	with	prolonged	periods	
above	35°C.	
Because	of	these	increasing	threats,	there	is	a	new	demand	for	disaster	risk	reduction.	While	China	can	
predict	severe	weather	with	sufficient	accuracy,	there	is	a	need	to	determine	the	impact	of	severe	weath-
er.	 This	 has	 led	 to	 the	 development	 of	 impact-based	 forecasting	 and	 risk-based	 warning	 systems	
throughout	China.	A	key	element	of	China’s	effort	to	reduce	the	impact	of	disasters	is	adherence	to	laws,	
regulations	 and	 policies	 designed	 to	 enhance	 meteorological	 disaster	 risk	 reduction;	 these	 include	 the	
meteorological	law	of	the	People’s	Republic	of	China,	the	Flood	Control	Law	of	the	People’s	Republic	of	
China,	the	Regulations	on	Prevention	of	and	Preparedness	for	Meteorological	Disasters,	and	the	Drought	
Control	Regulation	of	the	People’s	Republic	of	China.	
Overall	 monitoring	 and	 forecasting	 systems	 have	 improved	 significantly.	 Warning	 information	 services	
are	continuously	expanding	and	the	overall	reach	through	all	media	exceeds	one	billion	people	daily.	Pro-
gress	has	been	made	in	building	multi-agency	synergy	for	the	prevention	and	preparedness	for	meteoro-
logical	disasters	and	public	awareness	of	disaster	prevention	and	emergency	self-rescue	capacity	has	in-
creased.	



Meteorological	Operations	at	Shanghai	Meteorological	Service	
The	workshop	participants	visited	the	SMS	operations	centre.	All	description	of	the	SMS	operations	can	
be	found	in	Part	2	of	this	report.	The	integrated	platform	for	meteorological	operations	consists	of	three	
areas:	 the	 weather	 forecast	 area,	 IT	 support	 and	 data	 services,	 and	 the	 public	 weather	 service	 area.	 A	
schematic	of	the	weather	forecast	area	is	shown	in	Figure	38.	The	forecast	area	is	divided	into	nine	sub-
sections.	
                        Figure	38	Schematic	of	the	weather	forecast	area	of	the	Shanghai	Met	Service	




                                                                                                                      	
	
	

	                                                                                                                  36	
	
	
The	operational	organization	and	workflow	is	shown	in	Figure	39.	
	
                                         Figure	39	Operational	Organization	




                                                                                                     	
The	complete	presentation	can	be	found	in	Part	2	of	this	report.	



Participant	Case	Studies	
In	 preparation	 for	 the	 workshop,	 participants	 were	 asked	 to	 describe	 how	 forecasts	 and	 warnings	 are	
used	 in	 their	 countries	 by	 describing	 a	 meteorological	 or	 hydrological	 event.	 How	 well	 was	 it	 forecast?	
How	 were	 warnings	 created	 and	 communicated?	 How	 did	 the	 public	 and	 other	 sectors	 respond?	 What	
was	the	impact	of	the	hazard?	What	did	you	learn	from	the	event?	What	could	be	done	better?		
The	participants	were	asked	to	describe	the	event	from	the	perspective	of	a	forecaster	and	from	the	per-
spective	of	disaster	management/emergency	response.	
How	did	the	hazard	impact	the	public	and	how	did	they	respond?	
What	worked	and	what	didn’t.		
While	few	of	the	participants	followed	the	template	closely,	their	presentations	offer	insight	into	the	is-
sues	affecting	each	country.	Brief	summaries	of	their	case	studies	follow	and	the	full	case	studies	are	in-
cluded	in	Part	2	on	this	report.	
	




	                                                                                                                  37	
	
                                                             Figure	40	Brief	overview	of	Bangladesh	
Bangladesh		
(Aziz	 Mazharul,	 Department	
of	Agriculture	Extension,	Min-
istry	of	Agriculture)	
An	 overview	 of	 Bangladesh	 is	
shown	in	Figure	40.	The	coun-
try	 is	 affected	 by	 multiple	
hazards	 including	 cyclones	
and	 storm	 surges,	 thunder-
storms,	 tornadoes	 and	 hail-
storms,	 floods,	 droughts,	
heavy	 rain	 and	 landslides,	
heat	 waves,	 cold	 waves	 and	
dense	 fog,	 and	 earthquakes	
and	tsunamis.		
	
	
                                                                                                                        	
	                                                            Figure	41	Emergency	warning	and	evacuation	I	Bangladesh	

	
	Given	 the	 frequency	 of	 the	 impact	 of	 tropi-
cal	 cyclones	 and	 storm	 surges,	 early	 warn-
ing	 allows	 the	 population	 to	 take	 effective	
measures	 and	 evacuate	 and	 shelter	 (Figure	
41).		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	                                                                                                                           	

               Figure	42	Warning	Dissemination	mechanisms	                  	The	 Storm	 Warning	 Centre	 (SWC)	 is	
                                                                            the	principal	means	by	which	warnings	
                                                                            related	 to	 typhoons	 are	 issued	 (Figure	
                                                                            42).	 However,	 unlike	 Shanghai,	 which	
                                                                            has	a	single	warning	centre	for	all	haz-
                                                                            ard	 warnings;	 the	 SWC	 is	 only	 respon-
                                                                            sible	for	tropical	cyclones.	
                                                                            	
                                                                            	
                                                                            	
                                                                            	
                                                              	
                                                                            	
	
	
	



	                                                                                                                       38	
	
Typhoon	 warnings	 are	 disseminated	 by	 the	 Cyclone	 Preparedness	 Programme	 (CPP),	 which	 is	 a	 volun-
teer	 organizing	 comprising	 42,675	 members	 recruited	 from	 within	 local	 communities	 (Figure	 43).	 This	
system	is	very	effective.	Similar	translation	and	dissemination	mechanisms	are	needed	for	other	hazards	
and	sectors;	e.g.,	farming	community.	
	
                               Figure	43	Dissemination	of	typhoon	warnings	by	CPP	




                                                                                              	
The	following	are	identified	as	needs:	
    •   There	is	a	need	to	develop	better	decision	support	services	and	build	capacity	to	translate	fore-
        casts	so	that	they	can	be	readily	used	from	web-based	platforms.		
    •   Innovation	in	the	use	of	ICT	tools	and	techniques	is	needed	to	collect,	analyse	and	translate	disas-
        ter-related	information;	i.e.,	simplify	multi-hazard	data	collection	and	develop	effective	feedback	
        mechanisms.		
    •   Develop	multi-timescale	longer	range	hazard	information	and	translate	these	products	for	differ-
        ent	sectors.		
    •   Build	on	and	scale	up	existing	advisory	system	
    •   Make	 use	 of	 Union	 Information	 Service	 Centres	 (UISCs)	 for	 early	 warning	 dissemination	 and	
        communication	at	the	local	level	
    •   Push	and	pull	SMS	service	should	be	introduced	for	hazard	early	warning	messages	
    •   Community	radios	should	be	used	as	another	channel	for	dissemination	and	distance	learning	
    •   Subscription	services	could	be	introduced	for	emails	and	mobile	SMS	




	                                                                                                           39	
	
	
                                                                 Figure	44	Brief	Overview	of	Chile	
Chile	
(Natalia	 Silva	 Bustos	 &	 Felipe	
Riquelme	 Vasquez,	 National	 Emer-
gency	 Office	 of	 Ministry	 of	 Interior	
and	Public	Security	(ONEMI),	Chile)	
A	general	overview	of	Chile	is	shown	
in	 Figure	 44.	 Chile	 is	 impacted	 by	
volcanic	 eruptions,	 forest	 fires,	
storms	 surges	 and	 tsunamis,	 earth-
quakes,	 floods	 and	 droughts.	 There	
are	more	than	500	active	volcanoes,	
90	 of	 these	 are	 high	 risk.	 There	 are	
more	 than	 200	 seismic	 events	 per	
day.	 46%	 of	 Earth’s	 seismic	 energy	
released	 during	 the	 20th	 Century	                                                                             	
focused	on	Chile.		
ONEMI	is	the	state’s	technical	organ-
ization,	 which	 leads	 the	 national	 civil	 protection	 system	 and	 coordinates	 the	 actions	 of	 public,	 private.	
Scientific-technical,	 NGOs,	 civil	 society,	 UN	 system,	 among	 others	 related	 to	 disaster	 risk	 management.	
The	structure	and	flow	of	information	from	technical	agencies	to	the	early	warning	centres	and	emergen-
cy	operations	committees	is	shown	in	Figure	45.	
A	 case	 study	 of	 rainfall,	                         Figure	45	Monitoring	and	Warning	System	
floods,	 mudflows	 and	 land-
slides	 on	 March	 25,	 2015	
illustrates	the	strengths	and	
weakness	 of	 the	 system.	 An	
extreme	 hydrometeorologi-
cal	 event	 –	 unseasonal	
heavy	 rains	 due	 to	 a	 cold	
front	 –	 occurred	 in	 the	
north	 of	 Chile.	 The	 event	
caused	 mudflows	 and	 flash	
floods.	 27,413	 people	 were	
affected,	 5,585	 were	 sought	
shelter,	 31	 people	 died	 due	
the	 mudflows	 and	 16	 re-                                                                            	
main	 officially	 missing.	
28,000	homes	were	affected	
including	2,071	destroyed	and	6,253	severely	damaged.	There	were	impacts	on	health,	mining,	connectiv-
ity,	critical	infrastructure,	etc.	Waste	materials	from	mining	contributed	to	a	public	health	crisis.	
The	 meteorological	 situation	 was	 well	 forecast	 at	 least	 4	 days	 in	 advance,	 and	 both	 the	 authorities	 and	
public	were	alerted.	The	normal	rainfall	is	4-5	mm	per	year.	At	its	most	intense,	8.2	mm	of	rain	fell	in	15	
minutes.	This	was	the	worst	rain	in	the	past	80	years.	In	3	hours,	rainfall	exceeded	the	30-year	average.	
There	are	several	factors	that	contributed	this	emergency	becoming	a	disaster:	
    •    Low	spatial	distribution	of	meteorological	stations	
    •    Hydrological	and	meteorological	models	are	not	coupled	
    •    Lack	of	similar	historical	cases	
    •    No	experience	in	this	kind	of	hazard	
    •    Lack	of	scientific	and	technical	knowledge	about	this	phenomenon	
    •    Inadequate	capacity	to	translate	rainfall	into	landslides	or	mudflows	
    •    Impact	information	is	disaggregated	in	different	sectors	
    •    Lack	of	evacuation	plans	and	established	safety	zones	
In	response,	Chile	is:	

	                                                                                                                     40	
	
    •    Investing	 in	 a	 project	 to	 integrate	 different	 hydrological	 and	 meteorological	 stations	 through	 a	
         public-private	partnership	
    •    Supporting	drills	about	landslides	in	high	risk	areas	
    •    Working	 with	 different	 technical	 organizations	 and	 researchers	 to	 develop	 a	 multi-hazard	 ap-
         proach	to	warnings	and	response.	
    •    Strengthening	the	national	governance	to	create	the	capabilities	to	assess	risk	and	determine	po-
         tential	impacts.	

Democratic	Republic	of	Congo	
	(Donatien	 Barthelemy	 Kamunga	 Musungayi,	
                                                                                         Figure	45	Institutional	landscape	
MettelSat;	 Jean	 K’Onganga	 Kitambala,	 Protec-
tion	 Civile;	 Placide	 Munsai	 Masena,	 Hydrogra-
phie	et	Balisage)	
The	 institutional	 landscape	 of	 agencies	 involved	
in	 Hydromet	 information	 services	 is	 shown	 in	
Figure	45.	
A	 case	 study	 of	 extreme	 low	 water	 levels	 in	 the	
Congo	 River	 in	 2011	 highlights	 some	 of	 the	 is-
sues	facing	DRC.	From	a	hydrological	viewpoint,	
the	 low	 water	 levels	 in	 the	 Congo	 River	 experi-
enced	 in	 June	 and	 July	 2011	 were	 not	 forecast	                                                                              	
with	the	sharp	drop	in	water	levels	surprising	all	
technicians	 and	 users.	 Meteorological	 observa-
tions	 revealed	 below	 normal	 rainfall	 before	 the	 dry	 season.	 MettelSat	 had	 access	 to	 these	 observations	
from	DRC	and	Zambia,	but	they	did	not	share	this	information	with	the	river	navigation	authority	(RVF).	
No	warnings	were	issued.	On	the	collaboration	between	the	RVF	and	MettelSat,	data	exchange	should	be	
more	systematic	and	based	on	better	data	management	tools.	On	the	warning	development	process,	the	
low	runoff	observed	since	May	could	have	been	better	interpolated.	Figure	46	shows	that	the	low	water	
levels	were	close	to	the	minimum	for	the	river.	
                      Figure	46	Description	of	event	in	terms	of	monthly	water	levels	




                                                                                                          	
The	impact	of	the	event	is	shown	Figure	47.	After	on	large	ship	was	wrecked	and	many	had	run	aground,	
ship	 owners	 reduced	 their	 loads	 to	 navigate	 in	 lower	 water	 levels	 within	 the	 400	 km	 of	 the	 navigable	
reach.	The	RVF	updated	signage	in	the	river	to	improve	navigation	safety.	The	Electricity	company	(SNEL)	
dredged	the	channel	to	ensure	continuity	of	hydro-electricity	generation,	and	the	drinking	water	supply	
authorities	 (REGIDESO)	 moved	 its	 pumping	 infrastructure.	 The	 overall	 impact	 was	 reduced	 water	 and	
electricity	 consumption	 by	 the	 public;	 and	 reduced	 river	 transport,	 hydropower	 generation	 and	 driving	
water	production.	




	                                                                                                                             41	
	
The	 event	 confirmed	 the	 need	                              Figure	47	Impact	of	the	low	river	levels	
for:	
    •   Capacity	 building	 for	
        staff	 in	 forecasting	 and	
        predictive	modelling	
    •   Automatic	 observation	
        and	 communication	 of	
        rainfall	 and	 hydrologi-
        cal	observations	
    •   Updated	 rating	 curves,	
        which	are	presently	on-
        ly	available	in	Kinshasa	
    •   Improved	 collaboration	
        between	 meteo,	 hydro,	
        transportation,	 energy	
        and	civil	protection	                                                                                     	

	
	
From	the	perspective	of	emergency	response,	the	following	highlights	some	of	the	issues	and	solutions:	
    •   No	 forecasts	 were	 received.	 Civil	 protection	 was	 invited	 to	 a	 workshop	 to	 improve	 stakeholder	
        coordination	in	the	management	of	the	emergency	
    •   Civil	protection	had	the	responsibility	to	communicate	warnings,	but	no	forecast,	alert	or	warn-
        ing	was	received	from	the	technical	agencies.	Civil	protection	is	responsible	for	following	up	on	
        the	stakeholder	workshop	recommendations	
    •   Civil	protection	has	communicated	the	recommendations	from	the	workshop	to	decision-makers	
        and	ensure	follow-up	on	their	implementation	
    •   Life	 jackets	 are	 now	 mandatory	 on	 all	 ships.	 Civil	 protection	 has	 improved	 collaboration	 with	
        forecasters	to	anticipate	impacts	from	hydrometeorological	events	and	act	early	
A	project	to	strengthen	the	capacity	of	the	Hydromet	and	early	warning	services	is	underway.	Priorities	
for	strengthening	early	warning	are	shown	in	Figure	48	
                                  Figure	48	Priorities	for	strengthening	early	warning		




                                                                                                                  	
	




	                                                                                                              42	
	
Ghana	
(Miawuli	 Lumor,	 Water	 Resources	 Commission;	 Gavivinia	 Yao	 Tamakloe,	 National	 Disaster	 Manage-
ment	 Organization;	 Sylvester	 Darko,	 Hydrological	 Services	 Department;	 James	 Barrone	 Dusu,	 Ghana	
Meteorological	Agency)	
Ghana	is	vulnerable	to	flooding	and	following	major	floods	in	2007	and	2010	has	embarked	on	strength-
ening	flood	management	(Figure	49).		
	                                                              Figure	49	Overview	of	Ghana	

Disaster	 risk	 management	
involves	 the	 key	 agencies:	
Ghana	 Meteorological	 Agen-
cy	(GMet)	for	meteorological	
forecasts	and	warnings;	Wa-
ter	 Resources	 Commission	
(WRC)	 for	 transboundary	
basin	 management	 and	 the	
coordinating	 agency	 on	 wa-
ter	 resources	 related	 issues;	
Hydrological	 Services	 De-
partment	 (HSD)	 for	 hydro-
logical	 monitoring	 and	 flood	
early	 warning	 system;	 and	
the	 National	 Disaster	 Man-
agement	 Office	 (NADMO),	
which	 is	 responsible	 for	 the	
management	 of	 disasters	
and	 related	 emergencies.	                                                                                   	
NAMDO	 depends	 on	 GMet	
and	HSD	to	obtain	early	warnings	of	floods	and	drought.	It	is	coordinates	activities	of	all	actors	in	disaster	
management	and	is	responsible	for	emergency	operations	and	engaging	the	community	in	improving	re-
silience.		
A	 flood	 forecasting	 system	 is	 in	 development,	 which	 will	 provide	 flood	 early	 warning	 and	 assessment	
(Figure	50).	
                                   Figure	50	Flood	forecast	and	warning	system	




                                                                                               	
An	example	of	the	flood	early	warning	system	for	White	Volta	is	shown	in	Figure	51.	




	                                                                                                             43	
	
                                    Figure	51	Flood	early	warning	system	White	Volta	




                                                                                                             	
This	is	enabling	the	validation	and	incorporation	of	flood	risk	maps	in	planning	and	flood	management,	
which	is	shared	with	communities	to	encourage	alternative	land	use	in	high	risk	areas	Figure	52).	
         Figure	52	Flood	risk	map	for	selected	districts	and	alternative	land	use	options	for	flood	prone	districts	




                                                                                                                       	


                                                    	
	Some	of	the	achievement	since	2011	include:	
•   Increased	capacity	of	the	national	hydro-meteorological	services:	
    o Water	Information	System	established	and	operational;	
    o HSD	systematically	collects,	stores	and	calibrates	hydrological	information;	
    o Real-time	tele-transmission	of	8	gauging	stations	
    o 20	Ghanaians	were	trained	in	flood	hazard	assessment	and	forecasting.	
        	
•   Informed	decision	making	for	effective	flood	prevention	in	Northern	Ghana:		
    o The	genesis	of	the	floods	in	Northern	Ghana	is	understood;	
    o Effectiveness	of	flood	prevention	measures	is	assessed;	
    o Flood	hazard	maps	for	the	White	Volta	and	tributaries	are	available.		
        	
•   Strengthened	emergency	preparedness	in	Northern	Ghana:		
    o Flood	forecasting	system	with	3-day	lead	time	for	the	White	Volta	is	operational;		
    o Flood	propagation	time	and	hazard	maps	are	available	for	preparedness	planning.	
        	
•   Fostered	institutional	collaboration	on	flood	management:	
    o Agreement	on	institutional	responsibility	for	forecasting	are	reached;	
Remaining	challenges	include:	

	                                                                                                                          44	
	
•   Coupling	the	FEWS	model	with	climate	data	from	GMet	
•   Building	“last	mile	connections”	
    o Ensuring	that	information	effectively	reaches	flood	affected	communities	
    o Supporting	district	assemblies	mainstreaming	information	in	district	planning	
•   Sustaining	the	capacity	of	national	agencies	for	flood	forecasting	
    o Continuing	training	of	hydrologists	and	meteorologists	in	forecasting	
    o Repairing,	 maintaining,	 operating	 and	 upgrading	 critical	 hydro-met	 stations	 in	 the	 White	 Volta	
        Basin	
•   Increasing	accuracy	of	flood	forecasting	
•   Fostering	effective	collaboration	among	national	agencies	in	flood	forecasting	
•   Understanding	the	social	and	economic	impacts	of	flooding	in	the	White	Volta	Basin	
•   Extending	flood	forecasting	to	all	parts	of	the	country	
•   Increasing	the	number	of	emergency	operations	centres	at	the	local	authority	level	–	most	districts	
    are	not	covered	
•   Target	audience	still	do	not	understand	their	responsibilities	in	disaster	management	chain	
•   Volunteerism	is	very	low	

Lao	Peoples	Democratic	Republic	
	(Outhone	 Phetluangsy,	 Depart-
ment	 of	 Meteorology	 and	 Hydrolo-                            Figure	53	Overview	of	Lao	PDR	
gy)	
An	overview	of	Lao	PDR	is	shown	in	
Figure	 53.	 Lao	 PDR	 has	 a	 tropical	
monsoon	 climate	 with	 a	 wet	 season	
and	 a	 dry	 season.	 The	 dry	 season	 is	
from	 mid-October	 to	 mid-May,	
which	is	the	period	of	the	Northeast	
monsoon.	 The	 wet	 season	 is	 from	
mid-May	 to	 mid-October,	 which	 is	
the	 period	 of	 the	 Southwest	 mon-
soon	 and	 is	 associated	 with	 tropical	
cyclones	over	the	Northwest	Pacific.	
85-95%	 of	 floods	 occur	 between	
June	and	October.	
	Floods,	 flash	 floods,	 landslides,	
earthquakes	 and	 drought	 are	 major	
hazards.	 The	 ministry	 of	 Water	 Re-
sources	 and	 Environment	 Admin-                                                                                     	
istration	is	responsible	for	the	oper-
                Figure	54	Forecast	and	warning	dissemination	
                                                                         ation	 of	 hydro-meteorological	 fore-
                                                                         cast	 dissemination.	 Daily	 forecasts	
                                                                         are	 issued	 through	 radio,	 television,	
                                                                         newspaper,	 provincial	 offices	 of	
                                                                         DMH,	 the	 National	 Disaster	 Man-
                                                                         agement	 Office	 and	 line	 agencies	
                                                                         (Figure	 54).	 All	 warnings	 are	 based	
                                                                         on	 meteorological	 and	 hydrological	
                                                                         thresholds	 with	 tropical	 storm	
                                                                         warnings	 focused	 on	 the	 location	 of	
                                                                         the	system	relative	to	Lao	PDR.	
                                                                         Challenges	include	the	need	to:	
                                                                         • Focus	 more	 attention	 on	 inun-
                                                                         dation	 through	 heavy	 rainfall	 flood	
                                                                         forecasting	and	warning	
                                                                         • Increase	 the	 frequency	 of	 fore-
                                                                  	      casts	 and	 warnings	 through	 mass	

	                                                                                                              45	
	
    media	to	the	public	and	directly	to	concerned	end-users	
•   Enhance	awareness	and	preparation	of	people	and	have	a	plan	to	respond	before	a	flood	
•   Improve	forecast	verification.	

Mali	
(Moussa	Toure,	Mali-Meteo;	Cheick	Fanta	Mady	Kone,	Protection	Civile)	
	Mali	 is	 frequently	 affected	 by	
floods	(Figure	55).	In	the	case	                        Figure	55	Overview	of	flooding	in	Mali	
of	 flooding	 in	 Bamako	 on	 28	
August	 2013,	 intense	 precipi-
tation	 was	 forecast	 8	 h	 ahead	
of	the	impact.	Radio	messages	
were	 issued;	 however,	 no	 in-
formation	 on	 amount	 of	 pre-
cipitation	 or	 its	 impact	 was	
provided.	 Partly	 because	 of	
this,	 no	 actions	 were	 taken	
ahead	 of	 the	 event.	 2000	
households	 were	 flooded	 and	
temporarily	 evacuated,	 240	                                                                                   	
houses	 collapses,	 and	 56	 peo-
ple	 died.	 Most	 of	 the	 casual-
ties	were	caused	by	electrocution	or	in	the	case	of	children,	drowning.		
From	the	perspective	of	the	civil	protection	directorate,	there	was	a	lack	of	understanding	of	the	impacts.	
It	is	the	responsibility	of	civil	protection	to	covert	forecasts	into	warnings,	to	disseminate	the	warnings,	
anticipate	and	reduce	damage,	manage	the	response,	learn	lessons	from	the	event,	and	enhance	prepar-
edness	for	future	events.	As	soon	as	the	flood	occurred,	civil	protection	strengthened	the	response	teams	
with	volunteers,	evacuated	household,	and	coordinated	humanitarian	assistance.	
The	following	needs	were	identified:	
•   forecast	precipitation	amounts	and	anticipate	impacts	per	historical	events	(deterministic	based	up-
    on	return	period)	and	modelling	(probabilistic);		
•   	trigger	emergency	plans	before	the	impacts	to	mobilize	more	staff	and	volunteers	and	reduce	dam-
    ages;		
•   enhance	dissemination	(radio)	in	local	languages	
                     Figure	56	Early	warning	limiting	factors	             • develop	 warning	 and	
                                                                           activate	 response	 plans	
                                                                           through	 joint	 process	 with	
                                                                           met	                   service,		
                                                                           civil	protection	and	munici-
                                                                           palities	
                                                                           • enhance	         awareness-
                                                                           raising	 activities	 and	 simu-
                                                                           lations	 to	 ensure	 better	
                                                                           preparedness	
                                                                                      Some	of	the	limiting	factors	
                                                                                      in	 early	 warning	 are	 sum-
                                                                                      marized	in	Figure	56.	
                                                                                      	

                                                                                  	   	
                                                                                      	
                                                                                      	
                                                                                      	
	

	                                                                                                              46	
	
Some	of	the	planned	improvements	are	summarized	in	Figure	57.	
                                             Figure	57	Future	improvements	




                                                                                                          	




                                                                                                          	
	

Myanmar	
	(Win	Maw,	 DMH;	 Tin	Mar	Htay,	 DMH;	
                                                                          Figure	58	Hazards	in	Myanmar	
and	 Su	 Sandar	 Win,	 Relief	 and	 Reset-
tlement	Department)	
Figure	 58	 summarizes	 some	 of	 the	 ma-
jor	 hazards	 affecting	 Myanmar.	 These	
include	 cyclones,	 heavy	 rainfall,	 storm	
surge	extreme	temperature,	scanty	rain-
fall,	 river	 flood,	 flash	 flood	 and	 coastal	
flood.	 Recent	 extremes	 include	 47.2	 °C	
in	Myinmu	in	2010;	29.10	inches	of	rain-
fall	 in	 12	 hours	 in	 Taungkok	 in	 2011	
resulting	 in	 flooding,	 and	 8.03	 inches	 of	
rainfall	in	Chin	State	in	2015	resulting	in	
landslides.		
The	 Department	 of	 Meteorology	 and	
Hydrology	is	responsible	for	forecasting	
and	warning	and	communication	of	me-
                                                                                                                    	
teorological	and	hydrological	hazards	to	
agencies	responsible	for	action	to	the	Ministry	of	Social	Welfare,	Relief	and	Resettlement	(MSWRR),	Red	
Cross,	Ministry	of	Interior	and	General	Administration	Department	(GAD).	The	Department	of	Relief	and	
Resettlement	is	responsible	for	emergency	operations	(Figure	59).	




	                                                                                                             47	
	
             Figure	59	Structure	of	Emergency	of	Operations	          Key	activities	of	the	Emergency	Opera-
                                                                      tions	Centre	are		
                                                                      •   In	normal	conditions:	
                                                                          • Investigating	 and	 monitoring	
                                                                      the	weather	condition	
                                                                          • Information	sharing	to	related	
                                                                      government	 organizations	 and	 NGO,	
                                                                      INGO	 organizations	 (such	 as,	 MRCS,	
                                                                      WFP,	UNOCHA,	etc.)	
                                                                           • Implementing	 for	 disaster	
                                                                      preparedness,	 information	 manage-
                                                                      ment	 and	 coordination	 for	 disaster	
                                                                      risk	reduction.	
                                                                          •    In	an	emergency:	
                                                                 	
                                                                   • Supporting	 for	 emergency	
        management,	response	and	logistics	through	information	sharing	on	network	and	quick	decision	
        making.	
    •   Providing	the	comprehensive	solution	to	the	decision	makers	by	collecting	necessary	data	and	in-
        formation	for	effective	response.	
    •   Cooperation	with	related	organizations	for	making	plans	to	give	assistance	the	needs	of	disaster	
        affected	people	in	disaster	affected	area.	
The	DMH	and	Emergency	Operations	Centre	share	responsibility	for	coordination	and	decision-making.	
There	is	good	communication	with	formal	data	sharing	arrangements.	At	present	DMH	does	not	develop	
impact-based	forecasts	and	warning,	only	warnings	based	on	meteorological	and	hydrological	thresholds	
are	 issued.	 Vulnerability	 and	 exposure	 data	 are	 collected	 by	 several	 government	 agencies/departments	
including	MSWRR,	GAD,	Ministry	of	Agriculture	and	Irrigation,	Myanmar	Information	Management	Unit,	
Ministry	of	Home	Affairs,	and	Ministry	of	Commerce.	
The	strengths	and	weaknesses	include:	
•   Strengths	
    o Strong	will	of	staff	
    o Relatively	high	academic	background	
    o Staffs’	passion	and	willingness	to	improve	DMH	
    o Consecutive	budget	increases	
•   Weaknesses	
    o Outdated	infrastructure	
    o Shortage	of	budget	
    o Shortage	of	manpower	
    o Insufficient	overall	facilities	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	



	                                                                                                           48	
	
Nepal	
The	location,	topography	and	river	systems	of	Nepal	are	shown	in	Figure	60.	
The	 Department	 of	 Hydrol-                             Figure	60	Location,	topography	and	river	systems	
ogy	and	Meteorology	(DHM)	
is	 responsible	 for	 all	 hydro-
logical	 and	 meteorological	
activities	 and	 services	 in	
Nepal.	 The	 hydrology	 divi-
sion	 has	 sections	 for	 the	
river	 network;	 flood	 fore-
casting;	 data;	 snow,	 water	
quality	 and	 environment;	
and	 technical.	 A	 major	 ob-
jective	of	DHM	is	flood	fore-
casting	 and	 early	 warning.	
Hazard-related	 losses	 for	
1990-2015	 are	 shown	 in	
Figure	61.	
	                                                                                                                      	
	
                   Figure	61	hazard	related	losses	1990-2015	




                                                                                	


	A	 significant	 investment	 is	 un-                      Figure	62	Flood	diagnostics	and	forecasting	(warning)	
derway	 to	 modernization	 DHM.	
A	 schematic	 of	 the	 flood	 fore-
casting	 and	 warning	 system	 is	
shown	in	Figure	62	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
                                                                                                                   	



	                                                                                                                  49	
	
Pacific	–	Fiji,	Samoa	and	Tonga	
(Litea	Biukoto	and	 Cyprien	Bosserelle,	Pacific	Community;	 Titimanu	Simi,	MNRE-DMO,	Samoa;	 Lame-
ko	 Asora,	 MNRE-WRD,	 Samoa;	 Luteru	 Agaalii	 Tauvele,	 Samoa	 Met	 Service;	 Moleni	 Tu’uholoaki	 and	
Laitia	Fifita,	Tonga	Meteorological	Services)	
The	locations	of	Fiji,	Samoa	and	Tonga	are	shown	in	Figure	63.	These	islands	are	frequently	impacted	by	
Tropical	 Cyclones,	 which	 cause	 strong	 winds,	 storm	 surges,	 and	 flooding.	 They	 are	 also	 vulnerable	 to	
earthquakes	and	tsunamis.	
                                     Figure	63	Islands	of	Fiji,	Samoa	and	Tonga	




                                                                                                            	

Tonga	
	Tropical	 Cyclone	 Ian,	 which	                     Figure	64	Impact	of	Tropical	Cyclone	Ian	on	Ha’apai	
struck	 Tonga	 on	 January	 11,	
2014	 illustrates	 challenges.	
TC	 Ian	 was	 well	 forecast	 and	
continuous	 briefings	 were	
given	 to	 Tonga’s	 National	
Emergency	 Management	 Of-
fice	 and	 operations	 centre.	
The	 Prime	 Minister’s	 office	
was	 informed	 that	 TC	 Ian	
would	 rapidly	 intensified	 into	
a	category	5	system;	a	state	of	
emergency	 declared	 at	 8	 am	
on	 January	 11.	 TC	 Ian’s	 eye	                                                                               	
passed	 over	 the	 Ha’apai	 Is-
lands	 at	 1430	 local	 time.	
Communication	 with	 Ha’apai	
was	 lost	 at	 1300	 local	 time.	
The	 cyclone	 caused	 extensive	
damage	(Figure	64)	
	
	

	                                                                                                               50	
	
Some	of	the	lessons	learned	and	challenges	include:	
•   Timely	 Delivery	 of	 Warnings	 to	 the	 people	 of	 what	 would	 happen	 just	 before,	 during	 and	 after	 eye	
    past	(TC	Ian).	
•   Some	people	just	evacuated	during	or	near	the	height	of	the	storm	
    o     Understanding	forecast?	
•   Technical	wordings	of	forecast	and	warnings	
    o     difficult	to	understand?	
•   NDMO	giving	free	credits	to	public	to	help	them	with	reporting	directly	for	emergency	responses	
    o     Misuse	of	funds	
•   Local	shipping	Agencies	continuing	operations	given	warnings	are	IN	FORCE	              	
•   Lack	of	effective	information	on	Disaster	impacts	
    o     Historical	reference/records	of	past	impacts	of	certain	Hazards	
•   Poor	communication	coverage	for	warnings	
    o     Needs	automatic	dissemination	systems	 	
•   Lack	of	observation	networks	within	our	area	of	responsibility	and	in	the	ocean	
•   Lack	of	operational	resources	to	implement	impact-based	forecast	and	warnings	services	
    o     Human	capacity	development	
    o     Equipment	
•   Implementing	preparedness	&	Awareness	Strategies	

Samoa		
The	country	profile	of	Samoa	is	shown	in	Figure	65.	Samoa	is	highly	vulnerable	to	tropical	cyclones	and	
tsunamis.	It	is	located	160	km	north	of	the	earthquake	generating	Tongan	Trench	and	at	the	heart	of	the	
South	Pacific	cyclone	belt.	Three	cyclones	and	one	Tsunami	resulted	in	losses	of	nearly	US$1	billion	
                                        Figure	65	Country	Profile	of	Samoa	




                                                                                                      	
Samoa’s	early	warning	system	is	shown	in	Figure	66.	There	are	standard	operating	procedures	in	the	case	
of	a	category	3-5	tropical	cyclone:	
Step	01:	     Continue	Discussion	with	Neighbour	National	Weather	Services	
Step	02:	     Issued	SWB	every	3	hours	

	                                                                                                                51	
	
Step	03:	     Director	 Met/Acting	 Director	 Met	 brief	 CEO	 every	 3	 hours	 after	 every	 issue	
              	
Step	04:	     CEO/Acting	CEO	MNRE	brief	NDC	
Step	05:	     Director	Met/Acting	Director	Met	brief	DMO	every	3	hours	after	every	issue	
Step	06:	     Director/Acting	Director	Met	follow-up	Media	interview	every	6	hours	
	
                                        Figure	66	Samoa	Early	Warning	System	




                                                                                                                	
The	case	of	Tropical	Cyclone	Tuni,	which	was	a	Category	1	event	in	November	2015	is	shown	in	Figure	
67.	The	first	Special	Weather	Bulletin	was	issued	at	262100	UTC	or	11	am	SLT	on	Friday	27	following	the	
activation	 of	 the	 STCWC	 on	 262000	 UTC	 or	 10	 am	 SLT	 the	 same	 day,	 33	 hours	 before	 the	 system	 was	
named	 by	 the	 RSMC	 Nadi.	 This	 was	 done	 due	 to	 the	 threat	 that	 the	 developing	 Depression	 has	 a	 high	
chance	to	develop	into	a	Tropical	Cyclone	while	moving	south	easterly	passing	the	south	of	the	Samoan	
islands.		
                    Figure	67	Tropical	Cyclone	Tuni	Cat	1,	November	2015	




                                                                                         	
	



	                                                                                                               52	
	
A	total	of	10	SWBs	including	a	Cancellation	bulletin	(SWB	10)	were	issued	every	6	hours	for	this	event.	
The	bulletin	includes	the	warnings	and	advisories	for	the	potential	hazards	associated	with	the	storm,	the	
latest	position	of	the	storm	and	its	expected	location	in	the	next	6-12	hours,	the	expected	effects	and	the	
potential	impacts.		
Apart	from	preparing	and	sending	the	warnings,	the	Weather	and	Forecasting	section	was	also	responsi-
ble	for	briefing	the	local	and	international	media	as	well	as	the	Disaster	Advisory	Council	and	all	relevant	
agencies.		
Continuous	discussions	with	the	regional	partners	including	the	Fiji	Meteorological	Services	and	Neigh-
bouring	Meteorological	Services.	
Some	of	the	challenges	are:	
   Lack	of	awareness	of	available	Information	Providers	and	available	data	
   Lack	of	capacity	to	utilize	and	apply	data	in	an	effective	and	efficient	way	
   Lack	 of	 resources	 (radars)	 and	 expertise	 to	 guide	 and	 implement	 the	 use	 and	 application	 of	 space-
    based	technologies	
   Lack	of	information	dissemination		
Some	actions	Samoa	expects	to	take	include:	
   Increase	awareness	of	information	providers	and	data	available	
   Build	local	capacity	to	enable	the	effective	and	efficient	utilization	of	available	services	and	data		
   Promote	 and	 encourage	 collaboration	 and	 communication	 amongst	 regional	 member	 countries	 and	
    organizations	
   To	seek	funding	and	training	opportunities	to	increase	the	self-sufficiency	of	local	programmes	and	
    officials	
   Encourage	 and	 increase	 information	 dissemination	 to	 relevant	 actors	 and	 the	 public	 to	 improve	
    Disaster	Management	across	the	board	
   Development	of	more	user	friendly	ways	of	information	dissemination	(mobile	apps)	
Efforts	are	also	underway	to	improve	forecasts	of	coastal	inundation.	Since	real-time	run-up	models	are	
very	slow,	the	preferred	approach	is	to	create	a	data	base	of	500,000	probable	scenarios	and	select	500	
representative	case	from	which	an	ensemble	forecast	can	be	made	(Figure	68).	
                      Figure	68	Met-models	for	operational	probabilistic	inundation	simulations	




                                                                                                                	


	                                                                                                                   53	
	
	

Sri	Lanka	
(Kehelella	Sarath	Premalal,	 Department	 of	 Meteorology;	 Sulaima	Lebbe	Mohamed	Aliyar,	 Irrigation	
Department)	
	Sri	 Lanka	 is	 an	 island	 in	 the	          Figure	69	Monthly	and	average	(1961-1990)	rainfall	in	Sri	Lanka	
tropics	 with	 two	 major	 sea-
sonal	 monsoonal	 regimes	 –	
Southwest	 from	 May	 to	 Sep-
tember	 and	 Northeast	 from	
December	 to	 February.	 In	 ad-
dition,	 there	 are	 two	 inter-
monsoon	seasons	namely	first	
inter-monsoon	 (March-April)	
and	 second	 inter-monsoon	
(October	–	November).		
The	 monthly	 and	 average	
rainfall	 and	 some	 of	 the	 im-
portant	 impacts	 are	 shown	
schematically	in	Figure	69.	
Estimates	 of	 cyclone	 related	
damage	in	2000	and	2003	are	
shown	in	Figure	70.	                                                                                              	
Figure	70	Estimates	of	cyclone	related	damage	in	2000	and	2003	




          	

The	case	of	Cyclone	Roanu,	which	developed	in	the	Bay	of	Bengal,	14-20	May	2016,	highlights	some	of	the	
problems	facing	Sri	Lanka.	The	cyclone	originated	as	a	low-pressure	area	to	the	south-east	of	Sri	Lanka	on	
14	May.	It	slowly	moved	north	west	very	close	the	east	coast	of	Sri	Lanka	becoming	a	depression	on	17	
May	 and	 a	 Cyclonic	 Storm	 on	 19	 May.	 The	 forecasts	 underestimated	 the	 rainfall	 and	 were	 not	 precise	
about	 the	 location	 of	 the	 heaviest	 rains.	 The	 forecasts	 were	 also	 not	 customized	 and	 were	 not	 impact-
based.	The	forecast	for	15	May	and	the	actual	rainfall	for	15-18	May	are	shown	in	Figure	71.	




	                                                                                                                 54	
	
                                   Figure	71	Forecast	for	15	May	and	actual	rainfall.	

	




	The	impacts	included:	
•     Situation	was	the	worst	floods	in	last	25	years	
•     According	Disaster	Management	Centre,	301,602	people	have	been	affected	by	the	floods	and	land-
      slides	and	estimated	21,484	people	displaced.	104	people	are	known	to	have	died	and	99	people	are	
      missing.		
                 Figure	72	landslide	in	Aranayake,	Kegalle	District	   •        Estimated	 623	 houses	
                                                                       have	 been	 destroyed	 and	 4,414	
                                                                       have	been	damaged	
                                                                       •        25,000	 to	 30,000	 busi-
                                                                       nesses	have	been	impacted	by	the	
                                                                       disaster	
                                                                       •        171	 schools	 in	 North	
                                                                       Western,	 Sabaragamuwa	 and	
                                                                       Western	 provinces	 were	 dam-
                                                                       aged	
                                                                       •        It	 is	 estimated	 that	
                                                                       70,000	 of	 school	 going	 children	
                                                                       are	affected	by	the	disaster	
	
                                                                       	In	 Kegalle	 district,	 a	 landslide	
                                                                       caused	 extensive	 loss	 of	 life	 and	
  property	(Figure	72)	
                                                                            Figure	73	Method	of	Communicating	Warnings	
	
The	 means	 of	 communicating	 warnings	 are	
shown	in	Figure	73.	
Some	of	the	lesson	learned	following	the	May	
2016	disaster	include:	
•    Warnings	 were	 not	 received	 by	 the	 peo-
     ple	affected.	
•    Lead	time	was	not	sufficient	even	though	
     warnings	received.	
•    No	 proper	 assessment	 on	 what	 is	 hap-
     pening	outside	the	river.	
                                                       	

	                                                                                                                     55	
	
•   Flood	hazard	maps,	inundation	data	were	not	shared	and	the	public	was	unware	of	their	vulnerability	
•   Misinterpretation	of	warning	messages	
•   Lack	of	customization	of	the	forecast	
•   No	impact	forecast	
        o Forecasters	lack	knowledge	about	impacts	from	meteorological	and	hydrological	hazards	
        o Lack	of	knowledge	of	river	floods	
•   People	in	the	Colombo	City	had	little	experience	of	flash	floods		
•   The	increased	vulnerability	of	the	population	due	to	major	land	use	changes	were	not	taken	into	con-
    sideration	
Based	on	these	findings,	there	is	a	need	to	
•   Strengthen	DoM	capacity	in	QPE		
•   Close	stakeholder	coordination	
•   Better	communication	and	customization	of	Forecast	and	warning	
•   Regular	discussion	/	Awareness	creation	
•   Change	the	present	language	of	weather	Forecast	(understandable	Language)	
•   Establish	a	video	conferencing	system	among	DoM,	DMC,	NBRO,	DOI	and	media	
The	following	activities	are	planned:	
•   Improve	the	accuracy	of	forecasts	
•   Timely	dissemination	
•   Regular	discussions	with	stakeholders	
•   Advance	the	leas	time	of	forecasts	and	warnings	
•   Improve	the	method	of	dissemination	and	contents	of	meteorological	and	hydrological	information	
•   Impact-based	warnings	
Figure	74	shows	how	impact-based	forecasting	may	be	improved.	
                                  Figure	74	Future	aim	for	impact-based	warnings	




	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	                                                                                                    56	
	
An	example	of	improved	forecasts	for	the	May	2016	event	is	shown	in	Figure	75.	
                      Figure	75	model	simulation	of	extreme	rainfall	situation	with	WRFDA	(NCEP)	

        	




Impact-Based	Forecasting	Exercises	
Exercise	1	
The	purpose	of	this	exercise	is	to	look	at	warnings	from	the	perspective	of	two	groups:	Forecasters	(me-
teorologists	and	hydrologists)	and	disaster	managers.	Each	group	is	asked	the	following	questions:	
•   Who	are	the	audience	for	weather	and	hydrological	warnings?	
•   What	do	they	need	to	know?	
•   When	do	they	need	to	know?	
•   How	should	we	tell	them?	
The	underlying	benefit	is	to	get	the	participants	talking	to	each	other	and	sharing	their	own	experiences.		

Exercise	2	
Developing	impact	tables	(Table	4	above).	The	purpose	of	this	exercise	is	to	show	how	useful	vulnerabil-
ity	information	can	be	created	from	expert	knowledge.	Here	the	participation	of	disaster	managers	is	very	
useful	because	they	are	often	more	knowledgeable	about	impacts	of	specific	hazards	based	on	emergency	
response.	In	operational	practice	input	from	many	different	stakeholders	is	needed	and	this	can	lead	to	a	
more	complex	table	based	on	impacts	tailored	to	specific	sectors	(See	annex	3).		

Exercise	3	
This	exercise	introduces	the	idea	of	the	impact	matrix.	A	detailed	explanation	accompanies	Figure	15.		

Exercise	4	
Each	of	the	forecasters	is	given	a	weather	and/or	hydrological	situation,	which	they	must	forecast.	In	the	
first	part	of	the	exercise,	they	will	provide	the	meteorological	and/or	hydrological	guidance.	In	the	second	
part	of	the	exercise,	the	forecasters	will	work	with	emergency	managers	to	develop	impact	tables	for	the	
specific	hazard	and	applicable	sectors.	Based	on	the	likelihood	of	the	event	and	other	factors,	such	as	time	
of	time,	existing	conditions,	etc.,	the	team	(forecasters	and	emergency	managers)	will	select	a	box	in	the	
matrix	and	issue	a	warning	according	the	colour	of	the	box	and	likely	impact	(Figure	76	and	Annex	4)	


	                                                                                                         57	
	
              Figure	76	Impact	Forecast	and	Warning	Template	                 	
                                                                              The	 purpose	 of	 this	 exercise	 is	
                                                                              work	 through	 the	 translation	 of	 a	
                                                                              weather	 or	 hydrological	 forecast	
                                                                              into	 an	 impact	 forecast	 and	 assign	
                                                                              a	 warning	 level.	 The	 exercise	 can	
                                                                              be	 adapted	 to	 a	 specific	 event,	
                                                                              which	 evolves	 with	 time	 or	 to	 dif-
                                                                              ferent	 geographical	 areas,	 which	
                                                                              may	 have	 different	 levels	 of	 alert	
                                                                              or	warning.	
                                                                              The	basic	simplicity	of	the	process	
                                                                              is	 emphasized	 to	 encourage	 easy	
                                                                              adoption	in	operational	services.	



                                                                              Conclusions	
                                                                             The	 ability	 to	 understand	 and	 re-
                                                                             spond	 effectively	 to	 warnings	 is	
                                                                             central	to	a	resilient	population.	By	
                                                                             avoiding	 physical	 harm,	 recovery	
                                                                             from	a	hazard	is	likely	to	be	faster	
                                                                             and	 more	 complete	 (Rogers	 et	 al.	
                                                                             2016).	 Impact-based	 forecast	 and	
                                                                             warning	 services	 complement	 the	
                                                                             traditional	 role	 of	 meteorological	
                                                                             and	 hydrological	 forecasting	 ser-
                                                                             vices	 by	 translating	 technical	
                                                                             knowledge	 into	 information	 of	 di-
                                                                             rect	 relevance	 to	 those	 affected.	
                                                                             Advances	 in	 our	 understanding	 of	
	                                                                            the	atmosphere-ocean-land	system	
                                                                             coupled	 with	 advances	 in	 numeri-
cal	 prediction	 and	 observation	 of	 this	 system	 means	 that	 we	 can	 make	 timely	 and	 accurate	 forecasts	 of	
hazards.	The	use	of	ensemble	prediction	techniques	gives	us	insight	into	the	likelihood	of	a	hazard	and	we	
can	use	this	knowledge,	coupled	with	information	about	what	and	who	is	likely	to	be	affected,	to	provide	
more	actionable	warnings.	
The	experience	of	those	WMO	Members,	which	have	developed	and	used	these	techniques,	is	invaluable	
in	 helping	 others.	 Further	 guidance	 is	 available	 through	 WMO	 programmes	 and	 together,	 WMO	 and	
World	Bank/GFDRR	are	working	to	ensure	that	the	efforts	to	modernization	NMHSs	can	strengthen	their	
capabilities	to	deliver	more	relevant	forecast	and	warning	services.	
In	a	relatively	short	training	course,	it	is	difficult	to	get	across	all	the	concepts	that	will	enable	the	opera-
tional	implementation	of	impact-based	forecasts	and	warnings.	Feedback	from	the	participants	highlight	
the	importance	of	the	topic	and	the	need	to	learn	more	about	how	to	implement	it	within	the	specific	con-
straints	of	a	country	(See	Annex	5).	Sharing	the	experiences	of	countries	trying	to	cope	with	the	impact	of	
hydrometeorological	hazards	is	integral	to	adapting	the	tools	to	their	specific	needs.	Bring	together	me-
teorologists,	hydrologists	and	disaster	managers	to	work	on	operational	scenarios	was	a	high	point	of	the	
workshop.		




	                                                                                                                 58	
	
	

References	
Rogers,	 David	 P.,	 and	 Vladimir	 V.	 Tsirkunov.	 2013.	 Weather	 and	 Climate	 Resilience:	 Effective	 Prepared-
         ness	 through	 National	 Meteorological	 and	 Hydrological	 Services.	 Directions	 in	 Development.	
         Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	
Rogers,	D.P.	H.	Kootval	and	V.V.	Tsirkunov.	2016:	Early	Warning,	Resilience	and	Risk	transfer.	Submitted	
        for	publication.	
Tang	Xu,	Lei	Feng,	Yongjie	Zou,	and	Haishen	Mu.	2012.	“The	Shanghai	Multi-hazard	Warning	System:	Ad-
       dressing	the	Challenge	of	Disaster	Risk	Reduction	in	an	Urban	Megalopolis.”	In	 Institutional	Part-
       nerships	in	Multi-Hazard	Early	Warning	Systems,	 edited	 by	 Maryam	 Golnaraghi,	 159-79.	 Heidel-
       berg,	Germany.	Springer.	
United	 Nations.	 2015.	 Sendai	 Framework	 for	 Disaster	 Risk	 Reduction	 2015-2013.	 United	 Nations,	 New	
         York.	
World	 Bank.	 2012.	 World	 Bank	 Disaster	 Risk	 Financing	 and	 Insurance	 (DRFI)	 Program.		
       http://www.gfdrr.org/gfdrr/DRFI.	
———.	2013.	Pacific	Catastrophe	Risk	Assessment	and	Financing	Initiative.	Risk	Assessment	–	Summary	
     Report.	Washington,	DC:	World	Bank.	
World	 Meteorological	 Organization.	 2012.	 “The	 WMO	 Strategy	 for	 Service	 Delivery.”	 WMO,	 Geneva.	
        http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/amp/pwsp/documents/SDS.pdf.	
———,	2015:	WMO	guidelines	on	multi-hazard	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services.	WMO	TD	no.	
     1150.	
	                                   	




	                                                                                                              59	
	
Annex	1	Workshop	Participants	
	     Participant	                  Country	         Organization	                Email	Address	
1.   	 Titimanu	Simi	               Samoa	       MNRE	-	DMO	                  Titi.simi@mnre.gov.ws	

2.   	 Lameko	Asora	Simanu		        Samoa	       MNRE	-	WRD	                  Lameko.simanu@mnre.gov.ws	

3.   	 Mr	Luteru	Agaalii	Tauvale	   Samoa	       Samoa	Met	Service	           Luteru.tauvale@mnre.gov.ws	
4.   	 Moleni	Tu'uholoaki		         Tonga	       Tonga	Meteorological	Ser-    molenit@met.gov.to	
                                                 vices	
5.   	 Laitia	Fifita		              Tonga	       Tonga	Meteorological	Ser-    laitiaf@met.gov.to	
                                                 vices	
6.   	 Litea	Biukoto	               Fiji	        Pacific	Community	           liteab@spc.int	

7.   	 Cyprien	Bosserelle	          Fiji	        Pacific	Community	           cyprienb@spc.int	

8.   	 Zhuluan	Lin	                 China	       	                            	
9.   	 Yonghui	Wu	                  China	       	                            	

10. 	 Danmin	Chen	                  China	       	                            	

11. 	Xueding	Li	                    China	       	                            	
     	                              	
12. 	Moussa	TOURE	                  Mali	        Mali-Meteo	                  mositoure@aol.com	

13. 	 Cheick	Fanta	Mady	Kone	       Mali	        Protection	Civile	           Cf1_kone@yahoo.fr	
14. 	 Donatien	Barthelemy	          DRC	         MettelSat	                   actioneaa2002@yahoo.fr	
      Kamunga	Musungayi	
15. 	 Jean	K'Onganga	Kitamba-       DRC	         Protection	Civile	           jeankitambala2005@yahoo.fr	
      la	
16. 	 Placide	Munsai	Masena	        DRC	         Hydrographie	et	Balisage	    masena_placide@yahoo.fr	

17. 	 Kehelella	Sarath	Premalal	    Sri	Lanka	   Department	of	Meteorology	   spremalal@yahoo.com	
18. 	 Sulaima	Lebbe	Mohamed		       Sri	Lanka	   Irrigation	Department	       Aliyar.sulaimalebbe@gmail.com	
      Aliyar	
19. 	 Natalia	Silva	Bustos	         Chile	       National	Emergency	Office	   nsilvab@onemi.gov.cl	
20. 	 Felipe	Riquelme	Vasquez	      Chile	       National	Emergency	Office	   friquelme@onemi.gov.cl	

21. 	 Win	Maw	                      Myanmar	     Department	of	Meteorology	   winmaw.kk@gmail.com	
                                                 and	Hydrology	

22. 	 Tin	Mar	Htay	                 Myanmar	     Department	of	Meteorology	   tmarhtay@googlemail.com	
                                                 and	Hydrology	
23. 	 Su	Sandar	Win	                Myanmar	     Relief	and	Resettlement	     susandarwin750@gmail.com	
                                                 Department	
24. 	 Mawuli	Lumor	                 Ghana	       Water	Resources	Commis-      maclumor@yahoo.com	
                                                 sion	
25. 	 Gavivina	Yao	Tamakloe	        Ghana	       National	Disaster	Manage-    gavivinaytamakloe@gmail.com	
                                                 ment	Organisation	
26. 	 Sylvester	Darko	              Ghana	       Hydrological	Services	De-    slykwesi@yahoo.com	
                                                 partment	

27. 	 James	Barrone	Dusu	           Ghana	       Ghana	Meteorological	Agen-   j.dusu@meteo.gov.gh	
                                                 cy	
28. 	 Outhone	Phetluangsy	          Lao	PDR	     Department	of	Meteorology	   outhone.dmh@gmail.com	
                                                 and	Hydrology	




	                                                                                                            60	
	
	    Participant	               Country	      Organization	                      Email	Address	
29. 	 Aziz	Mazharul	            Bangladesh	   Department	of	Agricultural	    azizdae@gmail.com	
                                              Extension,	Ministry	of	Agri-
                                              culture	
30. 	 Binod	Parajuli	           Nepal	        Department	of	Hydrology	       bp_gorkhali@hotmail.com	
                                              and	Meteorology	
31. 	 Rajendra	Sharma	          Nepal	        Department	of	Hydrology	       rajendra_706@hotmail.com	
                                              and	Meteorology	
32. 	 Jolanta	Kryspin-Watson	   	             World	Bank	                    jkryspin@worldbank.org	

33. 	 Tuo	Shi	                  	             World	Bank	                    tshi@worldbank.org	

34. 	 Jean	Baptiste	Migraine	   	             World	Bank	                    jmigraine@worldbank.org	

35. 	 Selim	Shahpar	            	             World	Bank	                    sselim@worldbank.org	

36. 	 Suranga	Kahandawa	        	             World	Bank	                    skahandawa@worldbank.org	
37. 	 Vladimir	Tsirkunov	       	             World	Bank	                    vtsirkunov@worldbank.org	

38. 	 Makoto	Suwa	              	             World	Bank	                    msuwa@worldbank.org	
39. 	 David	Rogers	             	             World	Bank	                    drogers@bluewin.ch	
40. 	 Chen	Zhenlin	             China	        Shanghai	Meteorological	       	
                                              Service	
41. 	 Chen	Baode	               China	        Shanghai	Meteorological	       baode@mail.typhoon.gov.cn	
                                              Service	
42. 	 Wuyun	                    China	        Shanghai	Meteorological	       wuyungg@foxmail.com	
                                              Service	
43. 	 Kong	Chunyan	             China	        Shanghai	Meteorological	       	
                                              Service	
44. 	 Zhang	Zhenyu	             China	        Shanghai	Municipal	Gov-        	
                                              ernment	
45. 	 Yang	Xiaodong	            China	        Shanghai	Municipal	Gov-        	
                                              ernment	
46. 	 Wang	Qiang	               China	        Shanghai	Meteorological	       	
                                              Service	
47. 	 Xiao	Chan	                China	        China	Meteorological	Ad-       	
                                              ministration	

	
	
	                                   	




	                                                                                                         61	
	
Annex	2	Workshop	Agenda	
                                          Monday,	12	December,	2016	
Start	 End	                                                    	
                                                         Registration	
08:30	   	      (participants	will	be	meet	in	the	lobby	of	Jian	Guo	Hotel	at	08:30	to	walk	to	Shanghai	Met	Ser-
                                                               vice)	

09:00	 10:00	       Introduction	of	participants,	objectives	and	expected	outcomes	of	the	meeting	


                Session	1:	This	session	will	introduce	the	World	Bank	GFDRR	HydroMet	program	and	multi-
                hazard	early	warning	systems	(MHEWS)	in	China.	Presenters	will	describe	how	the	GFDRR	
    	    	      program	is	supporting	new	World	Bank	investments	in	meteorological	and	hydrological	
                services;	the	importance	of	MHEWS;	and	introduce	the	audience	to	the	concept	of	MHEWS	
                as	implemented	by	CMA	in	Shanghai.	
                                              (Session	Chair:	David	Rogers,	GFDRR)	



                 Overview	of	WB	and	GFDRR	programs	supporting	modernization	of	HydroMet	and	Early	
10:00	 10:30	                                   Warning	Systems	
                                               Vladimir	Tsirkunov	
                                               World	Bank/GFDRR	

10:30	 11:00	                                   Coffee	Break	and	Group	Photo	

                          Welcome	from	Director	General	of	Shanghai	Meteorological	Service	
                                                Chen	Zhenlin,	SMS	

11:00	 12:00	
                   Concept	of	multi-hazard	early	warning	in	China	and	Overview	of	Shanghai	Multi-
                                      Hazard	Early	Warning	System	(MHEWS)	
                                                  Chen	Zhenlin,	SMS	

12:00	 14:00	                                               Lunch	

                Session	2:	Operations	of	the	Meteorological	Service,	Hydrological	Service	and	Disaster	
    	    	      Management	in	Shanghai.	
                (Session	Chair:	Chen	Baode,	SMS)	

                                                    Meteorological	Services	
14:00	 14:45	
                                                       	Kong	Chunya,	SMS	

                                                  Hydrological	Services	
14:45	 15:30	                                        Zhang	Zhenyu		
                                               Shanghai	Water	Affairs	Bureau	
15:30	 16:00	                                            Coffee	Break	

                                              Disaster	Management	
16:00	 16:45	                                    Yang	Xiaodong		
                        Shanghai	Emergency	Management	Office	of	Shanghai	Municipal	Government	

16:45	 17:30	                                             Discussion	


	                                                                                                            62	
	
                                          Tuesday,	13	December,	2016	
Start	 End	 	

                 Session	3:	This	session	will	introduce	the	concept	of	Impact-Based	Forecast	and	Warning	
                Services;	how	they	can	be	implemented	in	NMHSs	and	Disaster	Management	organizations;	
    	    	             and	how	impact-based	warning	services	are	being	implemented	in	Shanghai.		
                                                    (Session	Chair:	TBD)	

                              Implementing	Impact-Based	Forecast	and	Warning	Services		
                                         (including	exercise	1:	effective	warnings)	
08:30	 10:30	
                                         David	Rogers,	GFDRR	and	Chen	Baode,	SMS	
                                                          Discussion	
10:30	 11:00	                                           Coffee	Break	
                               Implementation	of	Impact-Based	Forecasting	in	Shanghai	
11:00	 12:30	
                                                      Wang	Qiang,	SMS	
                                                          Discussion	
12:30	 14:00	                                               Lunch	
                Session	4:	China	national	perspective	–	In	this	session	CMA	will	discuss	how	they	support	
    	    	
                                           disaster	risk	reduction	nationally	

                         CMA	Meteorological	Centre	and	Services	for	Disaster	Risk	Reduction	
14:00	 15:00	                                          Chan	Xiao	
                   Meteorological	Disaster	Risk	Management	Division	of	National	Climate	Center	Discussion	

15:00	 15:30	                                           Coffee	Break	
                Session	5:	During	this	session,	the	participants	will	have	a	guided	tour	of	the	SMS	operations	
    	    	
                                                            centre	

                   SMS	Operations	Centre:	brief	presentations	of	each	of	the	operational	platforms	
15:30	 17:30	
                                                            (TBD)	

	
	                                    	




	                                                                                                            63	
	
                                       Wednesday,	14	December	2016	
Start	   End	   	

                Session	5:	In	this	session,	participants	will	present	several	forecast	and	warning	case	stud-
                  ies,	which	highlight	the	issues	we	face	in	improving	the	public	and	sectorial	response	to	
                 hazardous	meteorological	and	hydrological	conditions.	This	will	be	an	opportunity	for	all	
    	       	     participants	to	share	their	experiences	with	the	aim	of	identifying	solutions,	which	may	
                                                  have	universal	application.	
                                               (Chair:	David	Rogers,	GFDRR)	




08:30	 10:30	                                    Participant	Case	Studies	




                                                           Break	
10:30	 11:00	

                                               Exercise	2a:	Impact	Matrix	
11:00	 12:30	

                                                           Lunch	
12:30	 14:00	




14:00	 15:30	                                    Participant	Case	Studies	




                                                           Break	
15:30	 16:00	
16:00	 17:30	                           Exercise	2b:	Vulnerability	Assessment	
	
	                                  	




	                                                                                                         64	
	
	
                                        Thursday,	15	December,	2018	
Start	   End	                                                 	

                Session	6:	In	this	session,	participants	will	be	assigned	to	small	groups	to	conduct	an	im-
                pact-based	forecast	and	warning	exercise	using	the	ideas	discussed	during	the	earlier	ses-
    	       	           sions	and	building	on	their	own	operational	experiences	and	case	studies	
                                      (Chair:	David	Rogers,	GFDRR	and	Chen	Baode,	SMS)	




08:30	 10:30	                      Exercise	3:	Impact-Based	Forecast	and	Warning		




                                                           Break	
10:30	 11:00	

                              Exercise	3:	Impact-Based	Forecast	and	Warning	Exercise	
11:30	 12:30	

                                                           Lunch	
12:30	 14:00	

                          Presentations	by	each	group	on	findings	and	recommendations,	
14:00	 16:30	
                                           	Discussion,	Reflections	and	Wrap	Up	

	

	                                 	




	                                                                                                        65	
	
Annex	 3	 Examples	 of	 Impact	 Matrices	 for	 Myanmar,	 Mozambique	
and	Mauritius	
                               	Wind	Impact	matrices	based	on	discussions	with	stakeholders	in	Myanmar.	

        Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	public	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	public	–	emergency	response	and	public	
                                                              security)	

Minimal	impacts	                     Minor	Impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
• Damages	to	billboards	             • Electrocution	                     • Localized	loss	of	communication	      • Widespread	damage	to	weak	
• Health	&	disease	problems	         • Electric	shock	                      and	electricity	supply	due	to	          structures	–	houses	and	com-
                                     • Falling	lamp	posts	                  gusty	wind	damaging	power	              mercial	buildings	collapsing	
                                     • Minor	disruption	to	travel	          lines	                                • Trees	falling	down	
                                     • Malaria		                          • Localized	business	disruption	        • Electric	power	lines	falling	down	
                                     • 	Psychological	problems	             (industrial	zone,	urban	areas)	       • Wind-driven	waves	damage	
                                     • Some	injuries		                    • Localized	disruption	of	schools	        coastal	structures	causing	injury	
                                     • Temporary	stoppage	of	health	      • Population	displacement	              • Widespread	delays	to	public	
                                       services	                          • 		Diversion	of	aircraft	                transportation	(Air,	Road,	Rail,	
                                     • 	Isolated	loss	of	telecommunica-   • Danger	to	life	from	flying	objects	     Ship,	Ferry).	
                                       tion	and	electrical	power	           –	injuries	(physical	trauma)	         • Danger	to	vehicles	on	roads	
                                     • Damage	to	roofing	                 • Air	and	sea	search	and	rescue	        • Death		
                                                                            disrupted	                            • High	risk	to	aircraft	
                                     	                                    • Localized	disruption	to	ground	       • Widespread	loss	of	fishing	boats,	
                                                                            transport	                              and	other	shipping	
                                                                                                                  • Search	and	rescue	impacted	on	a	
                                                                                                                    large	scale	
                                                                                                                    	
                                                                                                                    	
           Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	water	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	dams	and	irrigation)	
    Minimal	impacts	             Minor	Impacts	                  Significant	impacts	            Severe	impacts	
• 	                                  • Isolated	loss	of	telecommunica-    • Localized	disruption	to	commu-        • Control	systems	of	dam	break-
                                       tion	and	electrical	power	may	       nication	&	electric	supply	affect-      ing	
                                       affect	operations	                   ing	operations	
                                                                            	
        Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	agricultural	and	fisheries	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	farmers	and/or	fish-
                                                                   ers)	
Minimal	impacts	                     Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
• 	                                  • Isolated	damage	to	crops	          •   Loss	of	crops	                      • Widespread	Loss	of	fishing	
                                     • Soil	erosion	                      •   Loss	of	livestock	                    boats	and	gear,	loss	of	life	
                                     • High	waves	disrupt	fisheries	      •   Financial	losses	                   • Crops,	loss	yield	&	Cultivation	
                                                                          •   Loss	of	fishing	gear	and	boats,	    • Soil	erosion	
                                                                              loss	of	life	                       • Financial	losses	to	farmers	and	
                                                                                                                    fishers	

    Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	transportation	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	transportation	network)	

Minimal	impacts	                     Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
    	                                • Minor	disruption	to	travel	        • Disruption	to	Transportation	         • Widespread	disruption	to	
                                                                            (rail,	road,	inland	water,	air-         transport	networks	(road,	rail,	
                                                                            lines)	                                 air,	sea)	

        Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	energy	and	communication	sectors	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	energy	supply	and	
                                                 communication	networks)	

Minimal	impacts	                     Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
    	                                • Temporary	loss	of	telecommuni-     • Short	break	of	hydro	power	           • Widespread	damage	to	commu-
                                       cation	and	electrical	power	may	     generation	                             nication	and	energy	supply	in-
                                       affect	operations	and	supply	      • Minor	disruption	to	Communica-          frastructure	
                                                                            tion	&	Electric	supply	may	affect	
                                                                            supply	
                                                                          • 	
Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	health	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	health	services)	

Minimal	impacts	                     Minor	impacts	                           Significant	impacts	                Severe	impacts	
    	                                • Increase	in	presentation	of	       • Injuries		                            • Loss	of	life,	traumatic	injuries	
                                       injuries	in	emergency	centers	     • Temporary	stoppage	of	health	           (severity	and	duration,	area	ex-
                                     • Spread	of	malaria	                   services	                               tent)	
                                                                          • Psychological	impact	                 • Damage	to	Health	care	facilities	
                                                                          • Population	displacement	due	to	
                                                                            loss	of	homes	
Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	national	planning	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	central	government)	

Minimal	impacts	                     Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	




	                                                                                                                                                 66	
	
• 	                                 • 	                                  • Population	displacement	              • Widespread	damage	to	infra-
                                      	                                  • Widespread	economic	loss	               structure	systems	and	services		
	                                                                        • Increased	cost	of	rescue	and	           (shelter,	transportation,	schools,	
                                                                           rehabilitation.	                        hospitals,	energy	supply,	com-
                                                                         • Minor	disruption	to	Communica-          munication)	
                                                                           tion	&	Electric	supply		                	
                                                                           	
	
                       Extreme	temperature	Impact	matrices	based	on	discussions	with	stakeholders	in	Myanmar.	

        Extreme	temperature	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	public	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	public	–	emergency	re-
                                                  sponse,	and	public	security)	
Minimal	impacts	                    Minor	Impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
• Health	&	disease	problems	        •   Excessive	sweating		             •   Heat	stroke	                        • Death		
                                    •   Minor	disruption	to	travel	      •   Interruption	of	school	hour		       • Heat	stroke		
                                    •   	Water	related	problems	         •   Snake	bite	                         • Decreasing	crop	production	
                                    •   Psychological	problems	          •   Decreasing	food	production	         • 	Widespread	forest	fires	destroy	
                                    •   Vector-borne	Diseases	           •   Localized	shortage	of	food	           homes	and	businesses	
                                    •   Heat	Exhaustion/	Heat	Stroke	    •   Localized	forest	fire	              • Widespread	displacement	of	
                                    •   Hypothermia	                     •   Migration		                           population	
                                    •   Isolated	shortage	of	food	                                                 	
                                                                                                                   	
                                    	
    Extreme	temperature	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	water	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	dams	and	irrigation)	
    Minimal	impacts	            Minor	Impacts	                  Significant	impacts	             Severe	impacts	
• 	                                 • Temporary	loss	of	telecommu-       • Minor	disruption	to	Communica-        • Not	enough	water	in	the	water	
                                      nication	and	electrical	power	       tion	&	Electric	supply	affecting	       sources	to	supply	irrigation	wa-
                                      may	affect	operations	               operations	                             ter	
                                                                                                                 • River	water	level	at	lowest	point	

    Extreme	temperature	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	agricultural,	forestry	and	environmental	sectors	(impacts	that	have	a	pri-
    mary	effect	on	farmers	and	forestry)	

Minimal	impacts	                    Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
• 	                                 • Isolated	damage	to	crops	          •   Loss	of	crops	                      • Crops,	loss	yield	&	Cultivation	
                                    • Soil	erosion	                      •   Loss	of	livestock	                  • Financial	losses	to	farmers	and	
                                    • 	                                  •   Financial	losses	                     forestry	
                                                                         •   Localized	forest	fire	timber	       • Widespread	forest	fires	and	
                                                                             losses	and	environmental	deg-         environmental	degradation		
                                                                             radation	
Extreme	temperature	Impacts	Matrix	for	transportation	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	transportation	net-
work)	

Minimal	impacts	                    Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
    	                               • Minor	disruption	to	travel	        • Disruption	to	Transportation	         • Widespread	disruption	to	
                                                                           infrastructure	(rail,	road,	inland	     Transportation	infrastructure	
                                                                           water,	airlines)	                       (rail,	road,	inland	water,	air-
                                                                                                                   lines)	

Extreme	temperature	Impacts	Matrix	for	energy	and	communication	sectors	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	energy	
                                        supply	and	communication	networks)	

Minimal	impacts	                    Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
    	                               • Temporary	loss	of	telecommuni-     • Short	break	of	hydro	power	           • Widespread	disruption	to	com-
                                      cation	and	electrical	power	may	     generation	                             munication	and	energy	supply	
                                      affect	operations	and	supply	      • Minor	disruption	to	Communica-          infrastructure	
                                                                           tion	&	Electric	supply	may	affect	
                                                                           supply	
                                                                         • 	
Extreme	temperature	Impacts	Matrix	for	health	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	health	services)	

Minimal	impacts	                    Minor	impacts	                           Significant	impacts	                Severe	impacts	
    	                               • Heat	stroke	case	load	increase	    • High	Heat	stroke	case	load	           • Widespread	loss	of	life	among	
                                    • Snake	bite	case	load	increase	     • Loss	of	life	among	certain	popu-        all	population	
                                    • Vector-borne	disease	case	load	      lation	groups	                        • Very	high	heat	stroke	case	load	
                                      increase	
Extreme	temperature	Impacts	Matrix	for	national	planning	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	central	government)	

Minimal	impacts	                    Minor	impacts	                       Significant	impacts	                    Severe	impacts	
• 	                                 • 	                                  • Limited	migration	from	affected	      • Widespread	migration	
                                      	                                    areas	
	

	


	                                                                                                                                                67	
	
  Flood	Impact	matrices	developed	by	Stakeholders	in	Mozambique.	The	matrices	were	developed	based	on	their	primary	impact	on	
   a	sector;	however,	the	effects	may	be	cumulative.	Impacts	on	water	sector	and	agriculture	sector,	and	local	government	responsi-
                         ble	for	services,	for	example,	will	likely	impact	the	public	and	emergency	responders.	

Flood	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	public	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	public,	emergency	response	and	public	securi-
                                                             ty)	
Minimal	impacts	                      Minor	Impacts	                          Significant	impacts	             Severe	impacts	
• Water	in	roads	but	people	can	      • Some	minor	roads	not	passa-           • Major	roads	un-passable	       • Large	scale	damage	to	ma-
  still	drive	through	                  ble.	Major	roads	affected	but	          and	damaged.	Disruption	to	      jor	and	minor	roads	
• Some	water	around	houses	             can	be	used	                            electricity	and	communica-     • Electricity	and	communica-
  	                                   • Houses	close	to	the	river	              tion	networks		                  tion	disrupted	across	large	
                                        inundated	but	people	can	             • Houses	and	streets	inun-         areas		
                                        evacuate	themselves	                    dated;	schools,	hospitals	     • Major	towns	and	cities	
                                      • Some	villages	cut	off	for	a	            and	other	public	services	       affected;	public	service	dis-
                                        short	period	of	time,	people	           disrupted	                       ruption	across	a	wide	area	
                                        are	safe	                             • Loss	of	life	and	large	dam-    • Large	scale	damage	and	
                                      • Possible	increase	in	water-             ages	                            loss	of	life	
                                        borne	diseases	(malaria,	             • Farms	inundated.	Issues	of	    • Agricultural	grounds	inun-
                                        cholera,	etc.	                          local	food	security	             dated	across	large	areas	
                                        	                                     	                                  with	significant	threat	to	
                                        	                                     	                                  food	security	
                                                                                                                 	
                                      	                                                                          	

            Flood	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	water	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	dams	and	irrigation)	

 Minimal	impacts	                         Minor	Impacts	                       Significant	impacts	              Severe	impacts	

• Roads	not	passable	by	small	        • Roads	and	bridges	flooded	            • Roads,	railways	and	bridg-     • Roads	not	passable	by	
  vehicles,	traffic	problems	           but	passable,	traffic	affected	         es	not	passable	at	all	          small	vehicles,	traffic	prob-
• Isolated	low	lying	land	flooding	   • Localised	flooding	in	rural	          • Dykes	start	overtopping	         lems	
  near	river		                          populated	areas	                      • Widespread	flooding	in	        • Isolated	low	lying	land	
                                      • Localised	flooding	in	low	              populated	rural	areas	           flooding		
                                        lying	areas	                          • Localised	flooding	of	urban	   • Roads	and	bridges	flooded	
                                                                                areas	                           but	passable,	traffic	affect-
                                                                              • Risk	to	lives	of	people	         ed	
                                                                              • Risk	to	lives	of	animals		     • Localised	flooding	in	rural	
                                                                                                                 populated	areas	
                                                                                                               • Localised	flooding	in	low	
                                                                                                                 lying	areas	near	river	
      Flood	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	agriculture	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	farmers,	forestry,	and	environment)	

Minimal	impacts	                      Minor	impacts	                          Significant	impacts	             Severe	impacts	
• Minor	flooding	to	low	land	and	     • Loss	of	crops	at	river	mar-           • Crops	and	animals	affected	    • Total	destruction	of	crops.	
  crop	areas	                           gins.	                                    (50-75%)	                    • Total	or	partial	destruction	
• Isolated	damage	to	vegetation	      • Interruption	of	some	small	           • Some	infrastructure	and	         of	infrastructure.	
	                                       systems	(irrigation).	                    irrigation	systems		         • Migration	of	people	and	
                                      • Elevation	of	water	levels	in	           	                                animals.	
                                        dams	and	other	places	(25-                                             • Different	diseases.		
                                        50%)*	                                                                 • More	costs	after	floods	due	
                                        	                                                                        to	destruction	of	infra-
                                        *Big	difference	from	drought	.	                                          structure	
                                        The	 production	 of	 crops	 can	
                                        increase	 after	 floods	 (higher	
                                        soil	 fertility,	 more	 especially	
                                        in	high	zones).	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	




 	                                                                                                                                       68	
 	
                                      Wind	Impact	matrices	based	on	discussions	with	stakeholders	in	Mozambique.	

Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	public	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	public	–	emergency	response	and	public	secu-
                                                           rity)	
Minimal	impacts	                            Minor	Impacts	                      Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
• Trees	blown	over	                         • Roofs	of	houses	damaged	          • More	vulnerable	houses	                •       Loss	of	life	of	both	people	
• Small	scale	damage	to	crops	              • More	trees	blown	over	in	           collapse		                                     and	animals	
                                              larger	areas	that	block	roads		   • Significant	damage	to	roofs	           •       Big	trees	fall	down.	
                                            • More	damage	to	agriculture		        of	many	houses.	More	trees	            •       Many	houses	collapse	or	are	
                                            • Small	boats	affected	that	are	      fall	down		                                    severely	damaged		
                                              used	for	transport	and	fish-      • Electricity	poles	fall	down,	          •       Electricity	network	severely	
                                              ing.	Engine	boats	can	still	op-     electricity	network	disrupt-                   disrupted	on	large	scale	
                                              erate	                              ed	on	larger	scale		                   •       No	more	boats	can	operate,	
                                            • Some	electricity	poles	dam-       • Ferries	cannot	operate,	also	                  even	big	ships	grounded	
                                              aged,	causing	minor	outages	        small	to	medium	engine	                •       Schools,	hospitals	and	many	
                                            	                                     boats	grounded		                               public	services,	damaged	
                                                                                • Primary	schools	cannot	be	                     and	some	cannot	be	used.			
                                                                                  used	because	of	safety.	Sec-               	
                                                                                  ondary	schools	can	still	be	
                                                                                  used.	
                                                                                • Hospitals	still	operational,	
                                                                                  but	possibly	electricity	
                                                                                  problems	
                                                                                  	
                  Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	water	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	the	dams	and	irrigation)	

     Minimal	impacts	                         Minor	Impacts	                        Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	

     	                                        	                                     	                                    • Loss	of	measurement	equip-
                                                                                                                           ment	
                                                                                                                           	

               Wind	Impacts	Matrix	for	the	agricultural	sector	(impacts	that	have	a	primary	effect	on	farmers	and/or	fishers)	

Minimal	impacts	                            Minor	impacts	                      Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
     	                                      • Evapotranspiration	      (20%	    •   Loss	of	crops	                       • Widespread	Loss	of	fishing	
                                              below	normal)	                    •   Loss	of	livestock	                     boats	and	gear,	loss	of	life	
                                              	                                 •   Financial	losses	                    • Crops,	loss	yield	&	Cultivation	
                                                                                •   Loss	of	fishing	gear	and	            • Soil	erosion	
                                                                                    boats,	loss	of	life	                 • Financial	losses	to	farmers	
                                                                                                                           and	fishers	
 	
                                          Flash	flood	Impact	matrices	developed	by	Stakeholders	in	Mauritius.	

                                                   Flash	Flood	Impacts	Matrix	for	First	Responders	

 Minimal	impacts	                           Minor	Impacts	                      Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
 •       1cm	Surface	water	on	road	         • 3-5	cm	surface	water	on	road	     •   30cm	surface	water	                  •       Up-to	and	above	1m	
 •       Low	visibility	                    • Traffic	jam	                      •   Accidents	                           •       Casualties	
 •       Slow	traffic	                      • Sporadic	accumulation	of	water	   •   Heavy	traffic	jam	                   •       Vehicles	washed	away	
 •       Very	short	duration	                 (compounds)	                      •   Disrupt	socioeconomic	activities	    •       Drowning	
                                            • Disrupt	outdoor	activities	           (schools,	transport,	business)	      •       	Inundation	of	larger	areas	
 	                                          • Small	area	affected	              •   Increased	exposure	                  •       Plied	vehicles	along	water	
 	                                          • Short	duration	(15	min)	          •   Stranded	students/workers	                   courses	
                                                                                •   Flooding	in	basements/	under-        •       Major	damage	to	all	infrastruc-
                                                                                    ground	parking,		                            ture	
                                                                                •   Larger	area	affected	                •       Overflooded	basement	and	
                                                                                •   Longer	time	duration	(30	min)	               underground	parking	
                                                                                •   Accumulation	of	debris	(branch-      •       Trapped	persons	
                                                                                    es,	rocks,	silt)		                   •       Major	Disruptions	of	essential	
                                                                                •   Blocked	drains	and	other	water	              services	(public	transport,	
                                                                                    courses	                                     communication,	power	supply,	
                                                                                •   Affect	certain	essential	services	           access	to	hospitals,	etc)	
                                                                                    (communication,	waste		wa-           •       Delayed	access	emergency	
                                                                                    ter/sewage	overflow)	                        responders		
                                                                                •   Reduced		sea	activities		            •       Contaminated		potable	water	
                                                                                •   Small	area	of	vegeta-                •       Significant	accumulation	of	
                                                                                    tion/agriculture	affected		                  debris	
                                                                                •   Cancelled	public	and	outdoor	        •       Larger	area	of		vegeta-
                                                                                    events	                                      tion/agriculture	affected	
                                                                                •   Minor	damage	to	infrastructures	     •       	
                                                                                    (road/	bridges/	buildings		          	



 	                                                                                                                                                           69	
 	
                                                      Flash Flood Impacts Matrix for Public

Minimal	impacts	                      Minor	Impacts	                         Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
• Traffic	jam	and	public	stranded	    • Soil	erosion	                        • Panic	behaviour	                       • Flooding	(Commercial	&	Resi-
• Power	supply	disruption	            • Crop	damage	                         • Debris	flow	                             dential)	
                                        	                                    • Socio-economic	activities	dis-         • Drowning	
	                                                                              ruption	                               • Deaths	
	                                                                            • Mass	casualty	                         • Animal	deaths	
                                                                             • Dam	failure	                           • Property	damage	(	Commercial	
                                                                             • Water	Disruption	                        &	Residential)	
                                                                                                                      • People	and	cars	trapped	in	
                                                                                                                        underground	parking	
                                                                                                                      • Communication	disruption	
                                                     Flash	Flood	Impacts	Matrix	for	WATER	

Minimal	impacts	                      Minor	Impacts	                         Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
• Excessive	spills	from	dams	         •   Damage	and	loss	of	equipment	      • Disruption	of	water	supply,	           • Immediate	casualties	
  causing	high	peak	flows	            •   Reduce	workforce	                    electricity,	transport	                • Disruption		
  	                                   •   Telecommunication	damage	          • Siltation	and	blockage	of	water	       • Sedimentation	of	lagoons	(death	
                                      •   Health	impact	                       intake		                                 of	aquaculture	organisms)	
	                                                                            • Water	contamination	&	prolifer-        • Overflow	of	feeder	canals,	dams,	
                                      •   Electricity	supply	cut	
	                                                                              ation	of	diseases		                      rivers,	etc.	
                                                                             • Damage	of	pipeline	                    • Agriculture	loss	
                                                                             • Disruption	of	air	traffic	services,	     	
                                                                               road	traffic	
                                                                             • Damage	water	resources	infra-
                                                                               structure	(feeder	canals,	dams,	
                                                                               boreholes,	etc.)	
                                                                             • Socio-economical	activities	
                                                                               	
	
                                Drought	impacts	matrix	based	on	discussions	with	stakeholders	in	Mauritius	

    Drought	Impacts	Matrix	for	Water	Sector	

Minimal	impacts	                      Minor	impacts	                         Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
• Unpleasant	environment	             •   Health	impact	                     • Socio-economic	disruption	             • Excessive	agriculture	loss	
	                                     •   Social	unrest	                     • Imbalance	of	ecosystem	&	biodi-        • Disruption	of	potable	water	
                                      •   Disruption	of	work	                  versity	                                 supply	
	                                     •   Reduced	hydro-electrical	activi-   • Spread	of	diseases	                    • Wildfire		
                                          ties	                              • Poor	sanitary	conditions	
    Drought	Impacts	Matrix	for	First	Responders	

Minimal	impacts	                      Minor	impacts	                         Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
• Occasional	Small	Fire	in	vegeta-    • Frequent	small	Fire	outbreaks	       •   Frequent	large	Fire	outbreaks	       •   Major	fire	outbreaks	
  tion	field		                        • Reduced	water	level	in	reser-        •   Water	shortage	                      •   Acute	Water	shortage	
	                                       voirs	                               •   Public	health	problem	               •   Major	Public	health	problem	
                                      • Reduced	supply	of	water	for	         •   Limited	agricultural	products	       •   Shortage	of	vegetables	
	                                       irrigation	                          •   Reduced	supply	of	livestock	         •   Major	sanitation	issues	
                                      • Reduced	water	level	in	river	        •   Disrupt	economic	activities	         •   Reduced	power	supply	
                                      • Localised	crop	failures	             •   Reduce	irrigation	                   •   Stop	operation	of	certain	indus-
                                                                                                                          try	
                                                                                                                      •   Affected	livelihood	
                                                                                                                      •   Dam/Reservoirs	drying	up	
                                                                                                                      •   	
                                                                                                                      •   Stop	irrigation		

Drought Impacts Matrix for Public
Minimal	impacts	               Minor	impacts	                                Significant	impacts	                     Severe	impacts	
• Wild fires                          •                                      • Sanitation                             • Agriculture sector (crops & live-
• Hydro-electric generation                                                  • Spike in vegetables prices               stock)
                                                                                                                      • Domestic water supply
                                                                                                                      • Social unrest
	
	                                                	




	                                                                                                                                                      70	
	
Annex	4	Impact	Forecast	and	Warning	Template	
1.   [colour]	Warning	for	{hazard}	

Validity	     Warning	                 Forecaster’s	Assess-   Hazard	Impact	Matrix	
                                       ment	

Issued	at:	   	                        	
	
	
Valid	
from:	
	                                                                                       	

Valid	to:	


2.   	[colour]	Warning	for	{hazard}	

Validity	     Warning	                 Forecaster’s	Assess-   Hazard	Impact	Matrix	
                                       ment	

Issued	at:	   	                        	
	
	
Valid	
from:	
	                                                                                       	

Valid	to:	



3.   	[colour]	Warning	for	{hazard}	

Validity	     Warning	                 Forecaster’s	Assess-   Hazard	Impact	Matrix	
                                       ment	

Issued	at:	   	                        	
	
	
Valid	
from:	
	                                                                                       	

	
Valid	to:	


	                                 	




	                                                                                     71	
	
ACTIONS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	          	



	              72	
	
Annex	5	Participant	Feedback	
	


     Q1,	Q3,	Q4:	5	=	excellent;	4	=	very	good;	3	=	good;	2	=	average;	1	=	poor	
     Q2:	5	=	exceeded	expectations;	4	=	met	my	expectations;	3	=	nearly	met	my	expectations;	2	=	
     did	not	meet	my	expectations;	1	=	Below	my	expectations	

	
	    Question	                                                                                               Rating	
1	   How	would	you	rate	the	overall	useful	of	this	event?	                                                   3.9	
2	   To	what	extent	did	the	workshop	meet	your	expectations?	                                                3.6	
3	   To	what	extent	did	the	workshop	help	you	learn	good	practices	in	multi-hazard	im-                       3.5	
     pact-based	early	warning	systems?	
4	   To	what	extend	did	the	workshop	provide	networking	opportunities	                                       3.5	
	    	                                                                        Comments	
5	   What	aspects	of	early	      •   How	they've	made	impact	forecasting	operational,	Sharing	of	data/information	and	exper-
     warning	systems	                tise.	
                                 •   River	flooding,	urban	flooding	
     /impact-based	warning	      •   Guided	tour	for	weather	forecasting	centre	and	Disaster	management	in	Shanghai	
     are	you	most	interested	    •   Institutional	collaboration	for	anticipation	of	impacts;	Best	approach	to	engage	vulnerable	
     to	learn	from	Shanghai	         communities	in	monitoring	of	impacts	and	updating	impact	thresholds	
     Meteorological	Service?	    •   Dissemination	systems	for	forecast	information	and	early	warning.	The	fact	that	the	fore-
                                     casts/warnings	must	be	impact-based	
                                 •   Work	station,	forecasting	area	
                                 •   I	am	most	interested	to	learn	about	how	instrumentation	and	communication	was	devel-
                                     oped	and	how	interactions	between	events	are	considered	
                                 •   Instrument,	network,	telecommunication	system	among	others,	technology,	capacities,	
                                     research	sector	relationship	with	SNS,	how	is	the	collaboration	with	other	agencies	(other	
                                     hazards	and	other	regions)	
                                 •   Estimation	of	reconstruct	amounts	and	possible	impacts	on	populations.	
                                 •   Impact	of	early	warning	system.	
                                 •   	Rainfall	estimate	forecasting;	and	tools	and	methods	of	forecasting	for	areas	of	thunder-
                                     storm	developments	
                                 •   Establishment	of	the	brief	agencies	coordinating	before	its	out	to	the	public;	Color	coding	
                                     and	actions	follow;	and	establishment	of	the	Shanghai	Emergency	Warning	Center.	
                                 •   Public	Weather	Service;	swell	forecasting;	and	introduction	to	their	meteorological	and	
                                     forecasting	system	organization	and	setup.	
                                 •   Warning	dissemination	
                                 •   I	am	interested	in	not	only	impact	based	warning	and	forecast	but	also	real	time	monitoring	
                                     system	from	Shanghai	Meteorological	Service.	
                                 •   I	 am	 more	 interested	 in	 dissemination	 system	 about	 early	 warning	 system/	 impact	 based	
                                     warning	to	their	communities.	
                                 •   Model	based	EWS,	dissemination	of	warnings	
                                 •   Technology	
                                 •   The	responses	from	disaster	manager,	after	warning	based	to	met	forecast	
                                 •   Communication	network,	coordination	among	stakeholders,	meteorological	radars	
                                 •   Stakeholders	coordination	before	and	during	disasters,	and	their	infrastructure	and	human	
                                     resources	
                                 •   Flash	flood	forecasting;	and	Joint	warning	operations	
                                 •   Numerical	weather	prediction	and	coupling	of	climate	and	hydrological	models.	Will	also	
                                     like	to	learn	about	issuing	warning	using	color	coding.	
                                 •   Impact	based	early	warning	system	of	SMS;	NWP	system	of	SMS;	AWS	and	observation	
                                     system	of	SMS,	marine;	and	Forecast	of	SMS	are	the	most	interested	to	learn	for	me	
                                 •   Forecasting	sectoral	impacts	of	different	hazards	-	quantifying	the	size	and	nature	of	actual	
                                     impacts	
                                 •   How	they	integrate	impact	and	probability	of	occurrence	when	issuing	warnings	
                                 •   Impact	based	forecast	approach	developed;	and	working	groups	thematics		
                                 •   During	this	workshop,	we	were	impressed	by	how	the	Shanghai	Meteorological	Service	
                                     manages	meteorological	and	hydrological	data.	We	are	aware	of	their	technological	ad-
                                     vances	in	meteorology	and	hydrology.		

	                                                                                                                                 73	
	
                                  •   Interagency	coordination,	precision	in	data	transmission.	

6	   What	did	you	like	best	      •   Sharing	of	experience	between	countries	
     about	this	workshop?	        •   There	is	no	exercise	to	know	how	the	flood	models	are	forecasting	(…..).	(…….)	the	type	of	
                                      models	are	(…..)	forecasting	
                                  •   Practical	exercise	met	the	expectation,	for	some	extent.	It	is	to	be	practice	by	ourselves	to	
                                      improve	the	knowledge.	The	lecture	delivered	by	DG/SMS	opened	eye	for	the	ability	of	im-
                                      pact	based	warning.	The	knowledge	was	enhanced	by	the	related	presentations	provided	by	
                                      other	presenters	
                                  •   Ability	to	understand	countries	share	similar	requirements	and	have	very	different	solu-
                                      tions;	Visit	of	the	forecasting	center;	Experience	of	the	organizers	both	on	meteorology	and	
                                      emergency	response	/	decision	making	
                                  •   Group	work	and	discussion.	Best	practices	exchanges.	
                                  •   To	know	about	SMS	developed	its	system	and	how	it	is	managing	alerts.	
                                  •   Learn	 about	 other	 experiences,	 I	 recognized	 very	 different	 scopes	 and	 realities,	 I	 realize	
                                      about	the	importance	about	integrating	hydro-met	knowledge	
                                  •   The	fact	that	enough	time	was	allocated	to	group	works	which	allowed	for	individual	partic-
                                      ipation	was	excellent.	
                                  •   Implementing	impact-based	forecast	and	warning	services	and	including	all	the	exercise.	
                                  •   Practical	work	and	group	interaction	
                                  •   As	a	forecaster,	what	the	weather	will	do	it	the	fundamental	question	all	weather	forecast-
                                      ers	should	concern	about.	Exercises	on	how	to	develop	matrix	for	each	scenario	are	the	way	
                                      forward	for	developing	SOPs	and	actions	to	be	performed	for	impact	based	forecast.	
                                  •   The	interactive	sessions	on	the	last	day	on	impact	matrix	exercises.	Recommend	more	time	
                                      allocated	in	to	these	types	of	sessions	in	the	future;	More	effective	group	exercises.	
                                  •   The	idea	of	impact-based	warnings.	The	different	case	studies	were	eye	opening.	
                                  •   I	like	one	of	the	topic	is	exercise-3	impact	based	forecast	and	warning	exercise.	
                                  •   I	am	really	into	doing	the	last	day	activities	-	impact	based	forecast	warning	exercise	using	
                                      respective	country	maps.	
                                  •   International	participation;	and	sharing	of	ideas	and	processes	of	MHEWS	
                                  •   Facilities	
                                  •   I	like	the	practice,	because	we	get	easily	the	liability	to	work;	and	to	make	warning	impact	
                                      after	forecast	do	warning		
                                  •   Impact	based	warning,	weather	impact	matrix,	multi-hazard	early	warning	system,	good	
                                      practices	of	SMS.	
                                  •   have	clear	idea	of	impact-based	forecasting	and	risk	based	warning	
                                  •   Last	day	activity	on	impact	forecasting	
                                  •   Presentations	from	various	countries	helped	me	learn	about	the	various	challenges	and	
                                      successes	of	the	various	countries.	Presented	me	with	new	ideas	on	how	to	improve	our	
                                      system.	
                                  •   Practical	exercise	for	impact	based	forecast/warning.	Last	day	lecture/group	work.	
                                  •   Interaction	with	regional	countries	and	sharing	experiences	
                                  •   Discussions	and	exercises	around	impact	matrices	
                                  •   Assistance	from	WBG's	staff;	Understanding	about	impact	based	forecast;	Organization	has	
                                      been	good	
                                  •   Thanks	to	the	organizers,	I	really	appreciated	the	geographical	diversity	of	the	participants	
                                      from	around	the	world,	and	the	opportunity	to	exchange	the	experience	of	data	manage-
                                      ment	in	hydro-meteorology,	to	learn	more	about	how	data	are	obtained	and	processed.		
                                  •   The	exchange	of	experience	between	countries	and	different	types	of	forecast	modelling.	

                                  	
7	   What	 did	 you	 like	 least	 •   Long	presentations	(Some	too	exhaustive	and	theoretical)	
     about	this	workshop?	        •   Time	constraints/limitations	
                                  •   language	that	was	used	
                                  •   I	think	that	interactions	between	hydrometeorological	events	and	other,	for	instance,	geo-
                                      logical	event	was	poor.	
                                  •   I	expected	more	information	about	multi-hazard	approach;	and	to	know	how	to	work	with	
                                      other	sectors.	I	can	see	the	relation	about	impacts,	but	not	during	the	emergencies	are	
                                      evolving	(cascade	effects)	
                                  •   Difficult	to	indicate		-	probably	my	inability	to	look	around	Shanghai	City.	A	tour	of	the	city	
                                      would	have	ever	enhanced	my	knowledge	better.	
                                  •   Time	management	of	the	workshop;	Presentation	times	should	be	kept	to	10	minutes.	
                                  •   It	was	a	little	intense.	
                                  •   All	the	topics	are	very	interesting	for	my	colleague,	because	my	colleagues	try	to	improve	
                                      impact-based	forecast	process.		No	least	about	this	workshop.	
                                  •   There	are	nothing	dislike	activities	and	events	
                                  •   No	field	based	application	was	observed.	
                                  •   The	materials	of	the	workshop	
                                  •   The	training	about	wind	speed	forecast.	this	is	important	for	the	population	security.	

	                                                                                                                                       74	
	
                               •   There	was	no	field	visit	
                               •   Had	no	common	case	study	to	discuss	among	the	countries	
                               •   Powerpoints	in	Chinese	language.	
                               •   Less	time	to	learn	about	each	other	individually	and	also	to	explore	the	city	of	Shanghai	
                               •   internet	system	
                               •   Communication	 barriers	 and	 inconsistent	 time	 and	 opportunities	 allocated	 to	 participants	
                                   to	share	and	contribute.	
                               •   Too	many	presentations	from	SMS	in	day	1	and	2.	
                               •   Workshop	duration	has	been	very	short	
                               •   The	time	lost	for	the	interpretation	did	not	allow	us	to	go	deeper	and	explain	better	the	
                                   subject.	Despite	the	interpretation,	the	language	barrier	made	it	difficult	to	comprehend	
                                   the	lecturers.		
                               •   The	program	was	very	packed	and	they	should	have	account	for	jetlag	and	change	of	time-
                                   zones.	
                                   	

8	   Please	share	any	other	   •   Opportunity	to	work	on	an	operational	scenario	for	the	region.	Bring	together	forecasters,	
     comments	with	us	             hydrologists,	DM	practitioner	to	work	on	messaging.	Exchange	with	other	countries	show	
                                   met	and	DRM	valuable.	
                               •   Presentation	may	be	any	language	with	translation	but	the	Powerpoint	slides	to	be	in	Eng-
                                   lish	preferably;	Please	try	to	include	some	exercise	(practical)	works	in	(…….)	programme;	
                                   and	Name	board	to	be	organized	with	country.	
                               •   It	is	much	important	to	include	English	Version	of	presentation,	even	if	conduct	with	other	
                                   language.	
                                   *	Time	allocated	for	practicals	was	more	or	less	enough;	It	is	much	helpful	if	you	provide	
                                   some	literature	about	impact	based	warning	
                               •   I	recommend	more	examples	of	how	institutions	collaborate	in	Shanghai	through	practical	
                                   cases	and	how	capacities	have	evolved	over	time	through	return	of	experience.	The	country	
                                   presentations	through	case	studies	was	a	very	nice	approach	to	show	what	happens	in	reali-
                                   ty;	most	countries	have	not	followed	the	template	and	this	results	in	long	presentations.	
                               •   The	issue	of	adequate	time	for	the	exchanges,	discussions	and	exercises	should	be	looked	
                                   at;	The	workshop	has	been	very	informative	and	interactive	for	me,	but	for	the	time	con-
                                   straints,	I	would	have	wished	that	we	continue.	
                               •   more	time	used	for	translating.	Not	expected	in	this	kind	of	workshop	from	participants.	
                                   Participants	should	speak	English	to	same	time	which	is	sometimes	("ANNOYING")	
                               •   I	think	that	the	public	was	not	chosen	correctly.	WB	could	have	suggested	previously	the	set	
                                   couple	to	participate	in	the	workshop.	I	believe	that	experiences	from	developed	countries	
                                   will	be	useful	for	us	(Chile)	not	only	one	segment	of	economies	(for	instance,	to	share	and	
                                   know	how	USA;	Germany;	Japan;	others)	works	in	this	issues...	I	hope	that	share	with	us	all	
                                   presentations	and	materials	
                               •   The	opportunity	to	meet	all	the	participants	from	around	the	world	created	a	very	good	
                                   platform	for	me	(not	only	to	learn	from	their	experience	here	at	the	workshop,	but	also	to	
                                   create	a	platform	for	partner	discussions	which	we	care	back	in	our	countries)	
                               •   This	workshop	was	very	useful	for	me,	because	we	can	share	the	experience	between	all	
                                   the	participants.	We	can	have	a	better	understanding	of	the	value	of	multi-hazard	impact	
                                   based	warning.	
                               •   Meteorologists	mush	be	given	more	time	interaction	duration	and	information	about	fore-
                                   casting	techniques	
                               •   Sharing	lessons	learnt	was	absolutely	helpful	for	the	development	of	impact-based	forecast	
                                   for	my	country;	The	present	of	a	disaster	manager	from	my	country	would	have	been	use-
                                   ful;	Impact-based	forecast	demands	more	responses	for	delivery	of	a	new	service,	hence	for	
                                   it	to	success,	we	need	financial	support	from	all	levels.	
                               •   Please	require	English	fluency	for	participants;	Very	good	organization	of	workshop;	Please	
                                   note	here	that	the	information	packages	given	to	us	was	out	of	date	especially	transporta-
                                   tion	advices/guidance.	Please	provide	updated	information	to	participant;	please	focus	
                                   more	interactive	sessions	dedicated	to	the	Pacific	perspective	and	needs.	
                               •   Very	good	workshop.	I	would	like	to	coordinate	more	exercise	for	impact-based	warning,	
                                   because	we	are	trying	to	issue	impact-based	warning.	If	you	have	other	training	or	work-
                                   shop	on	this	subject,	please	invite	my	colleagues.		
                               •   We	have	to	save	our	people	and	world	as	much	as	we	can	although	we	don’t	change	the	
                                   climate	situations.	
                               •   My	expectations:	hands	on	learning	of	new	technology,	softwares,	procedures	etc	that	I	can	
                                   take	back	and	implement	or	advise	country	on	a	way	forward.	Too	much	time	spent	on	
                                   country	presentations.	There	are	all	of	hydrological	models	with	meteorological	models	that	
                                   would	have	provided	better	understanding	to	improve	our	impact	forecast	+	assessment.	
                               •   The	well	coming.	the	organization	on	time,	But	the	material	is	very	poor,	no	time	to	visit	
                                   Shanghai	city.	The	duration	is	too	short.	The	Shanghai	meteorologist	hire	the	visitors	him-
                                   self.	
                               •   It	was	nice	to	know	about	forecasting	and	early	warning	systems	of	different	countries	in	
                                   the	globe,	including	Africa,	Pacific	Islands	and	South	America;	Thank	you	WBG,	GFDRR	and	

	                                                                                                                               75	
	
        SMS	
    •   If	there	was	a	field	visit	of	some	community	where	the	EWS	is	good	implemented,	was	able	
        to	give	more	idea	how	they	have	been	doing,	would	provide	more	knowledge	on	the	sys-
        tem's	effectiveness.	
    •   For	the	Chinese	presentations,	it	would	have	been	good	if	their	slides	are	in	English!	
    •   Will	be	good	to	have	hands-on	training	on	some	few	applications	or	more	demonstrations	
        on	how	the	early	warning	systems	works.	
    •   We	need	more	information	for	impact	based	forecast/warning	with	color	code.	More	prac-
        tical	exercise	for	specific	impact.	We	need	to	know	how	to	consider	base	data	for	color	code	
        impact	based	forecast/warning.	
    •   More	informational	materials	could	be	prepared	for	participants.	
    •   We	live	on	the	same	planet	where	no	one	is	safe	from	the	evil	effects	of	the	climate	change.	
        This	workshop	should	be	reproduced	in	different	continents.	
    •   I’d	like	to	thank	the	organizers	for	the	workshop.	It	is	of	important	to	multiply	the	thoughts,	
        the	 activities	 that	 we	 carry	 out	 before,	 during	 and	 after	 the	 projects	 (???).		 It’s	 also	 im-
        portant	to	foresee	the	translation	and	more	or	less	the	languages	and	issue	the	certificates	
        of	participation.			

    	
	
	




	                                                                                                             76	
	
