CASE STUDY


Outpatient in its DNA
MedLife: Changing the Culture of Healthcare in Romania

March 2017
ABOUT IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on leveraging
the power of the private sector to tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. Working with private
enterprises in more than 100 countries, IFC uses its capital, expertise and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty
and promote shared prosperity.

ABOUT THE CASE STUDY
Expanding access to quality and affordable health care is a central element to eliminating extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity. The World Bank Group has a goal to end preventable deaths and disability through
Universal Health Coverage (UHC). In many developing countries, governments do not have the capacity to service the
entire population and private health care providers often play a critical role in meeting societal needs.

IFC’s health practice is developing case studies that demonstrate the ability of the private sector towards achieving
global and national health care goals. Through a focus on efficiency and innovation, certain business models can
provide better outcomes at a lower overall cost to society.

WRITTEN BY
This case study was authored by Ann M. Casanova with valuable inputs from IFC colleagues: Ioan Cleaton-Jones,
Mona Hassan, Chris McCahan, Alexandre Oliveira, and Elena Sterlin.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special note of appreciation is extended to MedLife, especially to Mihai Marcu, Dr. Nicolae Marcu, Dorin Preda, and
Alis Lupu for sharing their experience and data with us. The author is grateful for the many insights provided by IFC
colleagues. Special thanks to Elizabeth Price and Irina Sarchenko for communications advice, and to Leticia Crentsil for
copy-editing and for the creative design. 

DISCLAIMER
The findings, interpretations, views and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) or of the World Bank or the
governments they represent. While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided
on a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind. IFC may not require all or any of the
described practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or
projects that adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-
by-case basis with due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
© International Finance Corporation 2017. All rights reserved.

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law.

COVER PHOTO: MedLife
                                                                          Photo © MedLife
Table of Contents
  Forever Thankful to the People at MedLife				                      1

  From a Two-Bedroom Medical Practice to a Healthcare Network				   5		

  A Diversified Business Model Anchored in Outpatient Care				      7	

  Adopting a Day Surgery Model in Romania				                       11

  Selected Features About the Business Model				                    15

  The Role of IFC				                                               19

  Conclusion				21
Photo © MedLife
“FOREVER THANKFUL TO THE PEOPLE AT
MEDLIFE!”


“All of a sudden, Aneliss rolled her eyes to one side, as if she didn’t know where
she was, and began to vomit. She started to cry and then went into a strange state,
she was just staring aimlessly,” explained her mother, Diana U. Her frail daughter,
just barely 13 months old, went on to have a seizure. Her mother had suspected
that something was not right with her daughter since she was born. Early on, she
had bags under her eyes and when she was nine months old, small veins appeared
above the bridge of her nose and her eyes had swollen significantly. Blood tests
did not reveal any particular issue but her mother was worried that the veins might
burst, so they were very careful when handling her.
The parents had planned on taking Aneliss to be seen in Bucharest, where
there is better quality care, but after this seizure they called 112 and
took her to the emergency room in Constanta. A CT scan showed that
there was a brain hemorrhage which could not be treated locally. The
neurosurgeon referred them to a public hospital in Bucharest. At 4:00




                                                                                                                            Photo © MedLife
a.m., they arrived and the doctor told them to “enjoy it while it lasts; we
don’t know what could happen later.” Those words were very jarring
to the parents, and the mother responded by saying, “Doctor, I have no
intention to bury my child.” That doctor ultimately referred them to
Dr. Stefanita Dima at MedLife.
                                                                                      Twenty years ago, the
In addition to the MRIs and CT scans that had been done, Dr. Dima
                                                                                      brain surgery that saved
ordered an angiogram, which provided a very clear view of what was
happening. Dr. Dima told the parents that they were dealing with a very               Aneliss’ life would not
rare condition—pial para-galenic arteriovenous fistula—a type of venous               have been possible in
aneurysm, which compressed the nerves and reversed the blood flow. This
                                                                                      Romania but MedLife
caused the epileptic seizures and the eyes to bulge. This was the first case
                                                                                      successfully cured the
in Romania and there had only been six such cases in the world.
                                                                                     little girl’s rare condition.
Anelis needed brain surgery. The father cried for two days in a row
fearing that they would lose their little girl, but the mother told him
she did not accept that—whatever happened, she must live. It was
an emotional roller coaster for them given the complicated nature of the surgery. The medical team inserted
metallic spirals (coils) that corrected the aberrant communication of the vessels at the site of fistula and a resin
consolidated the entire structure, allowing the blood to resume its normal flow.


                                                                                                    Outpatient in its DNA | 1
              The surgery, which was done in September 2016, was a success. It was the first of its kind in Romania and Aneliss’
              case was the seventh in the world to be treated with modern techniques since 2010. Aneliss woke up without any
              complications, was much livelier than prior to the surgery, and had a big appetite. Reflecting on the experience,
              Diana said, “We found a team of consummate professionals at MedLife, who helped my daughter become a normal
              child. She is laughing again and wants to get up and walk—she had started to walk right before her first seizure.
              I’m happy and can’t wait to take her home! We are forever thankful to the people at MedLife!”

              Twenty years ago, such a complex surgery would not have been possible in Romania. Mr. Mihai Marcu, Chairman
              of the MedLife Board, explains, “MedLife was able to successfully address this case because of the high level of
              quality of our medical team and the state-of-the-art technology in which we are always investing in. This positions
              us to manage an increasing number of high complexity interventions, which are comparable to the procedures
                                                    performed in high-ranking hospitals abroad.”

                                                              MedLife, S.A. is the leading private, for-profit healthcare provider in Romania,
                                                              serving over 2 million patients annually with 3,300 employees, of which nearly
                                                              2,000 are doctors and 1,000 are nurses. MedLife has achieved such market
                                                              penetration by offering “a one-stop shop” approach for patients through a
                                                              network that integrates 37 outpatient clinics, 8 hospitals, 3-day care units, 26
                                                              laboratories with 143 sample collection points, 10 pharmacies, and 8 dental
Photo © MedLife




                                                              clinics. Its corporate subscriptions, pre-paid employer provided healthcare
                                                              packages for employees, have reached over 500,000 individuals. Most of its
                                                              patients are seen on an outpatient basis.

                       Mihai Marcu                            In 20 years, MedLife dramatically elevated the availability of quality
                       Chairman of the Board                  healthcare, bringing it out of a communist era mentality and infrastructure
                                                              and putting its services on par with several of its European neighbors. It
                       In 20 years, Medlife                   has demonstrated that the private sector can be trusted to provide effective
                       dramatically elevated                  medical solutions. MedLife has become the leading healthcare provider
                       the availability                       in Romania by offering innovative, effective, affordable, and good quality
                       and the quality of                     healthcare.

                       healthcare, bringing                   The company has established a geographic footprint in about half of Romania
                       it out of a communist                  and it has reached 80 percent of inhabitants in the areas where MedLife has a
                       era mentality and                      presence. Over a period of 20 years, it has provided medical services to over
                                                              5 million unique patients—this accounts for about 25 percent of the overall
                       infrastructure and
                                                              Romanian population. It is quite rare for a single private health service
                       demonstrating that
                                                              company to have treated such a large share of the country’s population. In
                       the private sector                     addition, 70 percent of its patients are women.
                       can. provide effective
                                                   IFC played an important role in MedLife’s growth and expansion through
                       medical solutions.
                                                   different stages of its development. In 2005, IFC took an equity stake in the
                                                   company with a $5 million investment and a EUR 5 million ($6.23 million)
              loan.1 This was later followed by two separate loans over the next decade totaling EUR 20 million ($24.3 million)
              from IFC’s own account. In addition, in 2011, IFC mobilized a EUR 40 million ($55.6 million) syndicated loan. In
              December 2016, IFC supported MedLife in going public. It was the first healthcare company to be successfully listed
              on the Bucharest Stock Exchange. In 13 years, the company’s revenues have skyrocketed. In 2003, the company’s
              revenues were $1.5 million and as of December 2016, they rose to an estimated EUR 116 million, ($128.3 million).

                   1	 Foreign exchange rates were as follows: 2005 = US$1: EUR 1.246; 2010 = US$1: EUR 1.327; 2011 = US$1: EUR 1.392; 2016 = US$1: EUR 1.106.
                       Source: Reuters.


                  2 | Outpatient in its DNA
  TOP 3 SUCCESS FACTORS
  Becoming the largest private healthcare provider in Romania was made possible in large measure because of
  its hyperclinics, its focus on the patient experience, and its pioneering attitude.




                 HYPERCLINICS                                            PATIENT                                                   PIONEERING
                                                                         EXPERIENCE                                                ATTITUDE

     MedLife introduced the                                  MedLife fosters a medical culture                         MedLife was convinced that they
     “hyperclinic” concept to the                            that is focused on the best care                          could do better than the status
     Romanian market. A hyperclinic                          experience for the patient. For                           quo in the post-communist era
     is a very large clinic that treats a                    many Romanians, this begins                               and they introduced a number of
     number of medical issues on an                          through employer-based corporate                          firsts in Romania. They were the
     outpatient basis. This concept                          subscriptions that provide access                         first to introduce the hyperclinic
     was revolutionary in Romania                            to MedLife doctors for annual                             concept, the first to offer a fully
     at that time. Romanians had                             exams and basic care. If issues are                       integrated solution for patients
     believed that the hospital was                          identified, care is escalated to the                      on site, the first to open a private
     the only place to get problems                          next tier, typically an outpatient                        hospital for Romanians, not just
     solved, because communist                               clinic. Across its network, it                            expatriates, the first to hire their
     medical systems were typically                          improved the patient experience by                        own doctors as employees, the first
     hospital-centric.                                       standardizing care and covering a                         to offer transparency in pricing for
                                                             large number of specialties—ten of                        patients, the first to introduce the
     The hyperclinic brings together                         which are specialized niches.2                            day surgery model in Romania,
     a number of medical specialties                                                                                   and the first healthcare company
     under one roof and compliments                          It attracts qualified doctors and is                      to successfully publically list on the
     high medical quality with                               constantly increasing capabilities.                       Bucharest Stock Exchange.
     state-of-the-art diagnostic and                         It provides a clean medical
     treatment equipment, labs and                           environment and has a very low                            While some of these features may
     pharmacies. With its “one-stop                          infection rate. It eliminated the                         have already existed in other parts
     shop” model, MedLife helped                             “grey envelope,” a widespread                             of the world, MedLife was the first
     change the culture in Romania                           practice in public hospitals where                        to introduce them to the Romanian
     toward a greater acceptance of                          patients are expected to make                             market and did so successfully.
     medical solutions that can be                           informal payments to doctors                              These efforts helped to change
     done on an outpatient basis.                            prior to receiving treatment. It                          the culture of healthcare in the
     The hyperclinic is the gateway                          eliminated this practice by hiring                        country. It shattered stereotypes
     and referral coordination hub                           doctors directly and paying them                          and redefined patient expectations.
     for its other health services.                          well. Unlike at public institutions,                      It proved that the private sector
                                                             everything the patient needs for                          has the power to safely resolve
                                                             treatment is provided by MedLife                          medical problems from the simple
                                                             on site, without the need for the                         to the complex—with quality care.
                                                             patient to provide medications and
                                                             medical consumables in order to
                                                             be treated. It has gained patient
                                                             trust in a country grappling with
                                                             corruption and has built a strong
                                                             brand based on its good reputation.



2 Aesthetic and reparatory surgery, thyroid surgery, assisted human reproduction, gastroenterology, maternal-fetal conditions, proctology, psychiatry, and psychotherapy.




                                                                                                                                             Outpatient in its DNA | 3
                            Photo © MedLife




4 | Outpatient in its DNA
FROM A TWO-BEDROOM MEDICAL
PRACTICE TO A HEALTHCARE NETWORK

Seven years after the fall of communism in 1989, market reforms began to allow the establishment of private
medical practices in Romania. At that time, Dr. Mihaela Marcu Cristescu, a well-known pediatrician was one of
the first movers to establish a private sector practice. She opened a small clinic in a two-bedroom apartment in
Bucharest where she offered pediatric and gynecological services, as well as general examinations. The clinic was
called “MedLife.” Three years later, she expanded the practice to include additional specialties of ophthalmology,
dermatology and ear, nose and throat (ENT).

Over the next 10 years, Dr. Cristescu was joined by her two sons, Nicolae Marcu, a psychiatrist, and later by
Mihail Marcu, a former banker, and together they went on to diversify and grow the family business. They
thought big and sought to change the culture and become the leader in the Romanian private healthcare market.
They introduced other segments including laboratories (2000), occupational health services (2002), and the
“Hyperclinic” (2004).

In the early days, hyperclinics brought together over 20 medical offices under one roof—a comprehensive mix of
high-quality medical outpatient services. However, if the patient’s treatment needed to be escalated to the next
tier, the patient would have to turn to public hospitals but the remnants of the communist system left a public
healthcare infrastructure that was severely underfunded and crumbling.

Public hospitals lacked basic equipment that was necessary to ensure patient safety and facilities were unclean,
exposing patients to the risk of infection. Medical skills were out of date and there was no funding to upgrade
them. Even in these conditions, patients experienced long waits to be seen. Although there was at the time—and
there still is—universal health coverage, patients are expected to provide medical staff with informal payments
to be seen. Furthermore, several basic products were not covered and patients would have to pay for these out
of pocket. It was very common for patients to have to pay for hospital bed accommodation separately, buy their
own medicines and other materials from a private pharmacy, and bring them to the public hospital for use in their
treatment.

MedLife decided that it could do better. The Romanian economy was growing at the time and the family set out
to establish a private hospital in Romania. At that time, one private hospital, Euroclinic, was operating in the
country, but it was targeted at the expatriate community, rather than Romanians. MedLife engaged IFC Advisory
Services to provide expert guidance on the business of establishing the first private hospital for Romanians. They
wanted a mass market product that was not geared toward the top tier of society and that was within reach for
Romanians.

As with MedLife’s other ventures, it embraced core values of price transparency—before treatment, high standards
of medical quality, equipping its facilities with the latest technology and bringing in international expertise. It also
ensured that facilities were clean, patients would be seen at their appointment time, and patients would not be
asked for informal payments. Patient volumes suggest that the market has accepted MedLife’s model and that the
company is bringing good value to Romania.




                                                                                                    Outpatient in its DNA | 5
                            Photo © MedLife




6 | Outpatient in its DNA
A DIVERSIFIED BUSINESS MODEL
ANCHORED IN OUTPATIENT CARE

BUSINESS LINES

Today, MedLife has six business lines that span all the key healthcare segments - ambulatory, inpatient, laboratory,
diagnostic imaging, and pharmacies. Below is a brief summary of the top three business lines by revenues -
corporate subscriptions, clinics, and hospitals.

1.	 CORPORATE SUBSCRIPTIONS

     MedLife introduced this business line in 2001. As of September 2016,
     it had the largest corporate subscriber base in Romania with more
     than 4,100 companies and half a million subscribers. Corporate
     subscriptions are an important aspect of the strategy as it provides a
     major gateway for patients to its network. MedLife sells to companies
     a variety of prepaid medical service packages that cover a range




                                                                                                                                                                       Photo © MedLife
     of preventative services, including annual check-ups, basic doctor
     consultations, and some lab tests. Surgeries are not normally included
     in the corporate subscription package, although in many cases the
     public health insurance can help to supplement the cost at a MedLife
     facilities. In addition, it also offers occupational health services that
     are mandatory under Romanian law.                                                                             Hyperclinics are very large
                                                                                                                   clinics that handle several
2.	 CLINICS
                                                                                    treatments on an outpatient
     Hyperclinics are very large clinics—over 3,000m2 (approximately
     32,300 ft2)—that handle several treatments on an outpatient basis              basis without hospitalizing
     without hospitalizing the patient. Today, hyperclinics integrate about         the patient. Today, MedLife’s
     50 medical specialties, including 10 centers of excellence, diagnostic         hyperclinics integrate about
     imaging, and laboratories under one roof.3 MedLife invests heavily in
                                                                                    50 medical specialties.
     the latest medical equipment and devices to ensure accurate diagnosis
     and treatment. Large cap-ex equipment such as MRI’s and CT scans
     have been installed in hyperclinics to facilitate access for patients. This
     is a differentiating factor from the competition. All these features have contributed to patient convenience, to
     building a culture of trust, and building the MedLife brand.


  3 MedLife’s 50 medical specialities are Allergology and clinic immunology, infectious diseases, cardiology, pediatric cardiology, dentoalveolar surgery, aesthetic
     and reparatory surgery, general surgery, pediatric surgery, thyroid surgery, assisted human reproduction, dermatovenerology, diabetes, nutrition and
     metabolic diseases, endocrinology, gastroenterology, physio kinetotherapy and medical recovery, genetics, geriatrics and gerontology, gynecology, hematology,
     homeopathy, speech-language pathology, labor medicine, family medicine, general medicine, internal medicine, sports medicine, maternal-fetal conditions,
     nephrology, neurosurgery, neurology, pediatric neurology, ophthalmology, oncology, ear nose and throat (ENT), orthodontry, orthopaedics, pediatrics,
     pneumology, proctology, psychiatry, psychology, psychotherapy, radiology and medical imaging, rheumatology, stomatology, and urology. The specialties
     highlighted in bold are considered centers of excellence.




                                                                                                                                        Outpatient in its DNA | 7
                                                                                                                             Photo © MedLife
        By providing effective healthcare solutions, MedLife helped to cultivate greater acceptance of outpatient care.
        It is worth noting that MedLife was providing outpatient care long before the public health authorities started
        to make it a priority. The clinics, particularly the hyperclinics, are the main engine that generates business for
        the other five business lines.

3.      HOSPITALS

        MedLife believes that an integrated solution is necessary to provide patients with the best possible medical
        experience. By providing a complete ecosystem, it can complete the cycle of care within its network, thereby
        enhancing its credibility as a medical provider. This element is also important to attract and retain good
        doctors throughout its network.

        MedLife has pursued a mix of organic growth and acquisitions that has resulted in eight hospitals in its
        portfolio. In addition to general hospitals, it has added hospitals that specialize in maternity, pediatric,
        orthopedic, neurosurgery and plastic surgery. It has the largest chain of private hospitals with a total of
        530 beds and 20 operating theaters. MedLife follows European standards of safety protocols, and delivers
        integrated treatment solutions for patients. It has worked hard to upgrade the Romanian system to place
        it on levels that compare with other European countries. It has obtained CONAS accreditation, the most
        prestigious certification offered to hospitals in Romania.




     8 | Outpatient in its DNA
MedLife helped to

cultivate greater

acceptance of

outpatient care

long before public

health authorities

started to make it




                                                  Photo © MedLife
a priority.




                                                 Photo © MedLife




                     Outpatient in its DNA | 9
                             Photo © MedLife




10 | Outpatient in its DNA
ADOPTING A DAY SURGERY MODEL IN
ROMANIA

A number of technological advances have enabled medicine to evolve toward minimally invasive techniques,
which expose patients to lower risks, while advances in anesthetic drugs are enabling faster recovery times.
These advances are allowing patients to be discharged from hospitals faster. In developed countries, it has been
the normal practice for several years to operate on patients and send them home the same day without spending
the night at the hospital. In the United States, over 75 percent of surgical procedures are performed this way;
however, in Romania, this is a relatively recent concept.

The World Bank conducted a study and concluded that the Romanian
system had too many hospitals that were old and inefficient. Further,
according to Eurostat, in 2014, the average length of in-patient hospital
stay was just over eight days.4 Believing that these indicators can be
improved, the World Bank advised the Government of Romania to




                                                                                                                                                                  Photo © MedLife
consolidate and transform hospitals toward a model that was focused
on more acute and long-term care, while shifting less complex services to
outpatient care and daily hospitalization. In order to further incentivize
daily hospitalization, the National Health Insurance House (NHIH)
began reimbursing out-patient surgeries at a higher rate than those same
surgeries that are conducted on an in-patient basis.                                                            Dr. Nicolae Marcu, CEO

In 2005, MedLife was the first to introduce limited day surgery to the                                          Day surgery has many
Romanian market. In the early days, MedLife found that Romanians                                                benefits. For patients
were not yet ready to adopt this concept. Dr. Marcu explains, “in our
                                                                                                                there is minimal disruption
part of the European Union, if you go home in five hours something is
wrong.” While Dr. Marcu found that it was very difficult to change the                                          and faster recovery.
mindset toward this type of surgical approach, it has gradually been                                            For providers, it allows
gaining acceptance. When MedLife introduced the concept, it would do                                            higher patient volumes
an average of 30 day surgeries a month—today, it does about 30 a day.
                                                                                                                and spreads fixed costs
MedLife has created space within two of its hospitals and one hyperclinic                                       over a greater number of
where it dedicated 100 beds to day surgery. It offers a total of 110
                                                                                                                patients. Patients, public
procedures on a day-surgery basis or a one-day admission basis, where
                                                                                                                insurance payers, and
the patient remains in the hospital for a maximum of 12 hours. Some
examples of procedures are tonsillectomy, laparoscopic appendectomy,                                            hospitals all benefit from
node biopsy, cervical polyp excision, and knee arthroscopy. In addition,                                        reduced costs.
MedLife offers some treatments such as chemotherapy, which is done on
a one or two-day basis.


  4 Hospital discharges and length of stay statistics. Eurostat. http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Hospital_discharges_and_length_of_
    stay_statistics Last visited on February 24, 2017.




                                                                                                                                   Outpatient in its DNA | 11
                                                                                                                          Photo © MedLife
While many patients are eligible for day surgery, not all are. MedLife takes the patient’s medical history into
account to determine if the patient is the right candidate. A pre-admission testing program includes guidelines
and algorithms based on high, medium and low risk procedures as well as patient comorbidities, the simultaneous
presence of two chronic diseases or conditions in a patient. Day surgeries are performed by skilled surgeons,
anesthesiologists, and other medical staff.

Once the patient is in recovery, MedLife ensures that certain criteria are met before the patient is discharged. This
includes patient orientation, stable vital signs, controlled pain, understanding the course of medication, ability to
dress and walk, and ensuring that there is a responsible adult to take the patient home and care for them over the
next 24 hours.

While this is still not a core part of the business, MedLife has found many benefits of day surgery. For patients,
there is minimal disruption, reduced risk of cross-infection, as well as faster and better recovery in the comfort of
their own home. The benefits for the hospital are higher volumes of patients, greater efficiencies, greater flexibility
in scheduling operations, as well as lower overall procedural costs. Patients, public insurance payers, and hospitals
benefit from reduced costs. Further, hospitals can serve a greater number of patients while optimizing fixed costs,
making it financially attractive. By reducing inefficient and long lengths of stay, hospitals can free up beds for
more complex conditions.




12 | Outpatient in its DNA
Medical advances
are allowing
patients to
be discharged
faster, reducing
inefficient and
long lengths of




                   Photo © MedLife
hospitals stay.




                   Photo © MedLife
                             Photo © MedLife




14 | Outpatient in its DNA
SELECTED FEATURES ABOUT THE
BUSINESS MODEL

GROWTH OF THE NETWORK

MedLife currently has a presence in about half of Romania and in time, it intends to fully cover all of Romania.
It seeks to open hyperclinics in cities of over 250,000 inhabitants and clinics in cities with populations over
150,000. It does not plan to enter markets with populations of less than 150,000.

In the early days, its growth was largely organic, but a fragmented market has offered opportunities to mix
organic growth with mergers and acquisitions. As of January 2017, it had acquired a total of 23 companies. It
seeks companies that are performing well and are managed by people with entrepreneurial drive, and who are
open to innovation. It targets companies where it can add value by complementing the existing services by adding
specialties, doctors, labs, and upgrading equipment. MedLife prefers to take a majority stake in the company and
it keeps the founders as managers. This is a very important element of success and is also a reason why many
target companies prefer to be acquired by MedLife rather than by its competitors.


                     FIGURE 1: FOOTPRINT OF MEDLIFE’S SERVICES - 2017




Source: MedLife




BRANDING

MedLife enjoys a strong brand reputation, but since it acquires well performing companies whose brands also
bring value, it co-brands for a period of time. Depending on the company, this can be anywhere from 6 months to
2 years to complete the branding integration.




                                                                                               Outpatient in its DNA | 15
                                                                                                                       Photo © MedLife
MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

MedLife was lucky to be a family-run business that brought both medical and business expertise to the company.
While Dr. Cristescu no longer has day-to-day responsibilities in the company, the brothers have divided their
responsibilities according to their area of specialization. Dr. Nicolae Marcu, CEO, oversees all the medical aspects
of the business while Mihai Marcu, Chairman of the Board, focuses on business strategy and financials.

In terms of management of acquired companies, it has a very flat organizational structure, with about 40
managers. MedLife gives deference to the expertise of the acquired company and those managers have a great
deal of latitude to make decisions so long as it is within the negotiated budget guidelines. The managers and
teams of the newly acquired companies are provided training in areas including financial management and
business process improvement to assist them in achieving optimal outcomes. They are held accountable through
key performance indicators.

MEDICAL QUALITY AND STAFFING

From around 2005 to 2007, it was difficult to recruit doctors to private practice because doctors feared that the
private sector could not provide a secure future. Competitors were able to attract doctors from public hospitals
for a few hours a day, but this model was not satisfactory to MedLife. MedLife wanted doctors to provide
continuity of care to patients. Dr. Nicolae Marcu explains, “It is difficult to train and maintain a doctor if that
person is only on our premises for three hours a day.” So the starting point for MedLife was to hire doctors as
employees for their hospitals and clinics.

Due to low investment in the healthcare sector- in 2016, Romania spent about 5 percent of GPD on healthcare—
doctors at public hospitals have long been underpaid. Medical staff routinely demanded informal payments from
patients to make up the shortfall. MedLife wanted to bring dignity back to the medical profession and eliminate
the corruption. It achieves this by paying its doctors and staff appropriately. It prohibits staff from taking
informal payments and immediately fires those that do. It has only had two cases in 20 years.



16 | Outpatient in its DNA
MedLife succeeded in attracting doctors with a policy that provides a salary, a schedule, opportunities to manage
personal career interests without state intervention, opportunities to be up to date with the latest medical
developments, having clean facilities to treat patients, and having the latest technology. It was also able to stop
the hemorrhaging of doctors and nurses who were leaving to work in other EU countries. MedLife created jobs
for 2,000 doctors and nurses that would have otherwise emigrated. In addition, it has successfully attracted the
Romanian diaspora pursuing careers in the medical profession abroad to return to Romania.

REVENUE STREAMS

As of December 31, 2015, corporate subscriptions were responsible for the largest share of revenues. This was
followed by clinics, which includes all of its outpatient care. Hospitals, which largely include day surgery, were the
third-largest driver of revenues.

REVENUE SOURCE BREAKDOWN

Most of MedLife’s revenues are received directly from patients on an out-of-pocket basis and are paid for at the
time of service. In 2014, 88 percent of revenues were cash payments made by patients, while 12 percent was from
the National Health Insurance House (NHIH). Further breakdown shows that its clinics represent 95 percent of
cash transactions while hospitals brought in 28 percent of revenues from NHIH. Corporate subscriptions are paid
100 percent in advance of services, representing an important cash flow. Private health insurance is negligible and
very few Romanians rely on it.

FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY

 Its overall EBITDA5 margins are in line with industry standards for integrated providers. Its compounded annual
growth rate has been on a growth trajectory and was 13 percent in 2012. This was driven by organic growth and
acquisitions. Its diversified business model is heavily reliant on cash transactions, corporate subscriptions, and
outpatient clinics which has positioned the company to be financially sustainable.



                                     FIGURE 2: REVENUES AS OF DECEMBER 2015 (US$)


                                                                    Stomatology
                                  Pharmacy                              494,563
                                    4,905,551                                                            Other Revenues
                                                                                                                139,436

                     Laboratories                                                                            Corporate
                        19,094,733
                                                                                                            Subscriptions
                                                                                                               27,867,361




                         Hospitals
                          20,171,235                                                                        Clinics
                                                                                                          25,316,819




  5 EBITDA is an acronym for Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization. It is a measure of a company’s cash flow and allows investors
    to see how much money a company is making before its deductions.



                                                                                                                               Outpatient in its DNA | 17
                             Photo © MedLife




18 | Outpatient in its DNA
THE ROLE OF IFC

The relationship between IFC and MedLife began in 2006 when MedLife approached IFC for advisory support to
privatize a public hospital. That effort was ultimately opposed by the parliament and MedLife decided to build its
own hospital organically with IFC’s Advisory Group support. At that time, MedLife had one large clinic, one lab
and 44,000 corporate subscriptions. In 2006, IFC took a 20 percent stake for a $5 million investment and provided
a EUR 5 million ($6.4 million) loan to complete the building of Life Memorial Hospital. MedLife and IFC went
on to partner on two more investments totaling EUR 20 million ($24.4 million) to increase the national coverage
of its services by expanding into second and third tier cities and by broadening its service offerings through organic
growth and acquisitions.

MedLife was interested in doing business with IFC because it brought long-term debt financing to support the
building of hospitals that was not readily available in the local market. It was also very attractive to have IFC, a
member of the World Bank, as a shareholder because it brought goodwill to the company.

IFC also brought valuable expertise to MedLife, more so than a conventional bank. For instance, IFC helped
the family business to consider corporate governance issues that would position the company as it grew. Mihai
reflected, “Rarely in banking do you see such sophisticated persons.” At that time, IFC did not formally appoint
a board member to MedLife, but Alexandre Oliveira, then the investment officer, served as a sounding board with
which the family could explore opportunities in a confidential environment. IFC’s support included a number of key
people “which gave comfort to the family.”

IFC was interested in doing business with MedLife because the investments complimented the World Bank’s country
strategy to support a major health sector reform project that was aimed at providing better quality health services.
It was also well aligned with IFC’s global health strategy, which is aimed at increasing access to healthcare by scaling
up operations across regions, moving down market, and creating centers of excellence in emerging markets. In
addition, it would provide employment opportunities to retain skilled professionals, many of whom were leaving the
country.

Over the last decade, IFC and MedLife have had a mutually beneficial relationship that has resulted in better
healthcare offerings for Romanians. MedLife concluded its IPO in December 2016 and IFC partially exited for a
second time. IFC has already recovered the value of its initial equity investment and continued to retain a partial
stake in the company.

 




                                                                                                 Outpatient in its DNA | 19
                             Photo © MedLife




20 | Outpatient in its DNA
CONCLUSION

MedLife pioneered the creation of an integrated healthcare network and proved that the private sector was capable
of providing good healthcare solutions for all Romanians. It has shown that private hospitals in Romania are safe
and are capable of handling complex procedures, like the brain surgery that Aneliss—the little girl with the fistula
underwent—with successful health outcomes.

Through its corporate subscriptions, it has expanded preventative medicine and it demonstrated that a large number
of services can be done on an outpatient basis, thereby improving outcomes for the patient while reducing costs. It
plans to continue to expand its day surgery model and other services.

By promoting dignity in the medical profession, it has enabled doctors to pursue their professional dreams in
an environment that has raised the standards of professional quality and ethics. MedLife thrives on transparent
practices and it hopes to provide a demonstration effect that will become the norm in the sector. MedLife created a
culture of trust with patients that has enabled it to build a strong reputation and brand. This trust has resulted in a
large number of patients choosing MedLife for the overall quality of its services.




 




 
                                                                                                                          Photo © MedLife




                                                                                                  Outpatient in its DNA | 21
STAY CONNECTED

WEB: www.ifc.org/health

LINKEDIN: www.linkedin.com/company/ifc-health

TWITTER: #ifchealth
For more information about IFC’s investments in health please contact:

Elena Sterlin                                     Chris McCahan
Global Manager, Health and Education              Global Lead, Health Care
Email: Esterlin@ifc.org                           E-mail: cmccahan@ifc.org
Washington, D.C., USA                             Washington, D.C., USA
www.ifc.org/education                             www.ifc.org/health
www.ifc.org/health




2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
