Survey Says…
Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
By Vikramaditya Khanna and Roman Zyla



Financial crises have a way of bringing corporate governance to the foreground. For in-
terested parties wanting to know more, there is an impressive body of research that looks           About the emerging
                                                                                                    mArket investor survey
at companies and the connection between strong governance and better performance.
However, the existing literature only goes so far. It does not look at whether the level and        •	 Twenty-nine respondents,
                                                                                                       culled from a total universe
quality of firm-level corporate governance plays a role as large-scale investors consider
                                                                                                       of 1,000 emerging market  
investment decisions in emerging markets.                                                              investment firms.
                                                                                                    •	 Respondents included
                                                                                                       decision-makers at
This study of emerging market investors sheds light on this issue and reveals that emerging            institutional investment
market investors care deeply about corporate governance.                                               firms, private equity funds,
                                                                                                       hedge funds, pension
                                                                                                       plans, and investment
The findings have significant implications, not only for the emerging markets business and             advisors.
finance community, but for policy makers, academics, the media, as well as for develop-             •	 Respondents included firms
                                                                                                       investing in publicly-held
ment finance institutions focused on sustainable economic development in these countries.              companies in one or more
                                                                                                       emerging markets.
                                                                                                    •	 The interviews with
                                                                                                       investment decision makers
Key findings:                                                                                          were off-the-record and
                                                                                                       were conducted through
At a                            For emerging market                Company                             face-to-face and telephone
                                                                                                       interviews in New York and
global level                    fund investment                    specific                            London.
                                decisions                                                           •	 Interviews took place in
                                                                                                       April–May 2010.

1	  Recent financial crises
    have elevated the
    importance of good
                                3	   Corporate governance is a
                                     critical factor in emerging   5	   Investors often do not
                                                                        invest in emerging market
                                                                        companies with poor
                                     market investment
    governance.                      decisions.                         governance.



2	  Specific corporate
    governance-related
    reforms could make
                                4	   Investors are willing
                                     to pay a premium for          6	   Lack of transparency is
                                                                        a red flag for emerging
                                                                        market investors.
                                     better-governed emerging
    countries more attractive        market firms.


	
    investment destinations.

    Emerging market investors
                                                                   7	   Board independence
                                                                        is a low-level concern
                                                                        for emerging market
    believe that better firm-                                           investors.
    level governance can make
    up for country weaknesses
    in corporate governance.
                                             Background

                                             Increasingly, emerging markets are becoming important engines of global growth.
                                             Many have become the focus of the investment community and the average inves-
                                             tor. In fact, business publications around the globe are spotlighting a number of
“The literature has grown                    these countries, particularly in the aftermath of financial crises, because some of
to include studies of                        these nations, such as India and China, represent the few bright spots in an other-
how governance reforms                       wise moribund global growth outlook.
and practices in specific
countries have influenced                    There is a vast literature on corporate governance, and specifically corporate
firms in those countries.”                   governance in emerging markets. Connections between better governance and
                                             firm market value and performance, especially in emerging markets, are captured.
                                             Additionally, there are also studies that explore whether the investment decisions
                                             of foreign investors are connected to governance concerns, and how these investors
                                             may change the governance and performance of the firms in which they invest.

                                             Some “law and finance” studies examine the connection between better governance
                                             and greater dispersion in ownership structures, and deeper equity markets.1 The
                                             literature has grown to include studies of how governance reforms and practices
                                             in specific countries have influenced firms in those countries. For example, a series
                                             of recent papers have found that better governance in Indian firms correlates with
                                             higher firm market valuations, and that the governance reforms promulgated in
                                             India caused higher firm market valuations for those firms subject to the reforms.2
                                             Further, studies on other emerging markets, in particular Russia and Korea, found
                                             that better governance is associated with higher valuations and that the relationship
                                             may be causal (from governance to performance).3 More recent studies of emerg-
                                             ing markets have attempted to explore what features of governance matter most
                                             in enhancing firm value, and through what channels do they operate with reduc-
                                             ing tunneling being a factor of prime importance.4 These findings are now being
                                             amalgamated into various governance rankings, which are being adjusted to reflect
                                             the unique concerns in certain markets and ownership structures.5

                                             Despite the relative plethora of studies, there are few that explicitly inquire from
                                             investors what importance they place on corporate governance arrangements when
                                             making investment decisions. However, it seems important to explore this question
                                             because governance, which is a form of investor protection, might be expected to
                                             influence how investors behave; this will be critical for understanding the role of
                                             governance. This is especially so in the context of emerging markets where many
                                             of the institutions protecting investors in more developed markets may not be
                                             fully present. In light of this, it is important to obtain a better appreciation of how

                                             1
                                               See La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1997); La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998); La Porta,
                                             Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999); and La Porta, Lopez de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2006).
                                             2
                                               See Balasubramaniam, Black and Khanna (2010); Dharmapala and Khanna (2010); Khanna (2009); Black and Khanna
                                             (2007); and Khanna and Mathew (2010).
                                             3
                                               See Black (2001) (Russia); Black, Love, and Rachinsky (2006) (Russia); Black, Jang, and Kim (2006) (Korea); Black, Jang, and
                                             Kim (2006a) (Korea); Black, Kim, Jang, and Park (2006) (Korea); and Black, Kim, Jang, and Park (2008) (Korea).
                                             4
                                               See Bertrand, Mehta, and Mullainathan (2002); and Atanasov, Black, Ciccotello, and Gyoshev (2010).
                                             5
                                               See Bebchuk and Hamdani (2009); Khanna (2009); Gilson and Gordan (2004); and Aggarwal, Erel, Stulz, and Williamson (2009).



2  |  Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
emerging market funds use governance in their investment decisions, what gover-
nance attributes matter most to them, and if these attributes vary with the country,
the size of the firm, its ownership structure, or its industry.

Other studies examine whether the investment decisions of foreign inves-
tors are connected to governance concerns, as well as how these investors may
change the governance and performance of firms in which they invest. At
a conceptual level, if governance is important for any set of investors, then
it should be for this set of investors (as they may have enough invested and
enough expertise) to be able to overcome collective action and information
asymmetry concerns. The studies to date provide evidence that governance
is important to these investors, but these studies do not focus on the largest
emerging markets nor do they uncover the kinds of governance factors inves-
tors look at when deciding where to invest in emerging markets. Given that
emerging market firms may raise certain kinds of governance concerns in a
more prominent manner than developed market firms (e.g., controlled versus
dispersedly held firms governance concerns), and that the background institu-
tional structures are less consistent across emerging markets, one might expect
that the behavior and optimal governance of emerging market funds could be
different than the behavior of similar investors in more developed markets.

Along with the heightened focus on emerging market investment opportunities
has come an increased attention to corporate governance considerations. There has
been a considerable amount of research conducted, but a comprehensive review of
this research revealed a significant information gap: most of the studies look at
developed markets, with little in-depth research on the role of governance in the
investment decisions of funds and blockholders in the major emerging markets.

Until now, that is.

The Emerging Market Investor Survey directly addresses this information gap,
focusing on the specific corporate governance issues of importance for investors in
emerging markets. To explore this issue, this paper engages in a series of interviews
with funds investing in emerging markets. Engaging in interviews allows one to
obtain a more textured and qualitative assessment of the role of governance in the
decisions of investors in emerging markets. Moreover, by examining these qualita-
tive assessments one obtains a better appreciation of what attributes of governance
matter most in emerging markets, and why and how these attributes might differ
from those relied upon in developed markets.6




6
 See F&C study (2009) (discussing that sovereign credit ratings of the major emerging markets may be ranging into invest-
ment grade category, but their corporate governance characteristics are very mixed, with Russia and China trailing behind
Brazil, India, and Korea).



                                                                       Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies  |  3
                                             One also begins with a few priors in this study. In particular, firms in emerging
                                             markets may suffer from greater concerns associated with minority expropriation
                                             than firms in more developed markets due to the ownership structure in emerging
                                             markets. Thus, it seems that one might expect investors in emerging markets not
                                             to rely on the same kinds of governance attributes as in developed markets, but
                                             perhaps only some of them or different ones altogether. Second, funds investing in
                                             emerging markets also face a different enforcement and institutional structure than
                                             funds investing primarily in more developed markets (e.g., slower and more incon-
                                             sistent enforcement at times). This suggests that investors in emerging markets can-
                                             not expect to use litigation as easily (if at all) in the home countries of their target
                                             firms. Thus, self protection measures (perhaps in the form of greater due diligence,
                                             larger discounts on price, or greater focus on firm level governance attributes)
                                             may be more important. Both of these matters, and others are difficult to assess
                                             by relying on financial data alone. Detailed and informed interview responses can
                                             provide a better sense of these matters and add a broader context to other studies.
                                             Moreover, this study also provides firms and policy-makers in emerging markets
                                             with a sense as to what investors in emerging markets focus on and how good prac-
                                             tices corporate governance plays a role in that equation.


                                             STUDY ApproAch

                                             The approach involved talking directly with the people whose business is to make
                                             investment decisions about opportunities in emerging markets.


defining Corporate
                                             Engaging decision-makers in conversation and using a standardized set of ques-
Governance                                   tions enabled a more nuanced assessment of the role of governance in their
For the purposes of this study we            investment decisions than other approaches. The approach also helped develop
assumed IFC’s view that corporate            a deeper understanding about the aspects of governance that matter most in
governance refers to the structures
and processes for the direction
                                             emerging markets, along with why and how these aspects might differ from what
and control of companies; a                  matters most in developed market investment decisions.
definition very similar to that of
the OECD. During the interviews              The approach allows a tightly targeted focus on emerging markets: out of a
we consciously did not define
corporate governance per se, but
                                             universe of several hundred firms that have investments in emerging markets, a
took the Funds representatives’ use          surprisingly small number (35) have business exclusively in emerging markets.
of the term to assume any aspect             From the 35 firms identified, 29 agreed to participate.
of corporate governance, hence
several references to issues of
ethics or honesty are not included
in IFC’s definition.




4  |  Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
Profile of respondents

Respondents included individuals who made investment decisions for their firms
or who advised others on such decisions.




FIGURE 1. WHERE DO                      FIGURE 2. INVESTMENT                       FIGURE 3. OWNERSHIP                     FIGURE 4. INVESTORS’
RESPONDENTS INVEST?                     HORIZONS                                   STAKES in TARGET FIRMS                  INDUSTRY PREFERENCES


      7% Southeast Asia                                                                                                          3% Media
                                                                                                                                 7% Natural Resources
      7% India                                                                                                                   3% None but Liquidty is Key
      7% Brazil/Latin America
      3% China
                                                                                         34% Various Levels
      10% Asia                                                                           3% Above 40 %




                                               69% Longer Term

                                               10% Shorter Term
                                                                                         53% Between 5% and 40%

                                                                                         10% Less than 5%
      66% Board Based                          21% Multiple Term                                                                  87% Board Based



Range of countries suggests that        Different time horizons might influence    The percentage of the fund’s own        Respondents are focused on
governance concerns are not driven by   governance considerations and response     ownership stake could influence their   investments in a broad range of
issues in a single market.              strategies if problems arise after         approach to governance.	                industries. Their responses likely
                                        investment: depending on duration of                                               represent the views of a broad section
                                        investment, investors might sell their                                             of emerging market investors. 	
                                        shares, try negotiating with management,
                                        or take the litigation route.




                                                                   Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies  |  5
“There are certain triggers                 key STUDY findings
that alert us to potential
                                            The key findings of this study fall into two categories:
areas of concern, such as
                                            •	 Overall importance of governance considerations in emerging market investment decisions,
the ratio of derivatives to                    and
total assets and the loan-                  •	 Specific governance factors that influence emerging market investment decisions.
to-deposit ratio.”
                                            In this section, the findings are detailed in turn.

—Emerging Markets Investor
Survey respondent
                                            1. Corporate governance is a critical factor in
                                            emerging market investment decisions

A detailed approach to                      All 29 respondents said that governance is an important factor in making their
governance assessments
                                            investment decisions. They all said that governance was part of their pre-invest-
One investor described his
                                            ment due diligence on a target firm.
organization’s approach to assessing
the governance of target firms as
follows. Target firms are assigned          Still, respondents reported different approaches to conducting governance assess-
three separate ratings:                     ments, ranging from the very formal to the more informal. The larger the invest-
• 	Quality of governance: internal          ment—and the more resources the firm has—the more formal and standardized
   proprietary governance rankings          the approach.
   based on thorough due diligence,
   including assessment of objective
   and subjective factors such
                                            All reported a process that includes learning about the firm, its controller, and its
   as overall ethical standards,            management; and it often involves traveling to the country and spending time at
   responsiveness to institutional          the firm. This is particularly the case for investor organizations with less formal
   investors, conflicts of interest,        assessments, which tend to rely on the opinions of their locally-based employees
   and general levels of trust in           who visit the firms.
   management.
• 	Directional indicator: to signal
                                            On the other hand, groups with more formal assessments tend to rely on both
   whether the firm’s governance
   is improving, getting worse, or          objective and subjective governance factors, and often purchase assessment ser-
   staying the same.                        vices from an outsourced service provider. The number of firms spending more
• 	Investment position: target firms        money on such outsourced services since the financial crisis has significantly
   receive “buy,” “sell,” or “hold”         increased.
   rating.
Target firms are assigned a grade (1,
                                            More than one-quarter of the respondents reported that they conduct back-
2, or 3) based on country-level and
firm-level factors.
                                            ground checks on the firm and its key players.

                                            Others noted the value of a relationship with native-born professionals from
“We find that the subjective factors        the country of interest who also had experience working in developed markets.
within the governance indicators            Respondents said that such individuals are valuable assets who can offer deeper
are more closely tied to stock price
                                            insight into the local business culture and how things work.
movements than the objective
factors,” the investor noted.




6  |  Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
Some of the surveyed investors said that their approach to governance was as-                     More than half of investors
sociated with a staged investment strategy. First, the investment firm decides on a               surveyed said they would
country and gathers information about a specific industry that tends to generate                  pay at least 10 percent
higher returns. Before making a direct investment in a company, the investor                      more for a better-governed
tests the waters by purchasing shares in a fund active in this country.                           firm compared to a similar,
                                                                                                  poorly-governed firm in
“This gives us some say in governance, and helps us find out more about a particu-                the same emerging market.
lar firm and its environment before we risk too much,” explained one respondent.


2. Investors are willing to pay a premium
for better-governed emerging market firms

Investors interviewed said they would pay more for a better governed firm in an
emerging market than they would for a firm that came with some governance
gaps. Although it was difficult to put an exact number on the value of gover-
nance given the range of other country and firm-level factors to consider, all
surveyed investors expected to pay a higher premium for better governance in an
emerging market firm than the premium they might pay for a firm with better
governance in developed markets.

What is the reason for this variance? There is an assumption that more developed
markets come with stronger institutional frameworks and better institutional
governance. The perception among investors is that a well-functioning gover-
nance framework in a country can help minimize their concerns. The reverse also
appears to be a strongly-held perception among investors.




                                                 Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies  |  7
                                             The data (see Table 1) clearly show that investors will pay more for emerging
                                             market companies with good governance.

                                             However, in response to a question about the exact size of the premium they
                                             would be willing to pay for better governance in an emerging market firms, sur-
                                             vey respondents were divided.

                                             Of note: more than half of the investors surveyed said that they would be willing
                                             to pay at least 10 percent more for a better-governed firm, compared to a similar
                                             firm in the same emerging market that lacks strong governance.

                                             While 38 percent responded that they would pay at least 20 percent more for
                                             shares in such a company, some few suggested that would pay even more—closer
                                             to a 40 percent premium.




 Table 1. The investment premium for good governance in emerging markets

                                                                                                             Percentage of
                                                                                                             respondents who agreed
 Statement read to 29 emerging market investment decision-makers                                             with statement

 My firm would pay a larger governance premium for emerging market companies than for developed
 market companies                                                                                                      100%
 My firm would pay a premium of at least 10 percent for good governance in an emerging market
 company                                                                                                                55%
 My firm would pay a premium of at least 20 percent for good governance in an emerging market
 company                                                                                                                38%
 My firm considers governance a threshold for an emerging market investment decision, and for how
 much of a premium we would be willing to pay                                                                           41%




One hundred percent of                          Emerging market investments versus developed market
the investors interviewed                       investments: a corporate governance comparison
said they would pay a
                                                Investors surveyed said there were differences in the way developed markets investors
higher premium for good                         think about corporate governance compared to how they approach the issue. Here
governance in an emerging                       are some highlights:
market firm than what                           •	 “Developed markets investors tend to focus on governance as a way to avoid risk
                                                   while emerging markets investors often focus on governance as a way to enhance
they would pay for a                               profitability.”
similar firm in a developed                     •	 “Developed markets investors often look at governance later in the investment
market.                                            cycle, but they could benefit from the due diligence approach used by emerging
                                                   markets investors, for example, to look at management quality early on.”




8  |  Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
The combination of a threshold effect and then a higher premium in emerging
markets relative to more developed markets raises interesting questions about
the impact of governance. If this is an accurate description, then the following
graphs (Figure 5, Panels A to C) provide a view of the impact of governance.

This visual depiction of the impact of governance shows its importance and
opens up areas that should be explored further. For example, how far would
firms need to go in improving governance before investors would be willing to
invest? What determines these thresholds? What are the key corporate gover-
nance attributes that would influence the decision?


Figure 5. IMPROVED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE IMPACT ON PREMIA

Panel A                                                         Panel B                                                       Panel C
                                                                                                                                       Premia Gap Between Better and Average Governance
                              Developed Markets                                             Emerging Markets                                Firms in Developed and Emerging Markets
                                                                         16                                                            8
         12
                                                                         14                                                            7
         10
                                                                         12                                                            6
          8                                                              10                                                            5
                                                                Premia
Premia




                                                                                                                              Premia
          6                                                              8                                                             4
          4                                                              6                                                             3
                                                                         4                                                             2
          2
                                                                         2                                                             1
          0
                  1       2        3        4       5      6             0                                                             0
                                                                                1       2         3      4     5      6                    1       2       3       4       5       6
                              Governance                                                                                                                  Governance
                                                                                                  Governance

              Better Governance            Average Governance                 Better Governance          Average Governance                Developed Markets           Emerging Markets




3. Emerging market investors believe that better
firm-level governance can make up for country
weaknesses in corporate governance

More than 40 percent of the investors surveyed said that well-governed firms in
emerging markets could mitigate some of their concerns about investing in cer-
tain countries. Investors would look positively on firms that outperform gover-
nance practices in the market in which they operate.

Respondents also agreed that it is important to understand the country’s context
and local business customs:

“In some Latin American countries, the best way to make things move more
quickly was to court the local church bishop and get him to advocate for your
cause, rather than relying on other typical community outreach methods to en-
courage locals to support your venture,” one of the interviewed investors said.




                                                                               Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies  |  9
                                             Another investor shared this story about doing business in Russia:

                                             “In Russia, it is essential to have at least one Russian citizen involved in your ven-
                                             ture, and to let it be known widely that at least one Russian was involved. This is
                                             partly for familiarity reasons. It is also a preventative: sometimes, local Russians
                                             might attempt to forge the articles of association and file them with the registrar
                                             without informing other shareholders. The presence of the local Russian as an
                                             investment partner can help reduce this risk, or ensure more effective policing.”


                                             4. Investors often do not invest in emerging market
                                             companies with poor governance

                                             Survey respondents also said that they expected steep discounts for shares in
                                             emerging market companies that lack strong governance practices.

                                             All of the surveyed investors said that they would not invest in a firm with deeply
                                             problematic governance.

                                             Trust plays an important role here, they said:
                                             •	 Can investors trust that management is speaking the truth?
                                             •	 Does management demonstrate clear commitments to better governance by
                                                working to institute basic corporate formalities, a code of ethics, a governance
                                                officer and the like?




10  |  Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
While this finding—and the finding that investors are willing to pay more for
better governance—is significant, some questions still remain:
•	 What is the corporate governance threshold for investment?
•	 How do investors determine these minimum thresholds?
•	 What specific governance factors influence the size of the premium paid for
   shares in a better-governed firm?

Such questions could form the basis for future research.


5. Lack of transparency is a red flag for emerging
market investors

Investors surveyed noted that the corporate governance factors they would pri-
oritize for emerging market companies might not be the same as the factors that
are important for developed market investments.

Of critical importance to emerging market investors: transparency and disclosure.

All of the investors surveyed said that willingness to disclose factored heavily into
their decision making. All emphasized the importance of information on the
motivations of a target firm’s controlling shareholder. All said that a target firm’s
reluctance to provide information or meet with shareholders would represent
significant causes for concern.

Several respondents elaborated on these concerns. Here is what one respondent said:

“The opacity of disclosure at a firm we were looking at, related to payments made
to government officials for licenses to conduct business, led us to be concerned
not only about the general bona fides of the other representations being made,
but also about the potential for being caught in violations of the U.S. Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act.”

In fact, nearly 40 percent of respondents expressed concerns about compliance
with this law, and observed that they look carefully at investment targets with
this issue in mind.

One investor pointed out that lack of disclosure could be indicative of additional
problems. For example, a management team that did not want to discuss finan-
cial results with shareholders is not in itself a reason for change in the firm’s stock
price. However, this cluelessness on the part of the management team would not
reflect well on the company or how it is run. As a result, investors might think
twice before purchasing a stake—or they may decide against making an invest-
ment in the firm altogether.



                                                 Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies  |  11
                                             These findings are consistent with prior research suggesting that better disclosure
                                             helps attract foreign investments, and that increased disclosure appears to make
                                             firms more attractive investments.7


 tAble 2. importAnt governAnce CHARACTERISTICS for emerging mArket investors

 Governance characteristics                                Very important                      Moderate importance                            Little importance

 Disclosure                                                      100%                                        0%                                         0%
 Related party transactions                                        90%                                      10%                                         0%
 Board structure/ board independence*                               3%                                      48%                                        48%
 Shareholder rights, such as “tag-along rights”                    83%                                      17%                                         0%
 Board process                                                      0%                                       3%                                        97%
 Separate Chairman and CEO                                         52%                                      41%                                         7%
 *Does not sum due to rounding.




                                                 tAble 3. specific governAnce CHARACTERISTICS of importAnce
                                                 to emerging mArket investors

                                                 Governance Characteristic                                                                Very important

                                                 Disclosure in general                                                                          100%
                                                 Disclosure in English                                                                           31%
                                                 Quarterly disclosure                                                                            59%
                                                 Willingness of senior management to meet                                                       100%
                                                 Motivations of controlling group/management                                                    100%
                                                 Succession planning and compensation structure                                                  59%




                                             7
                                               Increased disclosure appears to make firms more attractive investments.  See Hermalin and Weisbach (2009).  Further, the
                                             recent study by Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2009) suggests better disclosure helps attract foreign investors.  Although their
                                             study does not focus on the major emerging markets (with no firms from India, China or Russia and only 16 from each of
                                             Brazil and Turkey out of their 4,409 firms), their results are consistent with the findings in this paper.  This suggests that
                                             disclosure in particular may be a governance factor that is significant across jurisdictions whereas board independence may
                                             matter more in some contexts (e.g., dispersely held firms) than in others (e.g., controlled firms). 	



12  |  Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
6. Board independence is a lower-level concern                                                   “Governance features such
for emerging market investors                                                                    as independent directors
                                                                                                 have less meaning when
Respondents expressed less concern about board composition. Specifically, they                   the independent directors
said that the presence of a board with a majority of independent directors was                   are selected by the
not as important as other factors. It is not that this feature is undesirable in a               controlling shareholder.”
target firm. Rather, there are other, more pressing issues to consider, most said.               				
                                                                                                 —Emerging Market Investor
                                                                                                 Survey respondent
Investors surveyed pointed out that most emerging market firms have a controlling
group—a family or a government—unlike firms in developed markets. And since
the controlling group appoints directors, the independence of the board itself is
questionable, even if the directors are not associated with the controlling group.


7. The global financial crisis has elevated the
importance of good governance

Another key finding from the survey: in the wake of the global financial crisis of
2008–09, investors are more cautious about investing in firms in countries that
have problems with corporate governance.

When asked about China, more than 40 percent of investors surveyed responded
with one of the following:
•	 “We are concerned about our investments in China because of corporate
   governance issues.”
•	 “We have slowed down our investments in China because of corporate
   governance issues.”
•	 “We need a higher rate of return to invest in Chinese firms because of
   corporate governance concerns.”
•	 “We have pulled out of China because of corporate governance concerns.”

In particular, they pointed to opacity of ownership structure and general disclosure
concerns as reasons for their more cautious approach to Chinese investments.

Respondents had similar thoughts about their Russian investment portfolios.

Of note, investors surveyed said that they were more inclined to look seriously at
targets in countries with improving governance:
•	 48 percent expressed increased interest in India
•	 45 percent expressed increased interest in Brazil
•	 26 percent expressed increased interest in South Africa
•	 24 percent expressed increased interest in Turkey




                                               Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies  |  13
                                             8. Specific corporate governance-related reforms
                                             could make countries more attractive investment
                                             destinations

                                             Investors who were interviewed discussed reforms they hoped to see in the
                                             emerging markets where they invested or where they were thinking of invest-
                                             ing. Respondents suggested that reforms focus on improved and more consistent
                                             enforcement, specifically in:
                                             •	 Investor protection laws
                                             •	 Contracts

                                             Respondents also highlighted a number of country-specific corporate gover-
                                             nance-related changes that would improve the investment climate and increase
                                             the attractiveness of investments in these countries:
                                             •	 Less opacity in China
                                             •	 Fewer judicial and bureaucratic delays in India
                                             •	 Reduction in the number of multiple class structures in Brazil
                                             •	 Improvements to the rule of law in Russia




14  |  Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies
Why this study matters

The Emerging Markets Investor Survey provides clear evidence that corporate
governance plays an important role in the decisions of emerging market inves-
tors. Some are steering clear of firms in countries where governance remains
problematic, or they are demanding higher returns from such investments.

The information comes first hand from the investors themselves, and offers
insight into how corporate governance considerations impact their decisions.
While an admittedly small sample set, the frank and honest commentary can
offer a road map for where improvements and reforms should be focused. Such
information can help inform policy reform agendas of emerging market nations,
as well as provide guidance for emerging market companies that are seeking
financing.

The study also points to future avenues for follow up investigation, to identify
more specifically the kinds of governance changes that would be of value, and
how to implement the changes at the firm level and at the country level, with the
goal of expanding the private sector and supporting economic growth.




About the authors:

Vikramaditya Khanna is a Professor of Law at the University of Michigan Law School. S.J.D.
Harvard Law School 1997. Email: vskhanna@umich.edu

Roman Zyla is a Corporate Governance officer at IFC.
Email: rzyla@ifc.org




                                                    Survey Says…Corporate Governance Matters to Investors in Emerging Market Companies  |  15
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA


The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for
educational purposes. Content from this publication may be used freely without prior permission,
provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for commercial purposes.

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance
Corporation or of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) or
the governments they represent, or those of the companies interviewed for this survey.
