    CROSS-CUTTING SECTOR




    GOVERNANCE




PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION	1
n THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                  1
n THE ASSESSMENT PROCESSS	                                 3
n PRE-DISASTER BASELINE AND SECTOR OVERVIEW	11
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS	16
n ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF A DISASTER	23
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                          27
n CROSS-SECTOR LINKAGES INCLUDING CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES	   30
 SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY	33
n
 KEY REFERENCES	
n                                                        46
 ANNEXES	47
n
         ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
                 BBB      Building Back Better
                 CBO      Community-based organisation
                 CSO      Civil Society Organisation
                 DAC      Development Assistance Committee (World Bank)
               DALA       Damage and Loss Assessment
                DRM       Disaster Risk Management
                 DRR      Disaster Risk Reduction
                     EC   European Union
                  FTS     Financial Tracking Service
                   GT     Governance Team
                  ICT     Information and Communications Technology
                  IDP     Internally Displaced Person
                   IM     Information Management
                   LG     Local Government
                NGO       Non-Governmental organisation
              NRM/B       National Recovery Management/Body
               PDNA       Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
                     RS   Recovery Strategy




         INTRODUCTION
         There is no unique definition of governance used by all Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) partners, yet
         each recognises that it is closely linked to the exercise of power and related decision-making processes involving
         different state and non-state actors in the provision of public goods and services. State actors comprise public
         administration at central and local levels, the legislature, local governments (at all existing levels of territorial ad-
         ministration), the judiciary, and public security bodies while non-state actors can include non-governmental and
         religious organisations, traditional structures, community-based groups and the private sector.

         Governance is considered a cross-cutting sector within the context of a (PDNA) because each of the sub-sec-
         tors of the social, productive and infrastructure sectoral groupings includes an assessment of the disaster-in-
         duced disruption to the specific governance processes of the sub-sectors. However, governance also includes
         non-sector- specific core government functions needed to enable recovery and reconstruction:




1   |   GOVERNANCE
         	      • Piloting the overall national recovery process;

         	      • Managing public, private and international aid for recovery;

         	      • Restoring local governance functions;

         	      • Maintaining the rule of law in disaster-affected areas.

         A fifth optional core function in post-disaster settings is related to civil service management, in particular for
         replacement, redeployment and payment of benefits for injury or death, in cases of severe impact of the disaster
         on the public sector workforce, especially in central government institutions, as was the case in Haiti (2010) and
         Aceh (2004), for the provincial government. However, in most cases, the disaster impact on the central manage-
         ment of civil service will be marginal and hence, is not covered with other core functions.

         The main purpose of this chapter is to provide general guidance on conducting needs assessment and recovery
         planning for core government functions within the context of a PDNA. Guidance on specific governance assess-
         ments under each sub sector is provided in the corresponding chapters. Additional details on the conceptual
         framework defining core government functions are presented in Section 2.

         This chapter proposes an integrated approach to the PDNA, elaborating on the recovery needs of institutions
         that contribute to delivering core government functions. A strong emphasis is put on ensuring that these institu-
         tions are capable of achieving a strong national ownership over all aspects of the post-disaster recovery phase.

         The chapter describes the six steps for the formulation of the Recovery Strategy (RS):

         	      1)	 Providing sector overview and pre-disaster baseline;

         	      2)	 Assessing disaster effects;

         	      3)	 Presenting macroeconomic and human development impact;

         	      4)	 Determining recovery needs, including needs for Building Back Better (BBB) approaches;

         	      5)	 Formulating recovery strategy and action plan;

         	      6)	 Estimating recovery costs.




           UNDP defines governance as comprising the mechanisms, processes and institutions, through which citizens and groups articulate interests, exercise legal rights, uphold obligations and mediate
         1	
           differences (UNDP, Governance for Sustainable Human Development, UNDP Policy Document, New York, 1997). The World Bank views governance as “the manner in which power is exercised in
           the management of a country's economic and social resources for development (World Bank, Governance, Washington, D.C, 1993). For the EU, governance concerns “the state’s ability to serve the
           citizens. It refers to the rules, processes and behaviour by which interests are articulated, resources are managed, and power is exercised in society.” (http://ec.europa.eu/development/icenter/repository/
           com2003_0615en01_en.pdf).
         2	In certain countries, traditional leadership structures have been integrated into the formal governance structure and hence play an official role in decision-making and administrative processes. PDNA
            teams would have to ascertain early on what the exact nature of the structure is.


2   |   GOVERNANCE
         THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS
         FRAMEWORK AND SCOPE OF THE GOVERNANCE ASSESSMENT
         The core government functions form critical inter-related building blocks to achieve the main goals, as
         shown in Figure 1.

         Figure 1. Core Government Functions and Overall Goals within the Context of a Post-Disaster Situation

                              Core Government Functions                                    Overall Goals

                                                                                Effective & coherent cross-sector
                             Managing the recovery process
                                                                                        recovery response

                           Coordinating public & private and                    Inclusive national ownership over
                                   international aid                                     recovery process

                                                                                  Transparent and accountable
                          Restoring local governance functions
                                                                                    management of recovery


                              Maintaining the rule of law                        Protection of persons and assets




         This governance framework allows linking recovery planning with the longer-term development goals specific to
         the Governance Sector, in particular, building trust-based and responsive state-society relationships, capitalising
         on the transformative potential of post-disaster periods on governance arrangements.

         The framework applying to the governance PDNA must also differentiate between core government functions,
         covered in this chapter, and sub-sector specific governance aspects covered by other chapters. This is the distinc-
         tion made in Figure 2, where the former appear in blue and the latter in orange.

         The core government functions that are the main object of the governance PDNA are critical to the overall suc-
         cess of the recovery process in all sub-sectors for the following reasons:

         	    National recovery management: This refers to the country’s institutional infrastructure and capacities to
             •
              provide the necessary leadership to coordinate the PDNA, including defining a recovery vision and inte-
              grated strategic plan in order to raise and appropriate the necessary financial and non-financial resources
              for implementing the plan, to maintain coherence and effectiveness in the government response, especially
              among sectoral actors, to build public confidence on the adequacy of the response and integrity of its
              management and to monitor and report regularly and transparently on progress made. This overarching
              function may be played directly by the centre of government (i.e. the cabinet) or delegated to a permanent
              or ad hoc national recovery body, or a combination of both. It is inevitably a highly political function that
              cannot be outsourced.

         	    Aid management: In many post-disaster contexts, aid is a major part of the recovery budget, and aid
             •
              organisations become a major source of policy orientations; thus, aid management becomes an essential
              part of the wider recovery agenda, albeit with unique challenges.

3   |   GOVERNANCE
         	    Maintaining the rule of law: Disasters often create situations of chaos and breakdown in the rule of law
             •
              and have a direct impact on the functionality of law and order institutions. Without proper security on the
              ground, recovery is impeded. Security and justice services are also important to guarantee the protection
              of groups made vulnerable by the post-disaster consequences, including by responding to needs to replace
              lost ID and property papers.

         	    Local governance: Functioning local governments and participatory local governance processes at all rel-
             •
              evant sub-national levels (e.g. governorate, county, municipality) are needed to plan and implement local
              recovery plans that are relevant to local needs and to increase local ownership. Local governments in par-
              ticularly have a crucial role to play in coordinating interventions prepared and delivered by sub-sectors at
              the community level. Their performance in a post-disaster context has a great bearing on public confidence
              in the state’s response.




4   |   GOVERNANCE
         FIGURE 2. Core Government Functions in the Context of a Post-Disaster Situation


                Central                                              National Recovery
            Government
                                                                       Management

                                                        Aid                                Maintaining the
                                                    Coordination                            Rule of Law




                                                                              A
             Sub-Sector              E                                        G
            Government               D                                        R                                       H
                                                          H                                      W                    O
                                     U                                        I
                                                          E                                      A                    U
                                     C                                        C
                                                          A                                      T                    S
                                     A                                        U
                                                          L                                      S                    I
                                     T                                        L
                                                          T                                      A                    N
                                     I                                        T
                                                          H                                      N                    G
                                     O                                        U
                                     N                                        R
                                                                              E




                   Local
                                              Non-state                   Local                       Private
             Governance
                                               actors*                  Authorities                   sector




                                         Humanitarian      Basic          Rebuilding        Citizen
                                                                                                        Livelihoods
                   Needs                    Aid           Services      Infrastructure     Security


                                                                   Affected Populations




         NOTE: Dotted lines refer to processes in decision-making, implementation and monitoring that involve the par-
         ticipation of and coordination between state and non-state actors, and central and local levels. Depending on
         the context, the strength of these multi-stakeholder processes, as opposed to centrally-controlled governance of
         all recovery aspects will vary. The figure also describes a situation where local governments have an important
         role in leading and managing recovery at the local level, which is not systematically the case because at times
         this echelon of governance is bypassed by national institutions and aid providers.
5   |   GOVERNANCE
         This is an example and does not include the full scope of government business that is carried out in additional
         productive sectors, such as manufacturing, oil/natural gas, trade and tourism, and in infrastructure sectors, such
         as transport and electricity.

         PLEASE NOTE: In decentralised environments, local governments are usually responsible for part or all of basic
         service delivery (e.g. primary education or primary health care), hence restoring their operational capacities will
         be an essential part of the recovery plan for the sub-sectors concerned. Yet, to avoid double-counting, basic ser-
         vice delivery by local governments should be covered in PDNAs of corresponding sub-sector (e.g. health, educa-
         tion). The part of local governments’ operations that is addressed by the governance chapter are the higher-level
         functions (leadership, coordination, administration, communications, political representation). In addition, there
         may be certain services provided by local governments that will not be reported in a sub-sectors but are im-
         portant to recovery and will have to be researched under governance, for example, issuing or/replacing business
         licences, work permits, driving licences, operating market places or cemeteries (if not already reviewed by the
         Community Infrastructure sub-sector), etc. At the onset of the PDNA, after the initial context analysis, the PDNA
         teams will have to meet and agree on how functions and services provided by local governments are divided
         among themselves with the aim of avoiding double-counting. For the rest of this chapter, services provided by
         local governments and not reported under sub-sector analysis will be referred to as “other local government
         (LG) services”.

         In terms of institutions, Table 1 provides a distinction between primary (or core) and secondary institutions in-
         volved in each function. This will help prioritise data collection work, in particular for infrastructure and physical
         aspects. It is a model that needs to be adapted to the legal and institutional reality of each country.

         Table 1. Institutional Stakeholders and Core Government Functions
                   Function                       Primary / Core institutions                         Secondary institutions
          National recovery           Chief Executive’s Office, National Recovery          Statistics Agency
          management                  Management Body, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of    Central Bank
                                      Planning, Army
                                                                                           Treasury
                                                                                           National Parliament
          Aid management              National Recovery Management Body Ministries         NGO coordination
                                      of Foreign Affairs/Planning and Finance, donor
                                      coordination group(s)
          Local governance            Ministry of Local Administration, provincial         Local government associations, civil society,
                                      governments, local governments                       private sector
          Rule of Law                 Higher Judicial Authority,                           Bar Association
                                      Ministry of Justice, Ministry of the Interior, the   Prison administration
                                      National Police                                      Human rights organisations
                                                                                           Customary authorities

         No two disasters have the same effect on governance functions because the physical consequences of different
         natural disasters on national and local governments differ according to the nature and scale of the disaster. Some
         disasters grossly disrupt central governance functions (e.g. Haiti 2010 earthquake), while others have more local-
         ised consequences (e.g. the 2010 Mt. Merapi eruption in Indonesia). Hazards such as earthquakes, tsunamis and
         hurricanes may cause widespread damage in a limited geographical area and tend to have extensive negative
         impacts on local governance institutions. Other hazards such as droughts have very limited impact on physical
         institutional assets, but can overstretch human and financial service delivery capacities given the potential huge

6   |   GOVERNANCE
         needs for relief, livelihoods and other supportive services to those affected by the crisis. While most disasters
         affect some or all local governance functions, major disasters will also affect core central government capacities
         to govern the recovery process and manage the political pressure caused by the disaster.

         Since assessing governance needs in the context of a PDNA may involve the review of the disaster effects and
         impact on a large number of institutions and governance processes, in order to stay within the time limits im-
         posed for a PDNA, the Governance Team (GT) will need to prioritise its scope of work using the following criteria:

         	       Location of the disaster: A disaster that hits a national capital area will potentially much more profoundly
                •
                 disrupt the core government functions than a disaster striking only provincial area(s). In the former case,
                 the PDNA Team will need to include a detailed review of the disaster impact on central government institu-
                 tions playing a key role in delivering core government functions, such as the President’s Office, the Cabinet,
                 the Ministry of Finance (including the Treasury), the Central Bank, the Ministry of Planning, etc. In all cases,
                 regardless of the impact of the disaster on central government institutions, assessing the disaster impact
                 on local governance systems in the areas hit by the disaster is required. Furthermore, where a disaster
                 triggers large movements of the population, the Assessment Team should also review the needs of local
                 governance systems in hosting areas, even if they were not affected indirectly by the disaster.

         	       Pre-disaster capacity: Capacity gaps in core government institutions existing prior to a disaster will usually
                •
                 become more acute after a disaster. For example, if the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) was known to have
                 lacked the capacity to support effective inter-ministerial coordination and policy formulation, this weakness
                 will undoubtedly be.aggravated after the disaster when pressure for effective coordination is even higher,
                 and therefore an appropriately tailored response to fill this gap should be devised rapidly. The pre-disaster
                 sector overview (see Chapter 3) will help gauge the critical pre-disaster capacity gaps in order to prioritise
                 areas of assessment.

         	       Pre-disaster local governance arrangements: The architecture of the sub-national governance system as
                •
                 well as its regulatory framework determine the role that local institutions will play in the recovery phase.
                 Local government systems can be complex, involving different administrative levels (e.g. state, province,
                 region, department, county, municipality, borough, village), with intricate divisions of responsibilities in
                 service delivery. A higher level of decentralisation normally implies a response to the disaster more prom-
                 inently engineered and delivered from the local level. However, central and/or provincial governments
                 will most probably bear the major responsibility in the disaster response and should be prioritised in the
                 assessment in settings with weak and poorly resourced local governments, and/or with limited devolution
                 of responsibilities.

         COORDINATING THE PDNA PROCESS FOR GOVERNANCE
         The PDNA, both in its assessment and recovery planning process for governance should be led by a core team,
         the Governance Team (GT), under the leadership of the national Focal Point (FP) designated for coordinating
         the overall process. GT members should be primarily made of FPs designated in each of the national institutions
         deemed essential in delivering the core functions prioritised for the governance PDNA (see 2.1). It would typically
         involve Ministries of Finance, Planning, Interior, Justice, Local Administration (or equivalent), Foreign Affairs (if the
         designated body for aid coordination) and the Statistics Agency, and possibly other bodies. At the sub-national

         3	 In the worst case, such as in Haiti in 2010, some of these institutions will have lost almost all operational capacity, bringing the country’s core government functions almost to a halt.


7   |   GOVERNANCE
         level, provincial governments of affected areas should also be represented in the GT. For lower-level local gov-
         ernments in these areas, their number and potentially difficult access might make it impractical to involve them
         directly into the GT; as a proxy, a representative of the national local government association, if existing, can be
         invited to join the GT. A small number of representatives of prominent civil society organisations or academic
         institutions as well as private sector (e.g. business associations) can also be invited to take part in the GT. The GT
         will, in any event, consult with a wide number of stakeholders at the national and local levels during the PDNA
         process; hence, it is not necessary to involve all possible actors in its composition.

         After a request is made for a formal governance PDNA process and a GT is formed, it will be supported by UNDP,
         the World Banks and the European Union, which will need to deploy public sector and local governance experts
         with senior expertise in post-disaster settings. Other relevant governance development partners, i.e. UN agencies
         can be invited to join the GT, e.g. UN-Habitat, United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), and United
         Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), development banks, donors or non-governmental organisations
         (NGOs). Clear roles and responsibilities should be developed and assigned to different stakeholders involved.

         Governance is not part of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) cluster coordination system for United
         Nations agencies in humanitarian crises. Yet, if governance is deemed an important aspect for the recovery re-
         sponse (i.e. not just governance within the sectors covered by the cluster system), it may be included in a Gap
         Cluster, which looks at areas of needs not covered elsewhere in the IASC structure. If so, the GT will need to be
         represented in the Gap Cluster for increased efficiency of coordination. Also, to allow cross-sector coordination
         on governance issues, it is recommended that each of the sectoral PDNA teams (for health, education, etc.)
         designates a governance FP who will liaise closely with the GT, provide data when needed, and ensure that gov-
         ernance aspects in his/her sector’s recovery strategy are consistent with the overall core government functions
         in recovery strategy developed by the GT. For certain sub-sectors teams such as Housing (for issues related to
         land use rights/rule of law), Community Infrastructure (CI), or Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), closer coordination
         mechanisms may be needed to avoid duplication of efforts and guarantee coherence in response.

         Finally, GT members should represent both men and women, and at least one of the team members should have
         specific experience in gender and governance.

         ASSESSMENT METHODS
         The data collection strategy and information requirements for the Governance Sector recovery should ideally be
         seen as a process and placed in the cycle of disaster management. Accordingly, assessments and information
         required for recovery build on the data that was collected before the disaster used as pre-disaster baseline, and
         build on rapid assessments in the early post-disaster phase. It should then become a monitoring system of the
         governance system recovery performance.

         The scope and depth of the assessment is constrained by the limited time in which it needs to be accomplished
         and the potentially large array of institutions, processes and locations to be surveyed, especially for local gov-
         ernance aspects. The GT needs to make use of available post-disaster data whenever possible and decide on
         critical additional information that needs to be collected specifically for the PDNA. Among data that may have
         already been collected through the network of sub-national government and state institutions are government



         4	 An example is the Civil Service Management body if there has been a serious impact on the public sector workforce.


8   |   GOVERNANCE
         statistics on the state of damage to public administration buildings, civil service presence in areas affected, public
         financial management data, as well as crime statistics. Basic governance data may also have been collected by
         humanitarian actors, although they are usually very limited in scope.

         In general, governance-related data are more commonly qualitative than quantitative and is not individual or
         household-based. It makes it therefore more prone to accuracy issues and subjective interpretations. Quantita-
         tive performance analysis of governance systems is notoriously complex and requires a long design time that is
         not suitable for a PDNA. Therefore, rather than relying only on dubious statistical models, a governance PDNA
         should be highly consultative in order to triangulate governance-related information from different sources. The
         political economy dimension cannot be ignored in the governance especially related to core government func-
         tions. Therefore, the GT should be able to include an analysis from the information collected.

         Qualitative analysis methods involve focus group discussions, interviews and perception surveys that can also be
         used to gauge popular expectations, fears and the degree of tensions/risks of violence. UNDP’s Institutional and
         Context Analysis (ICA) protocol evaluates the capacity of governance systems through a political economy lens
         in order to respond effectively to population needs. The World Bank’s Social Impact Analysis (SIA) is another
         method that can be applied to identify impacts on social relations, local institutions and leadership. Ensuring
         that rigorous methodological standards are used for the qualitative analysis will be critical to the credibility of the
         information collected. Whatever method is used, care must be taken to ensure that women and men from the
         affected community can participate equally. Specific arrangements that may be required to facilitate women’s
         participation in particular include the gender balance of the Assessment Team, separate, private interviews with
         men and women, and attention to the time and venue of the assessment, etc. When possible, governance data
         can be disaggregated by sex and age. In particular, the degree of participation and leadership roles of women
         and men in local, regional and national governance must be assessed.

         There is no single source that can provide all the necessary information on core governance functions: the PDNA
         exercise will involve a large number of stakeholders (see Annex 1). The main sources for the PDNA are key infor-
         mants, for example from core government offices and ministries (offices of the chief executive, finance, planning,
         interior, local administration, etc.), provincial and local governments, and development partners. Focus group
         discussions should be organised with stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, and relevant
         experts, complemented by simple institutional performance surveys, in particular of local governments. Citizen
         perceptions surveys can be useful to gauge the level of support to the government disaster response and identify
         potential risks that may entail a loss of confidence and breakdown in the rule of law – but citizen surveys are
         notoriously difficult to organise in crisis contexts. For any type of surveys, sampling of locations will be purposive
         in the initial phases towards representative sampling in later phases. Table 2 presents an overview on the mix of
         assessment methods that can be used to research the different core government functions.




         5	Managing the recovery process of core government functions has both technical and political challenges. Given the criticality of the functions considered, and the need to involve a number of
            key high-level institutions of government, the governance PDNA process should preferably be led from the centre of government (e.g. Prime Minister or President’s Office). If a National Recovery
            Management Body (NRMB) already exists at the time of launching the PDNA, whether it is permanent or ad hoc, it should then perform the coordination function.
         6	www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/Democratic%20Governance/OGC/UNDP_Institutional%20and%20Context%20Analysis.pdf
         7	http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTPOVERTY/EXTPSIA/0,,contentMDK:20467256~menuPK:1108016~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK:490130~isCURL:Y~is-
            CURL:Y,00.html


9   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 2. Summary of Assessment Methods for a Governance PDNA
                Function                                   Key Informants                                Methods
          National recovery man-   President’s / Prime Minister’s Office               Interviews
          agement                                                                      Secondary data
                                   National Parliament
                                   National Recovery Management Body (if applicable)   Workshop
                                   Ministries of Planning/Finance
                                   Ministry of Defence (if the army is involved)
                                   Statistics Agency
                                   Humanitarian and development partners
                                   Civil society, private sector
          Aid management           President’s /Prime Minister’s Office                Interviews
                                   National Recovery Management Body                   Secondary data
                                   (if applicable)                                     Workshop
                                   Ministry of Planning /Finance
                                   Ministry of Foreign Affairs
                                   Humanitarian and Development partners
          Local governance         National Recovery Management Body                   Interviews
                                   (if applicable)                                     Secondary data
                                   Ministry of Planning/Finance                        Workshop
                                   Ministry of Local Administration                    Focus groups
                                   Provincial and local governments (including         Infrastructure surveys
                                   the Association of Local Authorities)
                                                                                       Sample performance assessments
                                   Civil society
                                                                                       Citizen surveys
          Rule of Law              President’s / Prime Minister’s Office               Interviews
                                   Ministries of the Interior, Justice, Defence        Secondary data
                                   (if the army is involved)                           Workshop
                                   Judicial authorities                                Focus groups
                                   Civil society/human rights groups                   Infrastructure surveys
                                   Academic institutions                               Citizen surveys

         Priority should be given to using existing national and local information collection systems because this would
         provide a unique opportunity to strengthen these systems when needed.

         Finally, a PDNA is not the time to conduct in-depth capacity assessments of a large number of public institutions
         and national governance systems. Such capacity assessments can be prioritised for the future as an output of the
         recovery response to governance needs, in particular for building back better (BBB).

         EXPECTED OUTPUTS
         The first is a summary as a contribution to the overall PDNA report. The sectoral components are usually no more
         than 3 to 4 pages.

         The second output is a 15-20 page document that provides a more detailed report from the assessment,
         and a more detailed strategy for the recovery. The time horizon for the recovery strategy is determined by the
         government, but usually ranges from 2 to 5 years. Subsequently, the more extensive Governance Sector Recov-
         ery Strategy and Plan can then be used as a basis to review and revise as required local governance plans in the
         areas affected.
10   |   GOVERNANCE
         PRE-DISASTER BASELINE AND SECTOR OVERVIEW
         A detailed understanding of governance systems and practices applicable to core government functions before
         the disaster will make it possible to compare with post-disaster conditions and to measure the extent of the di-
         saster impact. An understanding of the pre-disaster political, legal and institutional environment explains some
         of the outcomes of disasters, helps to focus attention on how different parts of government are affected, and,
         crucially, indicates how support should be provided to help govern the recovery process. It will also help to en-
         sure that recovery efforts do not undermine local or national structures and capacities. It is in particular crucial to
         understand the legal and institutional framework applicable at the time of the disaster for managing the recov-
         ery and reconstruction process. Baseline information may be obtained either directly from government officials
         or through secondary sources. The scoping exercise at the onset of the PDNA planning process will help limit the
         breadth of information needed, staying within the limits of the core functions defined, and focus on the most
         important sources of information. Annex 2 presents a detailed list of possible sources of baseline information for
         governance indicators in general and more specifically for each core function.

         CONTEXT ANALYSIS
         For governance aspects, in contrast with other sub-sectors, political, legal and institutional aspects are the most
         important determining factors in the context analysis, rather than the socio-economic situation at household lev-
         el – although the latter also has an evident bearing on service delivery needs and the quality of relations between
         state and citizens. Nevertheless, GT will be able to make use of the socio-economic context analysis carried out
         by other sub-sectors teams.

         The context analysis should therefore focus on the main following elements:

         	   • Legal and institutional frameworks;

         	   • Social cohesion, security and conflict.

         For the legal and institutional framework, the GT needs to gather the following elements relevant to core gov-
         ernment functions. Most of this information should be attainable from secondary sources or key informants. It
         should not require broader consultation processes.




11   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 3. Legal and Institutional Context
                Function                             Key Informants                                               Methods
          General                Constitutional basis for division of powers and roles       Interviews
                                 of the executive branch, as well as accountability          Secondary data
                                 principles.
                                                                                             Workshop
                                 Bill of human rights (in particular women’s rights).
                                 Main public sector reforms underway possibly im-
                                 pacting directly on the disaster response capacity and
                                 modality.
                                 Press and civil society freedoms legislation.


          National Recovery      Organic law of National Recovery Management Body            Overview on institutions involved in policy formu-
          Management             (NRMB) (if exists) or decree establishing National          lation and public financial management (national
                                 Recovery mechanism (NRM).                                   planning and budgeting), procedures followed (in
                                                                                             particular for intersectoral coordination) and the
                                 Other laws defining the Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
                                                                                             role of parliament.
                                 sector.
                                                                                             Modalities for integration of vertical (sector based)
                                 Public Finance Management (PFM)-related legislation.
                                                                                             planning with horizontal (area-based) planning.
          Aid management         Legal provisions for aid management, both public            Existing aid management structures and mecha-
                                 (ODA) and private (NGOs, corporations), including           nisms, at the national and sub-national levels.
                                 control of aid flows and recipients, aid coordination
                                 and aid reporting in national budget.
          Local governance       R egulatory framework defining administrative, politi-      Sub-national government structure and presence
                                 cal and fiscal decentralisation, with a focus on division   on the ground.
                                 of responsibilities for disaster response, infrastructure   Overview of local governments’ operational.
                                 and service delivery.                                       capacities (including human and financial).
                                                                                             Civil society presence and strength in disaster-hit
                                                                                             areas.
          Rule of law            Military and police mandates.                               Structure of the judiciary branch.
                                 Constitutional basis for civil-military relations.          Structure and role of different security forces, in
                                                                                             particular control and command structure.
                                 Laws pertaining to protection of vulnerable groups
                                 against violence (in particular women).                     Presence of security and justice facilities at the
                                                                                             local level.
                                 Citizenship and property laws.
                                                                                             Civil registry/land and property management
                                 Prevalence of customary laws.
                                                                                             institutions.

         Understanding the social cohesion, security and conflict context is a critical element of the governance PDNA.
         Existing or potential tensions or conflict between different population groups or political parties, weak gover-
         nance or lack of transparency in governance, discrimination based on sex, age, ethnicity, religion, caste, etc. and
         other conditions have important implications for needs and for the recovery process. The GT should analyse the
         prevalence of violence in society prior to the disaster and of conflict between citizens and the state or between
         groups (ethnic, religious, political, IDPs, etc.). Conflict drivers should be identified, including those that relate
         to serious problems of unemployment, access to justice, human rights abuses and political competition. The
         status of women vis-à-vis violence and risks of increased threats to women should be identified. If the country
         is undergoing a formal peace process, its progress and challenges should be analysed to the extent they might
         influence the recovery operation.

         An underlying feature of the context analysis should be adopting a political economy analysis angle to determine
         drivers of political behaviour, how they shape particular policies and programmes and what the implications
         are for recovery strategies and programmes. Rather than assuming a priori that ‘everyone wants recovery’ or

12   |   GOVERNANCE
         that ‘everyone wants it the same way’, a political economy analysis recognises that recovery and development
         interventions succeed when key players in society have an incentive to make them succeed; if such actors feel
         threatened, they will use their power and influence to make them fail. This, in turn, helps identify areas where
         change is more likely to occur and areas where change is very unlikely to occur unless other conditions shift be-
         forehand, providing a basis for prioritisation and strategic planning. The political economy of recovery is largely
         based on pre-disaster realities in terms of political power and institutional authority. In post-disaster settings,
         international actors operate under compressed timeframes and tight deadlines, with the pressure to spend and
         show results quickly. There is ample evidence that, focusing on delivery without cross-checking the assumptions
         on the context with the analysis can do harm. Understanding the context is an essential component of recovery
         planning even at the early stages of post-crisis response. The PDNA Governance Sector Team will have to make
         sure that the overall intent of political economy analysis approach is mainstreamed in the content of the PDNA.
         Given the time pressure and delivery imperatives, a full analysis will not be feasible. Rather, the GT will have to
         be opportunistic in including certain critical aspects within its PDNA process. For this, available UNDP and World
         Bank methodological resources are valuable sources of inspiration. In many cases, political economy analyses
         may have already been carried out in the country or area considered for the PDNA. The conclusions that were
         drawn from such an exercise, even if conducted in a development rather than recovery paradigm, would remain
         largely valid and useful for a recovery context.

         DESCRIPTION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS
         The inventory and mapping of government buildings in disaster-hit areas is needed, and out of it, the GT can
         identify those facilities that pertain to institutions involved in the core government functions. If a disaster did not
         hit the nation’s capital area, the likelihood is that only sub-national branches of the central administration and
         local government buildings have been hit. Table 1 provides a list of priority institutions that should be surveyed
         for their infrastructure and physical assets. It is more than likely that the details of the effects on government
         structures and assets held at the national and sub-national levels will be captured by the Infrastructure Team of
         the PDNA. The information should be shared with the GT if collected. It is also expected that the estimation of
         damage will also be undertaken by the Infrastructure Team. The estimation of the losses may be strengthened
         through an examination of the details of the effects on the delivery of and access to services.

         DESCRIPTION OF GOVERNANCE FUNCTIONS, SERVICE DELIVERY AND ACCESS TO SERVICES
         Table 4 shows some of the main data requirements with regard to pre-disaster performance levels and process
         indicators related to the delivery of core government functions. This is only a limited set of indicators that are
         directly relevant to post-disaster/recovery situations; they do not exhaustively describe the delivery of services and
         issues possibly faced by these functions. For the last two functions (local governance, rule of law), data collected
         should focus on disaster-hit areas and be compared with national averages or /standards.




         8	For example, if a disaster occurs towards the end of an elected government’s term, it is more likely that efforts will be made by political actors to use the management of relief and reconstruction
            processes to gain political points or to spoil an opponent’s electoral prospects.
           UNDP (www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/democratic-governance/oslo_governance_centre/Institutional_and_Context_Analysis_Guidance_Note); World Bank (http://sitere-
         9	
           sources.worldbank.org/EXTGOVANTICORR/Resources/3035863-1281627136986/PGPEProblem-drivenGPEanalysis-GoodPracticeFramework12-2009.pdf)


13   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 4. Pre-disaster Indicators
                Function                            Key Informants                                              Methods
          National Recovery      In case of previous disaster: timeline for producing       Strength of government coordination in prior
                                 recovery framework and plans, funding and execution        disaster situation, alignment of sectoral recovery
                                 rate, alignment with national budget, access of local      plans, frequency of the use of ‘extraordinary’
                                 governments to national recovery planning process.         executive measures for recovery management.
          Aid management         Yearly aid flows, % of aid projects captured in            Existence and type of aid information tracking
                                 national database, level of contribution of aid to         systems, number of aid coordination bodies led by
                                 priority development outputs.                              national actors, regularity of analysis reports on
                                                                                            external aid, % aid as budget support.
          Local governance       % state budget expanded through local governments          Coordination of local governments with
                                 (recurrent/capital), % execution rate of local             decentralised administrations, modalities for
                                 investment budgets, % of local investment resources        intergovernmental relations, capacities of local
                                 funded from own-revenues (taxes and other sources),        governments for information management and
                                 trends in central government transfers, service            communications.
                                 delivery figures for other local government services
                                 (not covered in sub-sectors)
          Rule of law            Crime statistics, sex- and gender-based violence           Use, type and effectiveness of alternative dispute
                                 (SGBV) figures, police force per capita, prison            resolution mechanisms
                                 population, % citizens without ID papers, %                Prevalence of militias and neighbourhood
                                 undocumented property ownership, reported human            vigilance groups for security maintenance at local
                                 rights abuses, citizen perception surveys on insecurity,   level
                                 access to justice indicators for disadvantaged and
                                 marginalised groups (women, minority, others), speed       Access to registration and property for
                                 of restoring full security in previous post-disaster       marginalised groups
                                 situations (if applicable)

         In general, whenever pre-disaster capacity assessment or profiles on the set of core public institutions occur as
         described in Table 1, the main findings should be used to understand the issues likely to constraining higher and
         better delivery levels of core functions.

         DESCRIPTION OF GOOD GOVERNANCE PARAMETRES
         The two main qualitative dimensions to be researched on the governance processes linked to the core functions
         above are participation (with inclusiveness) and accountability. Table 5 gives some indications on how these can
         be analysed in relation to the pre-disaster context. Understanding how participatory and accountable the de-
         livery of core functions was prior to the disaster is critical to understanding the risks of further erosion to these
         important dimensions of good governance in a context of post-disaster crisis. Recovery processes that provide
         limited opportunities for inclusive participation and remain opaque from public scrutiny can generate instability.




14   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 5. Good Governance Parametres
                   Function                         Key Informants                                              Methods
             National Recovery    Level and modalities of civil society and private        Integrity and government effectiveness indicators
             Management           sector participation in national policy-making on        (Transparency International, World Bank, OECD –
                                  development priorities and budget. Importance given      see Annex 2)
                                  to gender-sensitivity in policy-making tools             Level of compliance with open government
                                                                                           principles
                                                                                           Citizen perception surveys
                                                                                           General characteristics of the government’s
                                                                                           strategic communications capacities
             Aid management       Adherence to the Paris Principles for aid                Level of public access to aid figures and reports,
                                  management (ownership, harmonisation, alignment)         mutual accountability frameworks in place with
                                  and openness of aid management structures to non-        donor groups
                                  governmental actors.
             Local governance     Use of community-based planning processes for local      Citizen perception surveys (integrity, corruption).
                                  development, the involvement of local civil society      Local government corruption indices.
                                  organisations (CSOs) and the private sector, gender
                                  and youth representation in local decision-making.       Use and type of strategic communications by local
                                                                                           governments.
                                  Role and effectiveness of participatory processes in
                                  previous post-disaster operations, if applicable. Access Accountability frameworks applying to local
                                  of women and youth to other local government             government expenditures.
                                  services (not covered in sub-sectors).
                                  Citizen perception surveys on local governments
                                  (openness, participation).
             Maintaining          Policies on and frequency of use of community            Citizen perceptions on integrity of police and
             the rule of law      policing, participatory planning for citizen security    judicial sectors, confidence levels.
                                  plans, involvement of communities in fighting gender-    % of cases of human rights violations leading to
                                  based and other forms of social violence, attitudes of   prosecution.
                                  citizens towards security maintenance during previous
                                  post-disaster situations.                                Capacities of local media to report on human
                                                                                           rights violations


         RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
         The main risks and vulnerabilities linked to the exercise of core government functions in a post-disaster context are:

         	       political determinants that could lead to increased popular strife, opposition with government and conflict
                •
                 in the case of a breakdown in state’s capacities for maintaining the rule of law and/or if perceived or real
                 discrimination in access to humanitarian and recovery assistance managed by the state;

         	       increased exclusion in access to needed services and recovery assistance for specific population groups
                •
                 already marginalised before the disaster in case sufficient safeguards for inclusive participation and account-
                 ability in the planning and management of recovery at all levels are not included;

         	       increased opportunities for and possibly lower levels of control against the misuse of public and donor re-
                •
                 sources, be it by government and non-government bodies and individuals, due to extraordinary conditions,
                 fast-track measures in public financial processes (to accelerate delivery of assistance), a sudden influx of ex-
                 ternal aid onto possibly weak aid management systems, and the general state of disturbance in the rule of
                 law system (depending on the extensiveness of damages).




15   |   GOVERNANCE
         As seen under section 3.1, the socio-political and security context needs to be carefully analysed to evaluate the
         likelihood of the above-mentioned risks. The risks level are qualitative by nature in the area of governance, and
         their analysis usually consists in identifying the various pre-existing and ongoing drivers of instability, violence and
         mismanagement of public affairs. It is important in particular to evaluate the popular legitimacy of the govern-
         ment authorities in place, at national and local levels, and how this legitimacy – or the lack of it – may interfere
         with the recovery process.



         ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS
         The disaster effects on core government functions consist of:

         	    Damage to facilities and assets of public national and local institutions, as well as their direct implementing
             •
              partners from civil society or the private sector, involved in performing the core government functions.
              This will be collected and estimated by the Infrastructure Team, but can be presented in the section of the
              report on governance.

         	    Change in flows of income including:
             •

         		º	 Decline in the quality, quantity and timeliness of delivering these functions and services;

         		º	 Lower revenues and higher costs of performing these functions;

         		º	Unexpected expenditures to meet additional demands for these functions, in terms of volume and/
              or quality, i.e. new dimensions or skills that these functions were not addressing before due to lack
              of capacity or awareness (direct link to the Building Back Better concept). The GT is best placed to
              elaborate and determine the change in flows.

         The added complexity when assessing disaster effects on governance is that:

         		º	The estimated effects may accrue mostly from changes in flows in income/revenue rather than dam-
              age, especially for core government functions as these may run mostly from central government
              level, which do not usually suffer from extensive damages to their facilities;

         		º	The losses involved are rarely immediately quantifiable for core government functions as these func-
              tions do not produce services as such to be used by citizens but rather enable service delivery by
              sectoral institutions (covered in other chapters);

         		º	Large share of the losses may be identified in institutional capacity, which is not easily defined (e.g.
              also influenced by political considerations) and which may take time to become evident; hence, some
              may not be captured during the PDNA process.

         Annex 3 presents a template for recording the effects, which will then be used for estimating corresponding
         values and change in flows.




16   |   GOVERNANCE
         EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
         The main types of assets considered for core government functions are:

         	    Buildings: public administration buildings and facilities housing institutions at the central, provincial and
             •
              local levels;

         	   • Equipment and vehicles;

         	    Cash assets: in cases where some were held by concerned institutions in their facilities rather than in a
             •
              banking institution. This may be common in countries with a limited banking system and/or where local
              governments play a basic financial management role and only perform small cash-based transactions and
              hold a safe in their office. The same may apply to local courts and police stations.

         Documents and records held by governance administrations are crucial to their good functioning. They can be
         in hard or soft copies. The loss of records can limit, for example, a government institution’s capacity to issue
         certificates affecting personal welfare of individuals or income of businesses (for activities requiring government
         licensing). However, since documents and records do not have a market value, they cannot be counted as dam-
         ages; their replacement is counted as a loss.

         Physical assets relevant for the government sector are not necessarily held only by state institutions. When a
         non-state actor plays an important and direct role in the delivery of a function, its assets should be accounted
         for. In terms of core government functions, this is mostly relevant for the rule of law function (justice and se-
         curity), where NGOs and the traditional authorities may play an important role and local Governance Sectors
         and where local governments may be contracting NGO or private sector partners to assist in community mo-
         bilisation and strategic communications, or in the delivery of certain other public services (not already covered
         in sub-sectors PDNAs).

         There must be careful coordination between PDNA teams to avoid double counting of damages on public ad-
         ministration buildings and assets at the sub-national level. While institutional facilities are fairly sector-specific at
         the central level, it is not always the case at the sub-national level. For example, a governorate administration
         building may host the governor and his/her office (considered as a local government institution) as well as the
         departments of education, health and agriculture, etc. that would be reported under the corresponding sub-sec-
         tors. When reporting damage on such a multi-purpose administrative complex, it should be pro-rated under
         the different concerned sub-sectors or reported entirely under the local governance line item, in particular if the
         whole cost of the building replacement and maintenance will be borne only by the provincial/governorate bud-
         get, which would apply in advanced devolution of service delivery to the local level.




17   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 6. Examples of Key Buildings and Assets Relevant to Core Government Functions
                   Function                  Institutions                     Building Types            Equipment Types           Other Assets
             National recovery     Chief Executive’s Office,            Central offices and            Office furniture
             management            National Recovery                    provincial/local branches      Office and IT
                                   Management Body (NRMB)                                              equipment
                                   (if exists), Ministries of finance
                                   and of planning, the army                                           Vehicles
             Aid coordination      NRMB, Ministry of Foreign            Office of the institution      As above
                                   Affairs or Planning, Ministry of     hosting aid coordination
                                   Finance                              services
             Local governance      Ministry of Local                    Central offices for            As above                 Cash reserves (if
                                   Administration, provincial           ministries, Provincial/                                 applicable)
                                                                                                       + technical
                                   governments, local                   governor’s offices             equipment needed to
                                   governments                          and assembly, local /          deliver other services
                                                                        municipality offices and       (not covered in other
                                                                        local council.                 sub-sectors)
             Rule of law           Higher Judicial Authority,           Central offices (ministries,   As above                 Cash reserves (for
                                   Ministries of Justice, and of        police, higher courts),                                 local offices)
                                                                                                       + arms/ammunitions
                                   the Interior, the National Police    sub-national branches          (police)
                                   Court system                         of the police, prison and
                                                                        judicial administrations,      + all inmate care-
                                                                        police stations, prison and    related equipment
                                                                        detention centres, local       (for prisons)
                                                                        courts


         EFFECTS ON DELIVERY OF GOVERNMENT FUNCTIONS, SERVICES AND ACCESS
         Damage to the infrastructure and physical assets of institutions delivering core government functions have
         a direct effect on the performance of the latter. In addition, disaster affects these functions by causing:

         	       changes in the workforce (death, injury, displacement, re-assignments) of institutions responsible for deliv-
                •
                 ering the function, which is not accounted under damages; therefore, a separate inventory of the disaster’s
                 effects on workers of relevant national and local institutions will need to be carried out (including displace-
                 ment, deaths and disabilities). It will be used to evaluate:

         		º	the cost of compensatory benefits for incurred event (death, injury) to be paid from the state’s
              budget;

         		º	 the cost of replacing missing staff (recruiting new staff, re-training existing staff);

         		º	 the effect on the institutions’ capacities to deliver their assigned functions.

         To determine the number of civil servants missing or displaced, and the number and type of public records de-
         stroyed, the team will meet public officials at different levels of government and review administrative records.
         Data should be recorded disaggregated by sex.

         	      • The need for a higher and/or more complex level of delivery than usual. This entails the recruitment of
                  more personnel, purchase of more equipment, use of larger facilities, or increase in the operating budget
                  to reflect a higher level of activities or to procure external services, including for staff training. In this case,
                  the loss of functions is linked to the mismatch between institutional capacities and the demands generat-
                  ed by the disaster. Generally, the functional capacities most critical to the recovery–and most likely to be
                  impacted by the disaster in the institutions involved in core functions are:

18   |   GOVERNANCE
         		º	 Capacity to assess needs including to disaggregate needs according to gender and age;

         		º	 Capacity to collect, store and manage information;

         		º	 Capacity to produce evidence-based strategies, policies and plans;

         		º	 Capacity to coordinate multi-stakeholder actions;

         		º	 Capacity to maintain strategic communications to the public;

         		º	 Capacity to disburse funds for relief and recovery timely and with integrity;

         		º	 Capacity to re-establish, maintain or increase revenue collection to support public finances;

         		º	Capacity to quickly reassign resources (financial, human and technical) according to disaster
              response needs;

         		º	 Capacity to adapt administrative and business processes for greater rapidity of action.

         The GT also needs to measure to what extent the effects on core government functions affect sectoral recovery
         and the services delivered through them such as healthcare, schooling and housing materials. For example, if
         the aid coordination function of central government is not capable of effectively allocating incoming aid to the
         main priorities of the health sector (thematically or geographically), then the recovery of the health sector will
         be impeded in terms of time and quality. As a result, certain populations might lose access to services for longer
         periods than justified by the direct disaster effects on the health sector. While these effects can be evaluated
         qualitatively, it will be very difficult in most cases to give a costing value.

         Table 7 provides examples of common effects of disasters on the delivery of core government functions and their
         effects on the recovery of other sectors. The GT will need to verify the applicability of the listed effects to the
         situation researched and the extent of the effect(s), and collect basic quantitative elements in order to cost the
         corresponding change in flows (see Section 5).




            Capacity is broadly defined here as the ability of organisations (not individuals) to effectively and efficiently (i.e. in terms of quality, speed and cost) carry out,), programmes of coordinated action
         10	
            in pursuit of formally agreed goals. An organisation has capacity when it can: (i) identify, plan, prioritise, implement, monitor, and learn from specific courses of action; (ii) mobilise, deploy and
            where necessary, motivate resources (assets, people, money and information) consistently and continuously on agreed public priorities; and (iii) discipline a heavily constrained system to pursue
            agreed objectives collectively.


19   |   GOVERNANCE
         TABLE 7. Common Effects of disasters on Core Government Functions
              Core Function                        Immediate Effects                                       Secondary Effects
          National recovery man-   A sudden increase in the need for this function         The longer the establishment/activation time for
          agement                  requiring additional facilities, personnel,             the National Recovery Management Body (NRMB),
                                   equipment, operating budget. There may be a             the higher the possibility of a lack of coordination
                                   need to (re-)open local offices in affected areas.      between sub-sectors and between national/local
                                   Strong political support also needed to engineer        institutions for recovery planning. This may also
                                   cross-sector coordination. Depending on the             affect the channelling of donor resources to areas
                                   scale and complexity of the disaster, certain           in need for reconstruction as an overall priority
                                   competencies might be missing in the National           strategy and plan. If the NRMB is not equipped,
                                   Recovery Management Body (NRMB) and need                the required capacities, the recovery plan might
                                   external support. Some key ministries for the           be of poor quality, affecting all aspects of
                                   NRMB mission (Finance, Planning, Interior) might        recovery funded from national budget and donor
                                   be partially incapacitated as well as suffered          contributions. Ultimately, people’s confidence in
                                   damages from disaster. The main effect could be         their government can be severely dented.
                                   delays in engineering a national recovery strategy
                                   and plan, which is also essential to attract donor
                                   support.
          Aid management           As above, a sudden influx of aid flows in response      If aid management is not effectively handled,
                                   to disaster, which could overwhelm existing aid         aid efficiency will be reduced, which means
                                   management capacities in-country, requiring             poorer recovery results (reconstruction, improved
                                   additional staff, equipment, space, software and        livelihoods) per dollar of aid invested. More donors
                                   training. In countries with a poor track record of      will direct aid outside of government channels and
                                   accountability in public finance management,            plans, increasing the probability of aid duplication
                                   additional regulatory measures might be needed          or aid orphans (i.e. geographical locations or
                                   to increase donor confidence, or a new aid              thematic areas of recovery needs that are not
                                   management structure might need to be jump-             covered). Public confidence in the recovery process,
                                   started.                                                including in the role of aid organisations, could be
                                                                                           affected negatively, creating unrest.
          Local governance         Due to direct damages and/or limited capacities,        Sector interventions less aptly aligned to local
                                   inability of local governments to evaluate needs of     needs, possible duplications, slow mobilisation
                                   affected communities quickly or reliably enough,        of communities, conflict may arise over difficult
                                   design local recovery plans that can be used to         communications between communities and aid
                                   coordinate sectoral inputs, execute reconstruction      providers /central institutions, in the absence of
                                   activities or communicate clearly to population on      effective local governments as intermediaries.
                                   recovery plans. Infrastructure repairs, equipment,      Problems with accountability of local governments’
                                   staff renewal or increase, higher operating             management of recovery funds (public or aid) limit
                                   budgets, etc. are urgently needed.                      effectiveness of recovery process and create local
                                   Capacity to collect local revenues also affected and    instability, and can trigger centralization of decision
                                   tax base diminished, leading to severe shortfalls in    making.
                                   local budgets and need for higher indebtedness.
                                   Decreased delivery for services directly under local
                                   governments’ responsibility.
          Rule of law              Damages to the judicial, police and prison facilities   Failure to re-establish swiftly law and order in
                                   opening the door for an increase in crime and           disaster-hit areas means a lower capacity to
                                   disorder, with higher risks for vulnerable groups       implement recovery projects, a slow recovery
                                   (women in particular). Police forces may be             for economic activities (as mobility of goods
                                   insufficient to keep law and order in situations of     and people affected, as well as investments)
                                   post-disaster chaos. Judicial services under high       and increased hardship for stressed populations,
                                   pressure to renew missing documents adjudicate          in particular women and children. Inefficient
                                   property disputes (in higher numbers following          renewal of IDs may limit individuals in accessing
                                   disasters, especially in informal tenure areas) and     government-aid benefits/inheritances and lack
                                   provide protection to populations at risk (e.g.         of settlement of property disputes discourages
                                   widows, orphans, IDP).                                  investing in reconstruction.




20   |   GOVERNANCE
         The effects listed above will be felt at the national and local levels. For the local level, a breakdown is necessary
         according to the administrative divisions of the affected areas. It may also be necessary to consider local govern-
         ment units outside of the disaster area in cases where a large influx of IDP caused by the disaster overburden
         neighbouring hosting communities that were spared by the disaster (e.g. Haiti 2010).

         EFFECTS ON THE GOVERNANCE OF CORE FUNCTIONS
         Inclusive participation: the GT needs to evaluate how the disaster impacts the capacity of all institutions covered
         to conduct their tasks with sufficient and inclusive participation of beneficiaries and other sectors of society (civil
         society, private sector, traditional authorities, etc.) according to the relevance of their involvement. In general, the
         post-disaster phase will create opportunities (and demand) for accrued participation. Lessons learned also show
         that participation is a guarantee of better reconstruction, recovery and resilience-building in the long term. In
         countries with limited experience and practice in participatory decision making, such demand for participation
         post-disaster cannot be met by national and local government institutions without serious policy and capaci-
         ty-building efforts from the government and donors. Where participatory processes are already politically and
         institutionally well-engrained, fewer efforts will be needed to energise them in the post-disaster period because
         existing mechanisms and competencies can be used immediately. In all cases, fomenting and increasing partici-
         pation in recovery represents additional costs to the overall recovery budget, since managing participatory deci-
         sion-making processes involves extra government staff time, logistics, equipment and other operating expenses.
         Disasters can generate empathy among institutions and the public for the plight of the most vulnerable, but
         they can also trigger more self-centred attitudes, not just within individuals, but also within communities and
         small regions. In order to ensure the inclusion of marginalised and vulnerable groups, and not just undefined
         participation, above all it is essential that there be a strong political will at the national and local levels, which aid
         providers can help catalyse. It is equally important that there be increased investments in capacity building (e.g.
         to build gender-sensitive recovery plans) and awareness-raising programmes among the public on the needs of
         the most affected and vulnerable following the disaster and on why the provision of aid needs to be targeted,
         especially in the recovery phase.

         Accountability: Post-disaster periods can seriously challenge a country’s accountability frameworks, given the
         conjunction of increased pressure for rapid delivery (requiring short-cuts in administrative procedures for expend-
         ing public funds), the sudden increase in aid flows while, at the same time, the administrative capacity of the
         overall government machinery, and most certainly of local governments, is impacted negatively by the disaster.
         Nevertheless, there are high expectations for high standards of transparency and accountability in the man-
         agement of public funds available for supporting reconstruction and recovery among the public and the donor
         community when the latter resorts to budget support or other forms of monetary assistance to recovery through
         country systems. As concerns participation, countries with strong pre-existing accountability frameworks and
         records will sustain better this situation of higher demand against lower capacities, while in countries with poor
         track records of accountability in public finances, additional robust measures will need to be taken to avoid fu-
         elling opportunities for corruption, meaning slower recovery for affected communities, and possibly social and
         political unrest if the mismanagement by government institutions is made public. These measures could entail
         recruiting the services of external auditors and financial management experts, setting up separate administra-
         tive systems for the management of recovery aid (e.g. Haiti 2010), and increasing communications to the public
         through media campaigns, among others.


21   |   GOVERNANCE
         Box 1. Finance, Planning, Revenue Collection, Accounting and Auditing

         Disasters heavily impact government finance, planning and accounting, by placing additional pressure on the
         Planning and Finance Departments to process and approve new schemes and monitor performance of execut-
         ing agencies, as well as on other support functions such as accounting and auditing. The effect of a disaster on
         revenue collection, at the central and local levels, should also be measured, in the short and long term. Budget
         deficits will increase following a disaster, not only because of increased expenditures to support recovery, but
         also because of a significant decrease in revenue collected (taxes, fees, services) due to destroyed property and
         assets, slowed economy and increased unemployment. Also, tax cuts are usually awarded to affected families
         following a disaster. In the immediate timeframe, the effect of decreased revenues on the capacity of essential
         institutions to maintain their staffing level and operations has to be measured. The example below demonstrates
         the importance of public financial management (PFM) considerations in post-disaster situations:

         Advancing Transparency in Recovery Operations, Aceh

         The Chairperson of the Agency of the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction for the Region and Community of
         Aceh (BRR) Agency sent a clear message that he was firmly committed to ensuring that all aid and government
         resources would be used transparently and accountably. He backed this up with an Anti-Corruption Unit and by
         asking UNDP to support it to develop the Recovery Aceh-Naas Database (RAND). This became operational later
         than was ideal (about seven months after the disaster), but it ultimately provided a powerful tool to track all aid
         programmes and projects. Efforts were made to account for domestic resources as well as international assis-
         tance, and also to link supply with needs. A housing geospatial database was also developed, which included
         photographs with geographical coordinates of all houses built, which was later extended to cover other assets.
         The 2009 Tsunami Legacy analysis credited this and other measures with having made the recovery more ‘leak-
         proof’. The report also recognised that early designations of grievance focal points and an adequate budget for
         grievance facilitation were critical for reporting abuses and corruption, and for empowering affected commu-
         nities to understand and use these mechanisms. The RAND system is now in the process of being adapted to
         support all aid coordination in the country for longer-term aid effectiveness.




         EFFECTS ON RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
         Pre-existing risks of institutional failure in delivering public goods and services in a participatory, inclusive and ac-
         countable manner, and at a level commensurate with the actual needs of populations are increased in a post-di-
         saster scenario. Vulnerabilities of certain regions and/or groups in society to be excluded from or inequitably
         treated during the recovery phase can also increase in situation of pre-existing marginalisation generated by poor
         governance systems – in particular in core government functions. Disasters can increase competition between
         regions and groups to access relief and recovery assistance, and aggravate political economies working against
         effective and equitable recovery for the most affected. Disasters also create opportunities for criminal activities
         of all kinds and more dangerous spaces for vulnerable populations, above all, women and young children. Al-
         though it is difficult to quantitatively evaluate the increase in risks of mismanagement of public funds, violence
         and unrest, exclusion and so forth, there are possible mitigation measures may be taken and their costs will have
         be accounted in the recovery plan and budget. (See previous paragraphs regarding increasing transparency, re-
         storing law and order, and increasing the protection network around vulnerable groups, etc.)


22   |   GOVERNANCE
         ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF A DISASTER
         Converting the effects of a disaster on core government functions into a numerical value can be challenging
         given how intangible some of the disaster effects on governance are. For example, how can the increased risk
         for mismanagement of public funds be monetised? It is equally difficult estimate the value of induced secondary
         effects of constraints faced post-disaster in the delivery of core functions onto sub-sector recovery (e.g. health,
         education, agriculture, etc.). Nevertheless, using the Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) methodology, generic
         cost items can be defined to help GT turn the evaluation of effects into a monetary value, as detailed in the next
         sections. The method to calculate the costs of damage and loss is described in further detail in separate guidance
         notes (World Bank, 2010).

         For change in flows, as for damages, the distinction should be made between public and private/civil society
         sector damage in order to determine where the weight of the recovery and reconstruction effort will fall.

         ECONOMIC VALUE OF TOTAL/PARTIAL DESTRUCTION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS
         This is based on the damage analysis explained in section 4.1. The sequence of actions is as follows:

         	   a)	Scope the extent of damage relevant to each core government function, with sampling visits for example
                 and secondary data;

         	      Conduct in-depth surveying and data collection for those functions most affected. For example, if the
             b)	
                disaster did not hit the capital city and its central government facilities, the GT can focus all attention on
                local administrations of core ministries, local governments, police and justice system in the disaster-af-
                fected areas.

         	      In principle, damage assessment is conducted on a facility-by-facility basis, usually based on detailed
             c)	
                estimates of numbers of square metres of the infrastructure damaged (disaggregated for roofing, floors,
                walls, etc.), with average unit costs per square meter for repair. In general, public administration of-
                fices are not so numerous that an exhaustive survey cannot be organised. It should not be necessary,
                therefore, to extrapolate damage levels on these facilities for proxies (such as damage on housing), as
                is sometimes done for service delivery facilities (schools, health care centres). For equipment and other
                moveable assets, previous inventories can be used (if available) or alternatively, an approximation needs
                to be established based on number of staff working in the administration and type of work conducted.
                For cash assets, data will need to be sourced from administrative personnel or saved financial records.
                Only qualitative assessment of lost official documents, archives and records can be conducted.




23   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 8. Economic Value of Damages
                   Type                             Itemized Costs                                    Mode of Calculation
          Total destruction of    Cost of replacement                                  Unit cost for full reconstruction of building (as it
          buildings                                                                    was prior to the disaster)
          Partial damage to       Cost of repair works                                 Unit cost for repair of partially damaged
          administrative public                                                        administrative facilities, either based on detailed
          building                                                                     assessment, or in case of large numbers of facilities
                                                                                       affected, on a percentage of full reconstruction
                                                                                       costs.
          Equipment, vehicles     Cost of replacement with new items (except for       Unit cost for replacement of equipment and
          and supplies            vehicles when repairs are possible and less costly   furniture
                                  than replacement)                                    Unit cost for repair of vehicles
                                                                                       Unit cost for replacement of office supplies
                                                                                       (based on annual recurrent budget of concerned
                                                                                       administration.
          Cash assets             Cash amounts lost                                    Use the most recent financial records or interview
                                                                                       financial staff. If not possible, use average based on
                                                                                       previous year data.


         VALUE OF CHANGES IN FLOWS DUE TO CHANGES IN DELIVERY OF FUNCTIONS
         AND SERVICES, AND ACCESS TO SERVICES
         Changes in the financial flows of the sector may occur due to the temporary absence of infrastructure, assets
         and staff and to increased or new demands for the delivery of core government functions to support sub-sectors
         and affected populations and territories. These changes are estimated based on the change in operational costs
         for the provision of post-disaster government functions, including other local government services not covered
         by sub-sectors; they normally include higher expenditures over and above the normal budgetary appropriations
         for the administrations concerned and lower revenues. Typical examples for these changes in flows are shown
         below and can be applied to each core function depending on the disaster observed and anticipated disaster
         effects for each function.




24   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 9. Value of Change in Flows of Income Due to Changes in Delivery of Functions and Services
                       Type                                Details                                            Basis for Calculation
          1. Increased expenditures for:
          Infrastructure          Removing debris, mud and other                               Unit cost per m3 of rubble to remove to next
                                  hazardous materials from the                                 adjacent street for collection. Cost of transport and
                                  destroyed or damaged facilities.                             disposal of rubble included in environment sector
                                                                                               assessment.
          Facilities              Establishing temporary facilities for essential              Market value for office rental or purchase of prefab
                                  administrations (including prisons, police                   facilities. Retrofitting costs for new temporary
                                  stations, courts) that suffered heavy damages and/or         facilities. If existing (and unused), government
                                  increasing size of existing facilities                       facilities maybe used instead to accommodate
                                  due to increased demand for function                         needs for additional space; only retrofitting costs
                                  (needing increase in workforce).                             are to be considered.
                                  Procuring additional office and other equipment and          Market value of additional equipment and other
                                  vehicles, improving connectivity to sustain increased        moveable assets needed.
                                  demand in delivery.
          Staffing                Recruiting and induction training (if needed) for new Recruitment costs calculated in HR staff time or
                                  staff (temporary or long-term) to replace missing staff costs of outsourced recruitment service company (if
                                  and/or to face increased demand.                        applicable).
                                  Redeploying staff from other administrations.                Increased payroll costs due to recruitment
                                                                                               of extra staff (over pre-disaster staff
                                  Paying compensatory benefits to injured
                                                                                               numbers) and/or increased salaries (to
                                  staff or life insurance benefits to families
                                                                                               reflect hardship conditions).
                                  of deceased staff.
                                                                                               Costs of living expenses paid to civil servants
                                                                                               redeployed out of normal duty station into disaster
                                                                                               areas.
                                                                                               Calculation of benefit payments as per applicable
                                                                                               civil service. regulations according to inventory of
                                                                                               injured / deceased staff.
                                                                                               Costs of induction training for new staff.
          Operating budgets       Energy, supplies, travel, fuel, meeting,                     Cost increase measured from comparing pre- and
                                  communications and other operating costs in excess           post-disaster operating budgets of concerned
                                  of previous pre-disaster budget because of logistical        institutions at local and national level, incorporating
                                  constraints created by disaster and/or because of            the impact of increased expected delivery levels
                                  increased level of function delivery needed (e.g.            and increased unit costs of different expenditures
                                  increased need for aid coordination activities, or           (e.g. fuel prices increasing due to the disaster).
                                  increased needs for security maintenance in disaster
                                  areas).
          Documents and           Cost of re-issuing documents (if back-up                     Estimate number of person-days of
          electronic records      data available) in terms of staff time /                     work for replacement retrieval + other supplies
                                  services /supplies.                                          needed.
          2. Change in flows of revenues
          Local government        Revenue losses for local governments (and their              Based on local government law and practices, a
          revenues – service      sub-contractors) from the temporary cessation of             list of concerned services can be established and
          fees                    other local public services (not accounted under             surveying of affected localities to see where such
                                  sub-sectors), such as building, land and business            services have stopped, been reduced or continue
                                  registration, traffic fines, parking fees, other             but without fee collection and evaluate losses
                                  certificate issuance fees, sports and culture facility use   based on pre-disaster collection levels. The losses
                                  fees, etc. Losses in solid waste management fees may         should take into account possible increased fees
                                  apply unless already accounted under community               collected from other services provided by local
                                  infrastructure.                                              governments.




25   |   GOVERNANCE
                    Type                                 Details                                     Basis for Calculation
             Local government     Cost of not collecting local taxes, or delaying      Estimates can be calculated on the basis of pre-
             revenues–            collection, or tax payers defaulting on dues, due    disaster fiscal year revenue (applying an increase
             local taxes          to disaster impeding administrative capacity for     based on the annual average increase rate over the
                                  collection and/or tax relief decided by national/    last 5 years).
                                  local governments due to the disaster’s impact on
                                  household and business incomes.
             Non-governmental     Financial losses of government sub-contractors       Remaining payments on contracts liquidated by
             organisation (NGO)   (NGOs, private companies) due to suspension or       government contracting authority (directly related
             and private sector   cessation of projects/programmes by government       to one of the core government functions).
             revenues             in governance and other service areas not social /
                                  economic sub-sectors (accounted by other teams).
                                  It could be civic education, awareness-raising,
                                  community mobilisation, sports and recreation,
                                  culture, etc.


         ECONOMIC VALUE OF CHANGES IN THE GOVERNANCE OF CORE FUNCTIONS
         The effects of disasters can threaten good governance parametres such as inclusion, participation, transparency
         and accountability. But post-disaster periods can also represent opportunities to achieve higher levels of these
         parametres at the central level in policy-making and in the management of aid received for recovery, and at the
         local level as well. It is usually not possible to evaluate the financial loss involved with a lessened or increased
         participation, inclusion, transparency and accountability at the time of a PDNA – or any time at all – given the
         intangibility of concepts such as trust, social cohesion, or institutional coherence (referring to capacity of central
         and local governments to adopt unified policies for recovery).

         Maintaining or increasing good governance aspects in the management of recovery, aid coordination, local gov-
         ernance and maintenance of rule of law is mostly achieved through technical assistance, capacity building and
         possibly, social accountability initiatives run by civil society groups or the contracting of independent auditing ser-
         vices. These costs would be considered a recovery need rather than a pure loss because many of these activities
         might not have taken place before the disaster and are not essential, strictly speaking, to re-establishing the said
         government function – for example, while much more preferable, the participation of communities in drawing
         recovery plans is not a sine qua non condition for the appropriation of public and donor resources for recovery.

         VALUE OF CHANGE IN FLOWS TO RISKS
         Three risks are identified for core government functions: (i) mismanagement of recovery resources; (ii) increased
         insecurity and violence; and (iii) political unrest. In general, only the second one can be translated into a loss value
         in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. It can include:

         	       Extra costs incurred by central and local governments to prevent further decay of law and order following
                •
                 a number of chaotic days immediately after the disaster (see Haiti 2010, Chile 2010) and to rapidly reduce
                 the risk level. It can involve extra police/army officer deployment, positioning and use of arms and ammu-
                 nitions, establishment of temporary detention facilities (if not counted already as a loss in service delivery)
                 and additional costs for rapid prosecution of violators of public order in this period;

         	       Costs of information campaigns through mass media and direct canvassing of affected communities (since
                •
                 access to media information might be severely curtailed following a disaster) to spread awareness on secu-
                 rity measures taken (e.g. emergency state, curfews) and promote good citizenship attitudes with respect
                 to damaged public and private properties;
26   |   GOVERNANCE
         	       Costs of special measures for the protection of vulnerable groups (women, widows, orphans and isolated
                •
                 children, disabled) such as setting temporary shelters, delivering social assistance, providing dedicated
                 security personnel to areas of concentration, extra efforts at campaigning against sex- and gender-based
                 violence (SGBV) and child abuse, increasing access to legal aid through paralegals, etc. if such expenditures
                 were not accounted under the Health, Education or other sub-sectors. The extra costs for replacing ID and
                 property papers in priority for vulnerable categories are already accounted for under “operating costs” in
                 Table 10;

         	       Losses to public and private properties due to post-disaster looting, which requires surveys among affect-
                •
                 ed businesses, households and administrations. Care must be taken not to account twice loss of assets
                 though (once as direct disaster damage and another time as a risk-related loss).

         Usually, the main disaster-related risks to law and order can be quickly tamed. However, in areas already under
         difficult political and security circumstances (e.g. Pakistani tribal areas), the destabilising effect of a major disaster
         can take longer to quell as the management of recovery by state authorities can provide more fuel to pre-existing
         political unrest.



         ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
         As seen in Section 5, disasters can significantly lower the capacity of governance institutions to plan, manage
         and monitor the recovery process. The longer-term impact of the disaster on core government functions will
         depend on a complex array of parametres, including:

         	      • The type of disaster;

         	      • Pre-existing structure and capacities;

         	      • The political economy of managing the recovery process;

         	      • The amount of policy and programming support that will be devoted to core government functions;

         	       Additional challenges that may arise during the post-disaster phase, such as conflict, major economic or
                •
                 social crisis (e.g. large-scale epidemics) or political instability in the government.

         The impact analysis will provide the basis of the recovery strategy. The specificity of governance, compared to
         other sub-sectors, is that the disaster impact can develop more slowly and not provide clear early warning signs
         – as would, for example, a sudden degradation in the health status of disaster-affected populations. Therefore,
         the GT will have to build different impact scenarios at the time of conducting the PDNA, using lessons learned.
         Table 10 provides indications on how the level of response may influence the different impact scenarios can be
         (based on the assumption of a major disaster hitting a country with rather weak governance institutions at cen-
         tral and local level, e.g. Haiti in 2010), using the level of policy and programming response as the main parameter.




            Evaluating expected losses due to corruption in the use of public and donor funding for recovery, due to weakened accountability systems (after the disaster) and/or increased opportunities for
         11	
            corruption (see 4.3) is both politically and technical highly sensitive. In general, losses due to the misuse of public funds are known months if not years after the post-disaster recovery assistance
            has been provided.


27   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 10. Different Possible Impact Scenarios on Core Government Functions
           Core Function                No Response                      Restoration of Previous            Restoration and Development
                                                                             Capacity Only                          Of Capacities
                                                                         (Mostly Infrastructure)
          National recovery   Recovery is entirely managed           Some coordination takes place         There is strong national leadership
          management          by sectors, without an overall         for strategic planning, but limited   over planning, implementing and
                              strategy, leaving possible gaps        capacities (lack of staff and         monitoring the recovery, with good
                              in area coverage, duplications         budget to extend presence at          integration of sectoral responses
                              and contradictions, poor use of        sub-national level of the National    guided by long-term national
                              financial resources and lack of        Recovery Management Body              development plan and governance
                              public communication, leading          [NRMB] impede a proactive             reforms. Capacity to better deal
                              to slow recovery, and loss of          leadership during implementation,     with future disasters is built and
                              confidence in public and among         where silo to recovery approaches     important steps are taken to
                              donors. External actors (donors,       take over, especially if local        increase national resilience against
                              NGOs) remain the main drivers of       governance is not supported as        disasters once the major phase of
                              the recovery, each with its own        well. Insufficient communications     the recovery is over. All disaster
                              vision and approach.                   and limited impact on public          areas have received assistance and
                                                                     confidence.                           vulnerable groups were supported
                                                                                                           effectively.
          Aid management      Aid management system is               Official aid tracked but other aid    Aid is captured accurately, not
                              quickly overwhelmed by the influx      sources (NGOs, decentralised,         only at the time of commitment,
                              of aid following the disaster.         private) are not captured, leading    but also during implementation.
                              Most aid is extra budgetary            to reduced aid effectiveness in       Results are regularly reported,
                              and is programmed with little          certain locations. Aid Information    facilitating a critical dialogue
                              involvement of government,             Management Systems (AIMS) not         between beneficiaries, government
                              leading to duplications and aid        able to provide reliable real-time    and donors. National ownership
                              orphans. National development          analysis to the NRMB to support       is increased, and a growing part
                              plan is not sufficiently considered    its work. Monitoring of aid-          of aid is included in the budget
                              during recovery, creating long-        funded programmes is basic and        (or will be included during the
                              term negative impact on poverty        incomplete, making reporting          next disaster). The government
                              alleviation and public sector          difficult. Aid coordination           is also able to decentralised aid
                              reform. Allegations of misuse of       structures are in place but not all   management to better coordinate
                              foreign aid abound.                    parts are functioning.                non-ODA flows.
          Local governance    There is reduced participation         Local governments can maintain        The Recovery Plan truly incorporates
                              of communities in planning and         visible state presence during         local aspirations while reflecting
                              managing aid, and recovery plans       crisis and take part in various       national development goals. Issues
                              mostly designed at central level.      recovery activities, but not all      in implementation are quickly dealt
                              On the ground, there is little or no   can take a leadership position.       with due to good coordination of
                              coordination between sectors / aid     In many locations, NRMB or            LGs with sectoral actors and NRMB.
                              providers. Certain service needs       sectors have the lead. There is       Aid projects are aligned with local
                              are neglected and community            some participation, but it is not     policies (not just national). People
                              cohesion unravels. Local revenues      systematic and women/youth            gain confidence in their local
                              remain extremely depleted,             are excluded. People have little      governments as they are regularly
                              limiting investment capacities of      understanding of the recovery         informed of and see progress
                              crippled local governments.            process. Resumption of service        happening. Local revenues are
                                                                     delivery by LGs remains stunted.      quickly re-established and invested.




28   |   GOVERNANCE
            Core Function              No Response                      Restoration of Previous            Restoration and Development
                                                                            Capacity Only                          Of Capacities
                                                                        (Mostly Infrastructure)
          Maintaining       Security chaos that may have            Order is re-established and           Not only is law and order quickly
          the rule of law   followed disaster sets in and           communities do not fall into          retrieved on the streets, but
                            disaster areas become crime zones       more violence, but the general        community security improves over
                            where illegal activities develop.       environment remains difficult for     what it was before, capitalising on
                            Women and children cannot               women and children. Victims of        increased security presence and
                            circulate safely, loss in livelihoods   human rights abuses, including        positive social cohesion following
                            /education opportunities. Small         the spoliation of property, are       disaster. There are better police
                            disputes degenerate quickly into        not adequately supported. Access      and judicial facilities. SGBV is aptly
                            larger conflicts and businesses are     to justice is not swiftly restored;   confronted by authorities and
                            discouraged to resume activities.       leaving customary justice to          community leadership. The local
                                                                    dominate.                             police better prepared for the next
                                                                                                          disaster.

         The macro-economic impact analysis for governance mostly relates to the weight on public finances of change
         in economic flows and recovery needs. For example, government budgets may have to bear the heavy cost of
         paying compensation benefits for a large number of civil servants (injured or dead), such as in Aceh in 2004,
         and local revenue losses will place more burden on national budgets to subsidise local governments, while
         national revenues are also affected because of the economic impact of the disaster. To measure the impact on
         macro-economic variables, analyses are usually performed on the post-disaster performance on gross domestic
         product (GDP), the balance of payments (BOP) and the fiscal sector.

         The human development impact is the difference between pre- and post-disaster levels of human development
         directly resulting from the disaster. It also includes the cumulative deficits accruing until human development
         has recovered and losses to the advancement of human development during the disaster and recovery period.
         The impact on human development is the disaster impact on the quality of human life in the medium and long
         term as measured through indexes such as the Human Development Index, the Gender Inequality Index and
         the Multidimensional Poverty Index. In addition, the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) can provide
         a framework for a macro assessment of the human development effect of disaster damage. It is difficult in a
         short time after a disaster to measure impact on human development for any sectors, particularly for gover-
         nance, since the impact of failing governance systems (due to a disaster) will make itself felt in the long-term
         only and often in a diffuse manner that is not easy to quantify. It would require a level of baseline and research
         that is not feasible in the framework of a PDNA. The only certainty is that for sectoral responses to be effective,
         a positive enabling institutional and fiscal environment is needed, which can only be provided with strong core
         government functions; hence, a severe impact on some or all of these functions will inevitably cause an impact
         of reduced progress on higher human development levels.




29   |   GOVERNANCE
         CROSS-SECTOR LINKAGES INCLUDING
         CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
         Cross-sector linkages between governance – prioritised in core government functions in post-disaster situations
         – and sub-sectors has already been largely addressed in Section 2.1 (See Figure 2) and throughout the disaster
         effect and impact sections. In summary:

         	   • Governance is both cross-cutting to all sub-sectors and a sub-sector in its own;

         	    Being a cross-cutting element, governance is discussed directly in each sub-sector chapter as well as in the
             •
              PDNA Guide (Chapter B). It deals mostly with the administration of service delivery, from central level to
              service delivery facility;

         	    Governance as a sub-sector deals with the core government functions that provide the necessary enabling
             •
              political, institutional and fiscal environment for the delivery of recovery support in social and economic
              activity sub-sectors. A main focus is the coordination of sub-sector delivery, on the one hand, at the policy
              and funding level (central government role), and on the other hand, at the needs assessment, planning and
              implementation level (role of local governments and other local governance stakeholders). Ensuring that
              cross-cutting governance imperatives of participation, inclusion and accountability are also embedded in
              all recovery operations is also a task ultimately attached to core government functions, but also reflected
              in sub-sector governance processes.

         	    Maintaining law and order in disaster-affected areas rapidly decreases risks of violence against vulnerable
             •
              individuals and groups, and ensures continued access of affected populations to justice to deal with disas-
              ter-related legal issues (e.g. land and property issues, reparations). A secure environment where wrongdo-
              ing against individuals and legal entities (e.g. organisations, companies, local governments) is investigated
              and punished according to the law – rather than according to mob rule – is beneficial to recovery activities
              in all other sub-sectors and to social cohesion, and helps build trust of affected populations in their state
              institutions.

         	    Special care must be taken in avoiding double-counting between core government functions and sub-sec-
             •
              tors in damages on public buildings and loss of revenues from service delivery (by local governments). The
              latter can be more problematic in contexts of high-level of devolution of service delivery to local govern-
              ments. For this reason, prior analytical review of the government institutional framework with all sub-sec-
              tor teams is needed in all cases to delineate areas of surveying under core government functions.

         Below are considerations relating to cross-cutting issues affecting as well the Governance Sector. The assess-
         ment should indicate how these issues can be addressed in the recovery process, and should establish cross-
         sector arrangements as required with other sector teams to ensure that they are adequately addressed in the
         Recovery Strategy.

         DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
         DRR considerations should be mainstreamed in the way that core government functions are delivered in the
         future, especially for local governance.

30   |   GOVERNANCE
         First, to ensure that the recovery process builds back better, it is important to ensure that sufficient understand-
         ing of the necessity and modalities to integrate DRR into the recovery planning and implementation process be
         present in institutions involved with core government functions.

         Below are other suggestions of elements to consider for DRR as it relates to governance:

         	    Identify national and local institutions and technical specialists responsible for DRR that should participate
             •
              in the recovery planning process to ensure it integrates DRR and builds back better;

         	    Identify national and local governance processes that organise territorial development planning, from na-
             •
              tional down to local levels, and how DRR concerns can be better mainstreamed in these processes;

         	    Identify needs for technical assistance, human resources, guidance materials and other capacity develop-
             •
              ment resources that will build the government’s capacity to mainstream DRR into recovery planning and
              implementation across all sectors as well as longer-term territorial development planning;

         	    Assess the need for further technical assessments in affected areas, such as hazard and risk mapping, envi-
             •
              ronmental impact assessments and other similar studies needed to facilitate sustainable land-use planning;

         	    Identify the existence of policy and legal frameworks that can support the integration of DRR into core
             •
              government processes, and any adjustments that may be required to enable the process;

         	    Estimate the financial resources required for integrating disaster risk management (DRM) and BBB, and
             •
              integrating these in national and local governments’ budgets;

         	    Strengthening local government’s capacities in DRR and DRM is essential to help them lead the process of
             •
              local recovery and BBB.

         In promoting BBB, the assessment should consider what is needed to enhance governance, such as a profession-
         al, proactive, modern and efficient public administration system and follow good governance principles, such as:

         	   • Improved infrastructure when rebuilding or repairing damaged government infrastructure;

         	   • Improved public service functions and efficient management systems;

         	   • Improved public service provision;

         	   • Improved institutional arrangements, policies and procedures;

         	    Improved gender mainstreaming and community governance participation mechanisms inclusive of wom-
             •
              en and men.

         THE ENVIRONMENT
         Coordination is necessary with the Environment Team to avoid double-counting in the assessment of environ-
         ment-related governance activities. For example, environmental concerns should be integrated high up in the
         policy development chain for recovery. This would require close involvement of the Ministry of Environment
         or a similar body in the national recovery coordination mechanism and process. The costs associated with this
         involvement and the support activities that it will entail should be reflected in the Environment PDNA chapter
         (since the Ministry of Environment is not one of the ministries involved in core government functions). However,
         the leadership and the content of these overall policy planning and coordination activities fall under the gover-
31   |   GOVERNANCE
         nance sub-sector. This is actually the case with any other sub-sectors with respect to sub-sector participation in
         developing an overall recovery vision and participating in the overall management of the recovery process. Also,
         certain environmental services, such as solid waste management and the protection of natural areas, may be
         directly under local governance (if it is a prerogative of local governments), or under community infrastructure,
         and should not be reported twice.

         GENDER
         Governance systems determine the relationship between state and citizens. Citizen interaction with the state is
         not gender-neutral. Governance systems reflect the power dynamics in a society and therefore often determine
         citizens’ ability to access services and resources, and to raise their voices to demand and make their government
         accountable.

         Gender relations and women’s realities often limit their ability to negotiate with the state including through civil
         society organisations. Factors obstructing women’s ability to benefit from the recovery process and outcomes,
         build capabilities, and exercise their rights include discriminatory practices, gender-based violence (GBV), and
         women’s unpaid and informal work, among others. These structural barriers are often deepened by non-respon-
         sive legal systems, ineffective public policy design, inadequate service provision and investments. Disasters can
         exacerbate these barriers and create new ones. Thus, in order to ensure that these barriers are taken into account
         in the recovery phase, it is necessary to ensure that women’s needs, interests and priorities concerning service de-
         livery and institutional arrangements, policies and procedures are voiced. The assessment can help identify how
         core government functions and services can be improved in a manner that responds to inequalities, addresses
         imbalances in programming and investment, and eliminates biases in public policy and processes that deepen
         the exclusion of women. This also includes ensuring that sufficient priority is given to protecting women and
         girls against increased risks of violence and spoliation of assets and property rights in the aftermath of a disaster.

         It is essential to promote a stronger understanding of gender equality among institutions involved in core func-
         tions since these institutions are leaders in shaping policies, plans and upholding accountability of state institu-
         tions. Biases against women need to be addressed and accountability mechanisms put in place to monitor the
         adequacy and impact of public investments and service provision for a more equitable outcome for women.
         The participation of women’s organisations as well as consultations with women, girls, boys and men in the as-
         sessment and the development of the Recovery Strategy can ensure that service delivery is more demand-driven
         and more effectively targeted and financed. It is also a critical element of ensuring legitimacy and effectiveness
         of governance systems (UN Women, 2012). Also, gender balance in capacity-building programmes for staff of
         governance institutions, both as providers and recipients, must be emphasised.

         CONFLICT MANAGEMENT
         In cases where there is an existing internal conflict or conflict potential, the Governance Team should conduct
         the assessment through a conflict-sensitive lens, and integrate conflict mitigation objectives in the recovery strat-
         egy. As with other sector teams, the focus should be at a minimum on the ‘do no harm’ principle by managing
         and ensuring that national and local tensions along social, political or ethnic lines are taken into account while
         assessing needs and planning recovery strategies. However, in violence-prone and politically fragile contexts, it
         will be important for each sector assessment to refer to the qualitative section of the Governance Assessment
         (i.e. analysis of political process and risks for socio-political tensions in the post-disaster context) to evaluate the
         potential impact of socio-political processes on the sector’s recovery strategy, and vice versa. In conflict-prone
32   |   GOVERNANCE
         settings, as already underlined, the governance PDNA should pay particular attention to assessing capacities for
         participatory recovery and identifying risks of exclusion since excluding certain groups from disaster recovery pro-
         cesses can only exacerbate the conflict risk. Similarly, confidence-building measures that can improve the hold of
         the social contract between governance institutions and the people, especially during the phase of reconstruc-
         tion where expectations run high but governance capacities are depleted, will be of particular importance. The
         GT will need to highlight where and what confidence-building measures are the most needed.



         THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY
         The Recovery Strategy for the Governance Sector follows the guiding principles, objectives and consultative
         process of the overall PDNA as outlined in Volume A. As such, the Sector Recovery Strategy will include the
         following four core components:

         	   1.	 The agreed vision and guiding principles for the overall recovery process of the sector;

         	   2.	 Outline of recovery needs in governance based on results of the assessment;

         	   3.	 Outline of results-based recovery plan for governance;

         	   4.	 Outline of implementation arrangements.

         VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
         The recovery vision is developed jointly during a consultative process (see below), which ensures the support of
         key stakeholders for the recovery strategy. The recovery vision serves as a guide for the recovery process and
         provides the overall direction and goal that the stakeholders desire to achieve.

         The overall goal of the recovery of core government functions is to enable an integrated and coherent overall
         recovery and reconstruction process that produces timely and effective improvements in the living conditions
         of disaster-affected populations, including their security. This would uphold the core principles of inclusion and
         integrity. The recovery of the machinery of government (core government functions) aims to strengthen national
         ownership and leadership over the planning and implementation of recovery across all areas of intervention,
         especially if the humanitarian phase has been mostly led by external actors. It also aims to correct the negative
         impact of disasters on core institutions of the national and local governance systems. This would result in safer
         institutional infrastructure and better preparation for coordination in order to more effectively and accountably
         respond to future disasters. However, efforts to improve the governance of recovery should strengthen the social
         contract that binds state and society.

         The recovery vision for governance should be guided by the country’s public sector reform objectives, which may
         be framed in a single public sector reforms strategy document and/or within the National Development Plan. If
         a decentralisation reform is underway, it will also provide broad parametres with which the recovery of the local
         Governance Sector should be aligned. Finally, if a security sector reform and/or judicial reform are underway,
         these would guide elements of the recovery strategy pertaining to re-establishing the rule of law in disaster-af-
         fected areas. At times, the recovery process can be used to accelerate the implementation of the above-listed


33   |   GOVERNANCE
         reforms. Indeed, the post-disaster period offers important – but not unlimited and often short – windows of
         opportunities for governance reforms. The enthusiasm for reconstruction may be high, the generosity of donors
         considerable, and resistance to change reduced.

         Significant pre-disaster constraints in the performance of core government functions need to be taken into
         account, and planning for recovery should include further analysis to address them where relevant. However,
         stakeholders involved in PDNAs need to be cautious about introducing institutional and regulatory reforms or
         to aiming for significant improvements in short periods to attain better accountability and effectiveness in gov-
         ernance. The need for reform needs to be balanced with what can be practically achieved in the context of a
         disaster recovery strategy and critically evaluated in the light of the current political economies at national and
         local levels. Major reforms will rarely work in such contexts, and governments should be cautious of the encour-
         agement of international consultants or influential donors to introduce sweeping new policy approaches that
         may not be appropriate or realistic for the context.

         Guiding principles for governance recovery should be defined to inform the sector recovery strategy. These
         should be agreed to within the GT under the leadership of the government. Examples of recovery guiding prin-
         ciples in governance include the following (see Annex 4 for additional details):

         	    Government commitment, leadership and ownership at all levels are critical for successful overall recovery,
             •
              and use process to strengthen their capacity to assume such leadership role;

         	    Planning governance system recovery should start very early, given the criticality to establish national sys-
             •
              tems and capacities to steer recovery interventions as soon as the humanitarian phase concludes;

         	    Central coordination of recovery should be underpinned by a greater responsibility of local governance
             •
              institutions in the implementation of recovery and reconstruction interventions;

         	    Institutional arrangements should be promoted that facilitate the participation of women and men of all
             •
              ages, in particular the most vulnerable sub-groups of the affected populations in order to understand and
              take into account their distinct experiences of the disaster, as well as their specific needs and priorities for
              reconstruction and recovery;

         	    Sound financial management, transparency and accountability at all levels of governance should be en-
             •
              couraged;

         	    Channel funds should be provided to those with the strongest incentives to use them for the intended
             •
              purposes;

         	    Civil society and the private sector should be engaged to establish partnerships aimed at gains in efficiency
             •
              and effectiveness;

         	    Communication should be used to promote awareness of rights and entitlements during recovery and
             •
              reconstruction;

         	    In politically divided contexts, a response should be provided to the diverse, sensitive views of stakeholders,
             •
              especially the government;

         	    Conflict sensitivity should be used in recovery and appropriate strategies to promote social cohesion and
             •
              political stability.

34   |   GOVERNANCE
         STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS
         Similar consultation arrangements than used during the needs assessment phase should be followed while de-
         veloping the recovery strategy. At the helm of the consultation process remains the Governance Sector Team led
         by the National Recovery Management Body and including representatives of key institutions involved in core
         government functions (see Section 2.4). The GT is supported by experts from United Nations agencies, World
         Bank, the European Union and other donors.

         The pressure to produce a recovery strategy swiftly will likely be high following the completion of the needs
         assessment phase, and hence a more condensed and workshop-based consultation process may be needed.

         	   1.	The starting point of the consultation process on the proposed governance recovery strategy should be
                 at the central level, with a broad representation of core institutions (including some representation of
                 sub-national governance actors) and sub-sectors teams. Results of the PDNA, an outline of the strategy
                 (with key objectives) as well as a draft budget should be presented. Major donors should be invited to
                 attend but could also be consulted subsequently in a separate occasion.

         	   2.	A round of consultations is then held at the local level in different disaster-struck areas in order to more
                 closely engage local governments, civil society and the local private sector.

         	      On the basis of feedback received during the first two steps, a complete recovery strategy can be final-
             3.	
                ised by the GT. It would then most probably be incorporated in the overall recovery strategy including
                all sub-sectors and cross-cutting areas, which will be presented by the government to donors and the
                public.

         RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILDING BACK BETTER
         Reconstruction and recovery needs are informed by the assessment results and the overall recovery strategy,
         distinguishing the needs to restore functionality of core government processes from the needs to increase and
         improve the delivery of these functions in order to catalyse the recovery process across all sectors, strengthen
         DRM and reduce risks and vulnerabilities of mismanagement, violence and political unrest.

         The most common reconstruction and recovery needs for governance concern:

         	   • Rebuilding and improving facilities and equipment to face surges in the demand for functions/services;

         	   • Replacing missing staff and recruit additional temporary ones;

         	   • Strengthening managerial and technical capacities for critical tasks needed during recovery;

         	   • Organising coordination, consultation and outreach activities.

         It needs to be emphasised that, in the case of core government functions, possibly as opposed to other sub-sec-
         tors, restoring operational capacity (facilities, staff, budget) to pre-disaster levels and even beyond, from a qual-
         itative point of view, is often not sufficient for a successful recovery, especially in countries which had a poorly
         functioning public administration prior to the disaster and/or countries that have never experienced disaster
         response and recovery before. The need for capacity development, as part of a BBB approach, then becomes
         the principal feature of the recovery strategy. Generally, across all categories of core government functions, the
         following capacities may need support in the form of technical assistance and training:

35   |   GOVERNANCE
         	    Information management –to collect higher amounts of data and handle higher information flows,
             •
              and provide analysis by sector, geographic area, beneficiary groups and institutions in order to facilitate
              cross-sector and spatial analysis at the national and local levels and to support decision-making, overall
              planning and coordination;

         	    Planning, in particular, multi-sector integrated planning processes and participatory planning;
             •

         	    Coordination, in particular for complex operations and multi-stakeholder processes involving international
             •
              actors;

         	    Project implementation and monitoring;
             •

         	    Accountable financial management, including by strengthening financial tracking systems and auditing
             •
              capacities;

         	   • Monitoring progress with tangible indicators and reporting on progress (related to IM capability);

         	   • Resource mobilisation and advocacy;

         	    Public outreach and social marketing in order to build confidence and mobilise civic participation and pos-
             •
              itive attitudes towards recovery (respect for rule of law, volunteerism);

         	   • Gender mainstreaming and compliance with human rights commitments;

         	   • Conflict sensitivity;

         	   • Human/citizen security.

         Table 11 presents a list of possible reconstruction and recovery needs that frequently apply in post-disaster con-
         texts. Because of the specific nature of governance processes and interventions, there is no distinction made
         among recovery needs between sub-categories used until now to analyse damages and losses, namely: function
         delivery and access, governance and risk limitation. These are not sufficiently clear-cut conceptual categories
         when defining recovery needs in governance processes, which imply overwhelmingly capacity development
         interventions that can serve all these three purposes at the same time.




36   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 11. Reconstruction and Recovery Needs for Core Government Functions
              Core function         Reconstruction Needs                                         Recovery Needs
          National recovery man-   Repairs or reconstruction        Setting up temporary facilities (during reconstruction). New facilities if the
                                                                   •
          agement                  (including refurbishing          NRMB is new entity (preferably use of existing building to avoid delays) –
                                   with equipment) of               national / sub-national levels.
                                   facilities of core ministries    Replacing missing staff and recruiting additional temporary ones (including
                                                                   •
                                   and NRMB involved in             through public sector re-assignments, UN Volunteers, consultants) to face
                                   piloting the recovery            a surge in demand for functions.
                                   process.
                                                                    Strengthening capacities for strategic planning and recovery policy
                                                                   •
                                                                    formulation, gender mainstreaming, leadership and coordination, public
                                                                    communications/ media relations, results-based monitoring and financial
                                                                    auditing.
                                                                    Establishing strong intersectoral coordination mechanisms
                                                                   •
                                                                    Organising broad-based consultations with civil society, private sector and
                                                                   •
                                                                    local governments.
                                                                    Conducting outreach campaigns on recovery strategy and results,
                                                                   •
                                                                    including through social media tools.
                                                                    Reinforcing capacities of state audit organs and/or contracting external
                                                                   •
                                                                    independent auditing capacity.
          Aid management           Aid management usually          etting up temporary facilities (during reconstruction) and/or extensions
                                   hosted by a unit in one         (including equipment) to respond to increased demand.
                                   of the core ministries           Replacing missing staff and deploying additional temporary ones.
                                                                   •
                                   or the NRMB, hence
                                   reconstruction needs             Organising effective donor coordination and producing resource
                                                                   •
                                   covered in the first             mobilisation materials.
                                   function of this table .         Strengthening capacities in aid modalities, aid tracking and databases, aid
                                                                   •
                                                                    effectiveness, coordination, donor and public relations, and results-based
                                                                    monitoring, reporting.
                                                                    Developing ICT and software solutions.
                                                                   •
          Local governance         Repairs/reconstruction of •    Setting up temporary facilities (during reconstruction) and/or extensions
                                   seats of provincial, district,  (including equipment) to respond to increased demand.
                                   municipal governments,          Replacing missing staff and deployment of additional
                                                                  •
                                   refurbishing (including         temporary staff.
                                   vehicles), restoring
                                   connectivity.                   Providing short-term budgetary support to compensate loss
                                                                  •
                                                                   of local revenues (and/or debt relief or soft loans).
                                   Replacing technical
                                   equipment needed                Strengthening the local government’ and non-state partners’ capacities
                                                                  •
                                   for local governments’          for leadership and coordination, needs assessment and data management,
                                   services not covered            recovery planning, participatory processes, gender mainstreaming, conflict
                                   under other sub-sectors         resolution, advocacy and public outreach, financial management, results-
                                                                   based monitoring.
                                                                    Setting up (or upgrading) participatory mechanisms for planning,
                                                                   •
                                                                    implementation and monitoring.
                                                                    Conducting outreach campaigns, including through social
                                                                   •
                                                                    media, on community mobilisation, recovery plans and results,
                                                                    DRR and resilience.
                                                                    Implementing social accountability initiatives of civil society to monitor the
                                                                   •
                                                                    use of recovery aid at the local level.




37   |   GOVERNANCE
                 Core function           Reconstruction Needs                                          Recovery Needs
             Re-establishing the rule   Repairs/ reconstruction          Setting up temporary facilities (during reconstruction) and additional ones
                                                                        •
             of law                     of central/local                 in sensitive locations.
                                        administrations of               Increasing mobility of the civil registry, police officers and justice personnel
                                                                        •
                                        government offices such          in locations isolated by disaster effects.
                                        interior, police, justice, as
                                        well as police stations,         Replacing missing staff and deploying additional temporary ones.
                                                                        •
                                        district courts, prisons,        Strengthening capacities for community policing, child and women
                                                                        •
                                        civil registry, land and         protection (including against trafficking), SGBV, conflict resolution in land
                                        property administration.         and property disputes, human rights and increased risks faced during post-
                                        Re-equipping the national        disaster situations.
                                        and municipal police             Conducting outreach campaigns, including through social media, on civic
                                                                        •
                                        forces with vehicles,            attitudes in post-disaster situations, law and order, sex-and gender-based
                                        weaponry                         violence (SGBV), land and property dispute resolution, etc.
                                        and ammunitions.


         THE GOVERNANCE RECOVERY PLAN
         PRIORITISING AND SEQUENCING RECOVERY NEEDS
         A proposed formulation of outputs for the Governance Recovery Plan, structured around the four priority core
         government functions, is presented below. They will need to be revisited against the reality of each country’s
         context, the chosen recovery strategy and available financial resources.

         	         A country-led effective management of reconstruction and recovery, ensuring coherent interventions
                a)	
                   and financial investments among sectors, building back more resilient communities and systems, and
                   guaranteeing an accountable use of the related earmarked national and donor resources.

         The national authorities need to have the capacity to plan strategically for the reconstruction and recovery of
         disaster-hit areas, guide sectoral planning accordingly, implement programmes, and supervise implementation
         by other actors, monitor the recovery and report on it transparently. The NRMB is the centrepiece of a strong
         nationally owned and led recovery process.

         	      b)	All aid, including international assistance for recovery, is coordinated, tracked and reported on in a timely,
                    transparent and accountable manner, achieving the recovery and development results for which it was
                    intended.

         The government needs to establish or strengthen its aid management and co-ordination architecture so as to
         ensure strong national ownership that will support alignment of recovery assistance with national development
         priorities, harmonisation of donor strategies and modalities, and higher efficiency of aid contributions. The
         management of aid needs to be highly accountable, to the people and to donors, requiring robust information
         management and excellent reporting and communications capacities.

         	      c)	An effective delivery of recovery assistance at the local level, directly relevant to local needs and aspira-
                    tions, is managed with community participation and scrutiny, and for which local governments play a
                    significant leadership and coordination role.

         Local actors need to: assess and aggregate reconstruction and recovery needs collected from affected commu-
         nities; accordingly draft local recovery plans and initiatives with community participation; advocate with sector
         ministries and the NRMB to ensure uptake of local needs in recovery response; mobilise resources from the
         central government, national/ international NGOs and donors; coordinate incoming assistance in support of the

38   |   GOVERNANCE
         plan; communicate effectively and transparently on the recovery efforts; and promote positive civic attitudes
         among the population.

         	         A rapid restoration of law, order and security in disaster-hit areas, building upon social capital and com-
                d)	
                   munity-based crime and conflict prevention mechanisms, and providing safe spaces for the recovery of
                   individual livelihoods, in particular that of groups more vulnerable to post-disaster violence and abuses.

         State institutions, and in particular its security forces, must be able to quickly restore and strengthen law and
         order in areas hit by the disaster and to minimise violence on individuals and looting of private and public prop-
         erties. Community-based approaches to preserving security should be supported by the government, donors
         and civil society, and rapid efforts made to make public spaces safe again for women, youth and other vulnera-
         ble groups. Judicial and local authorities and civil society also need to effectively respond to the rising needs of
         the affected populations for the replacement of lost personal documentation, including property titles, and the
         arbitration of the many property-related disputes that typically arise after a disaster.

         The Governance Sector recovery strategy will be formulated following a results-based model, detailing each
         intervention under agreed-upon outputs. It will include: (i) priority needs; (ii) interventions required; (iii) expected
         results; (iv) recovery costs; and (v) intended outcomes. Table 12 provides an example of this process.

         Table 12. Example of Recovery Intervention Formulation
             Priority Need              Interventions             Expected Results            Cost                       Intended Outcomes
             Restore the basic           Open temporary
                                        •                       The mayor’s office and       $US50,000 (repairs /        Local governments able
             functionality of five       office facilities.      his/her planning unit        prefabs)                    to start coordinating
             local governments                                   have facilities and are                                  recovery process and
                                        •
                                         Replace missing staff                                $ 90,000 (3 staff per year)
             (front office + planning                            staffed and equipped                                     resume basic service
                                         with local consultants.                              $100,000 (3 vehicles, IT
             unit) in X province.                                to the pre-disaster level.                               delivery.
                                        •
                                         Replace missing                                      and power supply).
                                         equipment.                                           Total per LG =$240,000
                                                                                              Total: $1,200,000

         Recovery needs in the Governance Sector will have to be sequenced (short-, medium- and long-term, as appro-
         priate), particularly in view of the multiple needs across all sectors and limited resources. A general set of consid-
         erations for prioritisation is presented in Chapter B of this PDNA Guide and are applicable as well to governance
         recovery. In situations of disasters in conflict areas, conflict sensitivity and the imperatives of peace building
         will also feature high among prioritisation criteria, especially for geographical targeting. Table 13 shows an ex-
         ample of prioritisation of interventions, separating restoration from BBB needs, which could apply to the case
         of a country hit by a major disaster, including over its capital city (hence creating damages on its central govern-
         ment institutions).




39   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 13. Sequencing Recovery Needs for the Governance Sub-sector

           Function                                                                      Phase
                                 Short-term (0–3 m)                             Medium-term (4–18 m)                           Long-term (18 –36 m)
          National     Infrastructure      Other Needs              Infrastructure              Other Needs             Infrastructure    Other Needs
          Recovery     Remove rubble       Issue decree on          Complete repairs and        Restore workforce       Complete          Outreach on recovery
          Management   Retrieve archives   NRMB mandate             retrofitting of NRMB        Outreach on             reconstruction    results
                       Set-up temporary    Restore workforce        and core ministries         recovery plan Recruit   of NRMB and       Build capacities for
                       office              Establish inter-         in need                     additional staff        core ministries   DRM and long-term
                                           sectoral coordination    Finish re-equipping         Build capacities for    (if applicable)   national resilience
                       Replace essential
                                           structure                Increase facilities (if     managing recovery       integrating       building
                       equipment
                                           Set up                   needed)                     Consultations on        DRR measures      Draw on lessons
                                           communications           Improve ICT                 recovery strategy                         learned on disaster
                                           capacities               infrastructure                                                        response
                                           Lead PDNA                                                                                      Network with
                                           Capacity assessment                                                                            international DRM
                                           Build capacities for                                                                           platforms and south-
                                           PDNA and planning                                                                              south exchange

          Aid          Infrastructure      Other Needs              Infrastructure              Other Needs             Infrastructure    Other Needs
          Management   Remove rubble       Restore workforce        Complete repairs and        Restore workforce       Complete          Conduct outreach
                       Retrieve archives   Design Aid               retrofitting of Aid         Procure and operate     reconstruction    on aid effectiveness
                       Set-up temporary    Information              Management Body             AIMS software           of Aid            results within NRMB
                       office              Management System        (AMB)                       Coordinate with         Management        reports)
                                           (AIMS)                   Finish re-equipping         sectors and local       Body (AMB)        Build capacities for
                       Replace essential
                                           Conduct a capacity       Increase facilities (if     authorities             (if applicable)   aid management
                       equipment
                                           assessment of aid        needed)                                             integrating       Draw on lessons
                                                                                                Consult with
                                           management body                                                              DRR measures      learned on DRR
                                                                    Upgrade ICT                 humanitarian and
                                           (AMB)                    infrastructure              development actors                        Set up a Users’
                                           Build capacities                                     Recruit additional                        Surveys
                                           for information                                      staff                                     Network with
                                           exchange and                                         Build capacities for                      international aid
                                           organisational                                       aid management                            effectiveness
                                           management                                                                                     platforms and south-
                                                                                                                                          south exchange
          Local        Infrastructure      Other needs              Infrastructure              Other needs             Infrastructure    Other needs
          Governance   Remove rubble       Restore                  Complete repairs            Restore workforce       Complete          Restore local taxation
                       Set up temporary    communications with      of damages to               Advocate local needs    reconstruction    and other own
                       facilities          central government       local government            into national plan      of local          revenues
                       Replace essential   Restore workforce        buildings                   Implement fiscal        government        Build capacities for
                       equipment           Restore fiscal           Replace equipment           measures to offset      administrative    DRM and long-term
                       (mobility,          transfers (if stopped)   for other local             loss of LG tax          complexes         resilience building in
                       communications,     Carry out                government services         revenues                integrating       communities
                       power)              vulnerability            Set up temporary            Recruit temporary       DRR measures      Draw on lessons
                                           mappings                 additional facilities (if   staff                                     learned on disaster
                                           Map civil society        needed)                     Establish local                           response
                                           and private sector       Improve ICT                 coordination for
                                           capacities               infrastructure              interventions
                                           Conduct capacity                                     Strengthen national /
                                           assessments                                          local dialogue
                                           Build capacities for                                 Strengthen
                                           needs assessment                                     participatory
                                           and planning                                         processes in
                                                                                                communities
                                                                                                Build capacities for
                                                                                                managing recovery




40   |   GOVERNANCE
           Function                                                                      Phase
                            Short-term (0–3 months)                         Medium-term (4–18 months)                          Long-term (18 –36 months)
          Restoring   Infrastructure      Other needs               Infrastructure              Other needs               Infrastructure       Other needs
          Law and     Remove rubble.      Restore workforce.        Completely repair           Restore workforce.        Complete             Replace lost ID and
          Order       Set up temporary    Conduct citizen           damages on police /         Replace lost ID and       reconstruction       property documents
                      facilities.         security risk             judicial buildings.         property documents.       of new police /      SGBV prevention
                      Replace essential   assessments.              Replace other               Adjudicate property       justice facilities   campaigns.
                      equipment           Deploy additional         equipment.                  disputes.                 integrating          Build capacities for
                      (power supply,      security forces.          Set up temporary                                      DRR measures.        rapid post-disaster
                                                                                                Carry out SGBV
                      mobility,           Build capacities for      additional facilities (if   / child abuse                                  security response.
                      communications,     security maintenance      needed).                    prevention                                     Support legal aid
                      arms).              in disaster situations.   Improve ICT                 campaigns.                                     initiatives.
                                          Provide human rights      infrastructure.             Strengthen citizen                             Draw on lessons
                                          and sex- and gender-                                  security structures.                           learned on disaster
                                          based violence                                        Build capacities for                           response.
                                          (SGBV) prevention                                     community policing.
                                          training.                                             Provide human rights
                                                                                                and SGBV training
                                                                                                for police and justice.
                                                                                                Support legal aid
                                                                                                initiatives.

         NOTE: Red font relates to BBB needs.

         COSTING 
         Costing estimates for recovery and reconstruction include the costs required to repair or replace damaged infra-
         structure and assets of institutions involved in the delivery of core government functions. Additionally, funding
         is required to re-establish their functionality (equipment, staff, logistics), support their governance and manage-
         ment capacity with technical assistance and training, and to support coordination, consultation and communi-
         cations. The total required budget should be realistic and take into account the existing total budget of these
         institutions and their absorption capacity. Costing for the Governance Sector should be presented separately for
         each core government function.

         The difference between the economic impact and the cost of the proposed response should not become too
         large. For post- disaster donor pledging conferences, the development partners are accustomed to looking at the
         total effect, consisting of the value of damage and change in flows, and pledge accordingly. However, experi-
         ence has shown that most of donor investments are dedicated to repairing disaster-related damages, and there
         is usually little funding remaining left for aspects of improved governance, access, participation and accountabil-
         ity. Rule of law aspects may also not be prioritised unless there are situations of pre-existing conflict. Therefore,
         the costing of governance interventions should remain realistic, and prioritisation is crucial to be able at least to
         establish a sufficient national capacity for recovery management, aid coordination and local governance. At the
         same time, strong advocacy by national governments and PDNA partners will be needed to raise the profile of
         governance priorities, considering that without a sound enabling institutional and governance environment, the
         effectiveness of sectoral investments and national ownership of recovery will be put in danger.

         Costing of infrastructure is relatively straightforward and is mostly performed through a bottom-up approach,
         using the methodology and tools for assessing damage and loss, as the costs for reconstruction is equal to the
         costs of the damage. Moreover, additional costs may need to be included to make public administration build-
         ings more disaster-resilient – not only so that they will remain standing after a disaster, but also that they be fully
         functional. Often, such additional costs are calculated as a percentage of a building’s original cost. Given that


41   |   GOVERNANCE
         administrative buildings for core government functions have no specific, costly specification needs, as would
         hospitals, schools or power plans, it should be relatively straightforward for the GT to establish country costing
         standards for repairing infrastructure of core government institutions.

         There should also be national standard unit costs available for police stations, court buildings and prisons, which
         are common buildings in any country; yet, not all countries apply best practices in this area with regard to en-
         suring that the design of these facilities preserve the human rights of victims, suspects and detainees. As far as
         possible, as part of the BBB approach, the opportunity should be taken when costing infrastructure repairs and
         reconstruction for the rule of law sector to increase compliance with human rights-based norms for such facili-
         ties, and not only to DRM concerns.

         Costing for delivery, access, governance and risk limitation needs includes mostly ‘soft’ expenditures for human
         resources, technical assistance, training, service contracts and logistics. The process for costing these expendi-
         tures is very similar to that used when costing a development programme budget. Consultation should take place
         with major in-country donors to access unit cost data for development-type activities. For human resources, staff
         payrolls should only be included when above pre-disaster payroll levels. Temporary staff are usually paid higher
         than permanent civil servants, and most governments have pay scales for short-term contracts. For a start, tem-
         porary employment should be limited to 12-18 months only, since government staffing numbers should go back
         to pre-disaster levels once the main surge linked to planning and implementing recovery has receded. Donors
         should use government pay scales and not theirs to calculate the costs of temporary staffing. Compensation
         payments for injured and killed government staff are not part of the recovery plan budget, but are accounted
         among the losses. Capacity development activities will have to be costed in a broad manner, since not enough
         details will be available at the during the PDNA to build elaborate training and technical assistance plans that
         make costing easier. At minimum, the GT should try to identify the number of personnel under each function
         that will require training and roughly the intensity of the training inputs. This would provide a total number of
         individual training days to which a realistic average cost can be applied, given the country’s experience with
         training activities for government staff. To reflect increased unit cost for transport, accommodation and logistics
         in general in a post-disaster environment, the training day unit cost in normal conditions should be augmented
         by a percentage of at least 10-20 per cent. The same applies to procuring foreign technical assistance where an
         estimation of the number of expert-days required to support core government institutions for the most serious
         capacity gaps will need to be provided by the GT.

         Normally, a PDNA costing exercise requires separating restoration from BBB costs. Such a distinction has been
         tentatively made in Table 13. However, it is not such a clear-cut process for governance activities because these
         are mostly related to capacity development. The GT will have to evaluate the usefulness and applicability of such
         a distinction when performing the costing, otherwise separating the costing of infrastructure needs with other
         needs seem sufficient. The following two recommendations are useful when considering costing for other as-
         pects than infrastructure:

         	    Develop a good plan with clear activities to ensure appropriate costing and its justification based on agreed
             •
              priorities, with realistic sequencing over time.

         	    Be realistic in the development of budgets; try to estimate the resource envelope from donor pledges,
             •
              take into account the current total expenditures of the concerned governance institutions, and look at the
              possible absorption capacity.

42   |   GOVERNANCE
         IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
         The sector recovery strategy should describe the implementation arrangements, including the following:

         PARTNERSHIPS, COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT
         The implementation of the different components of the Governance Recovery Plan may have to be divided
         between different government entities, such as the NRMB for the first two functions (national recovery man-
         agement and aid coordination), the Ministry of Local Administration / Development for local governance and the
         Ministry of Interior should be responsible for all aspects related to law and order. Yet, it is strongly recommend-
         ed that an overall Steering Committee be established, under the leadership of the NRMB (or similar) and with
         representation of all the component team leaders, as well as other core ministries as the ministries of finance,
         economy, planning or justice, to keep a strong coherent integrated approach to the recovery of core government
         functions.

         Partnership opportunities for supporting needs analysis in governance in post-disaster environments, presented
         in Section 2.2, apply also to implementation of the sector recovery plan.

         MONITORING AND EVALUATION
         The monitoring system should make use of specific indicators directly related to the type of interventions planned
         (for example, to monitor progress of capacity building activities or restoration of workforces). In addition, in or-
         der to measure impact at the outcome level, pre-disaster national governance performance indicators could be
         used if available rather than global indicators such as the World Bank Government Effectiveness Index. As far
         as possible, the set of indicators used to analyse the pre-disaster situation should be maintained in the sector’s
         monitoring and evaluation (M & E) framework. As a last resort, the use of global governance indices can be
         envisaged, but they are heavier to use and often fail to incorporate the specific challenges to crisis situations.

         It is also necessary to ensure that the monitoring of recovery includes a feedback loop directly from the commu-
         nities. Participatory monitoring will increase the likelihood of a successful recovery and reconstruction process.
         The local administration, especially at the lowest tiers of government, is in a unique position to ensure that ben-
         eficiaries participate in a meaningful way in the recovery programme monitoring given their proximity to their
         constituencies. This will require devising community-based monitoring systems and conducting opinion surveys
         at different points of the recovery phase to gather people’s views on the governance aspects of recovery (mostly
         participation, inclusion, equity and accountability).

         Monitoring and evaluation requires staff and an operations budget. Approximately 3 to 5 percent of the recovery
         and reconstruction budget for governance should be set aside for this purpose.

         LINKS TO DEVELOPMENT AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
         Links to humanitarian assistance: There is no governance cluster in the IASC coordination structure during a
         humanitarian crisis, but IASC policies recommend setting up ‘gap’ clusters to address other context-specific re-
         covery priorities not covered by the standard cluster system, if needed. Governance is typically an area that may
         call for such an ad hoc coordination mechanism between humanitarian actors if there is a sizeable amount of
         support during the humanitarian phase to restoring the capacities of government institutions. This is usually not
         the case, although an increasing number of humanitarian agencies seek to support local governments in playing
         a more significant role in the delivery of humanitarian aid. In case a governance or local governance cluster is


43   |   GOVERNANCE
         set up during the humanitarian phase, it will be a necessary port of call for the GT during the PDNA phase and
         afterwards, at the time of preparing the recovery plan.

         Links to development: Where there is a national Governance Sector development coordination mechanism,
         the GT and subsequent implementation coordination body should be closely connected to this group, and the
         development partners need to be consulted to assist in the PDNA process. If such sector-wide development
         coordination mechanism does not yet exist, the PDNA process can be used as an opportunity to initiate one.
         Linking implementation of the recovery plan with development processes ensures optimal harmonisation and
         alignment of the Governance Recovery Strategy to national public sector reform priorities, and vice versa. This
         would also ensure that strategies and work plans established by these groups incorporate the disaster impact
         for the concerned areas and take into account the fiscal impact of the disaster on the government’s capacity to
         continue implementing ongoing governance reforms.

         RESOURCE MOBILISATION MECHANISMS
         Reaching a consensus on funding mechanisms often poses a major challenge during the recovery phase. Deci-
         sions on which funding mechanisms to use should be based on the local context and aim at achieving the best
         efficiency. Such decisions should be based on dialogue between the national government and international part-
         ners, and should consider the pros and cons of each decision to develop a funding mechanism that is agreeable
         to all parties. Financial modalities are often influenced by the Financial Management Assessment carried out by
         the World Bank, and the funding preferences of specific donor(s). The result is often a mix of budget funding
         mechanisms, and may include pooled funding arrangements such as Multi-Partner Recovery Trust Funds. The
         modalities chosen should support the governance role of the main institutional partners, at the national and local
         levels, in financial management. Adequate financial tracking mechanisms for pledges, disbursements and actual
         expenditures need to be established.

         RISKS AND CHALLENGES
         The risks and challenges in the implementation of the Sector Recovery Strategy are:

         	      The governance recovery plan are limited to reconstructing local government offices and will neglect the
               •
                support needed in terms of capacities for good governance, as well as the support needed by core govern-
                ment functions at the central level;

         	      Ambitious investment plans may be embarked upon without a comprehensive analysis of absorption ca-
               •
                pacity and available resources;

         	      The same governance systems that were partially at the root of the crisis may be reproduced, or not
               •
                addressing the underlying institutional weaknesses and imbalances may not be addressed (for example,
                between regions, or between central and local levels in terms of fiscal and human resource capacities) that
                may have contributed to the impact of the disaster;




         12	 Coordination links may be maintained with several such reform support groups, for example, for public finance management, decentralisation or security sector and judicial reforms.


44   |   GOVERNANCE
         	      When national policy making capacity is still weak, dominant international stakeholders can push politically
               •
                oriented policy options or apply standard solutions that may have worked elsewhere but may fail in the
                country. This is particularly relevant for the model used to organise intersectoral and donor coordination;

         	      The timeframe for the PDNA is usually limited, which leads to limited consultation of all stakeholders, while
               •
                governance issues are by definition complex to grasp and analyse properly in a short time and require a
                prior knowledge of the local political economies (which country offices of development partners may be
                able to provide to the PDNA Team);

         	      Unreliable and incomplete information is always a major challenge in countries with fragile and conflict
               •
                situations;

         	      Assessments and recovery planning may be done in isolation, not sufficiently embedded in either the de-
               •
                velopment cooperation mechanisms established to support governance reforms;

         	      Not tailoring support to local governance to the actual level of decentralisation and capacities of local
               •
                governments (for example, neglecting local governments in the planning and management of recovery, to
                the advantage of the NRMB, in contexts where local governments have already achieved significant levels
                of autonomy and capacity);

         	      The Governance recovery plan cannot focus only on government institutions, because it would be ignoring
               •
                the roles played by non-state actors as well in important governance processes, especially at the local level,
                to make decision-making more participatory and accountable. Customary institutions may also play an
                important role in security, peace-building and justice. Identifying these non-state actors and their needs,
                including in the recovery plan, and advocating for assistance to them is necessary. However, this may add
                an extra burden to the PDNA process and may be seen by government as a competition over scarce donor
                resources allocated to governance priorities.




            This was the case in the Pakistan in 2011 during the post-flood recovery where the central government appointed unelected administrators to take over the planning and implementation of
         13	
            recovery from the elected heads of local executives. Subsequently, this was heavily criticized during the lessons learned exercise .


45   |   GOVERNANCE
         KEY REFERENCES
         UN Women. 2012. Guidance Note: Gender-Responsive Governance: Governance and National Planning

         World Bank. 2010. Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment: Guidance Notes. Vol. 2.

         Governance in post-disaster situations

         UNDP Guidance Note on the Restoration of Local Governance Functions

         (soon to be published)

         UNDP Guidance Note on Aid Management in Disaster Response Situations

         (soon to be published)

         UNDP Guidance Note on National Post-Disaster Recovery Planning and Coordination

         (soon to be published)

         Governance Assessments

         OECD. Donor Approaches to Governance Assessments: 2009 Sourcebook
         http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/25/12/42472200.pdf

         UNDP, User’s Guide on Measuring Fragility
         http://arabstates.undp.org/content/rbas/en/home/presscenter/events/2012/November/regional_governance_
         week/_jcr_content/centerparsys/download_15/file.res/Users'%20Guide%20on%20Measuring%20Fragility.pdf

         UNDP, User’s Guide on Measuring Local Governance
         http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/democratic-governance/local_governance/a-us-
         ers-guide-to-measuring-local-governance-.html

         World Bank. Governance Indicators: Where Are We, Where Should We Be Going?
         http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/pdf/wps4370.pdf

         Governance in post-disaster/post-conflict contexts

         European Commission. 2003. Governance and Development, Communication from the Commission to
         the Council, the European Parliament and the European Economic and Social Committee
         http://ec.europa.eu/development/icenter/repository/com2003_0615en01_en.pdf

         UNDP. 2006. Local Governance in Tsunami Recovery: Lessons Learned and Emerging Principles
         http://www.recoveryplatform.org/assets/recoverycases_reports/Local_Gov_Tsunami_Recovery_2006.pdf

         UNDP. 2012. Governance for Peace Report, Securing the Social Contract
         http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/crisis%20prevention/governance-for-peace_
         2011-12-15_web.pdf.pdf




46   |   GOVERNANCE
         UNDP. 2014. Lessons Learned Review of UN Support to Core Public Administration Functions in the Immediate
         Aftermath of Conflict.
         http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/crisis-prevention-and-recovery/Executive_Summa-
         ry_Public_Administration/

         World Bank. 2012. Approach to Public Sector Management 2011-2020: Better results from public sector institutions.
         http://siteresources.worldbank.org/PUBLICSECTORANDGOVERNANCE/Resources/285741-1348676611027/
         PSM-Approach.pdf

         Past PDNAs with a Governance Chapter

         PDNA Haiti:
         http://www.recoveryplatform.org/pdna/key_documents/past_pdnas_and_recovery_frameworks

         PDNA Cambodia:
         http://www.recoveryplatform.org/pdna/key_documents/past_pdnas_and_recovery_frameworks

         Early Recovery

         UNDP. 2008. Policy on Early Recovery.
         http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/A638DC99C778DD18C12575F3003F55B0-undp_
         aug2008.pdf

         Cluster Working Group on Early Recovery (CWGER). 2008. Guidance Note on Early Recovery.
         http://www.recoveryplatform.org/assets/tools_guidelines/guidane%20note%20on%20early%20recovery.pdf




         ANNEXES
         ANNEX 1. SELECTING STAKEHOLDERS FOR A GOVERNANCE PDNA
         1) NATIONAL/CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
         Among the national government institutions, the GT should consider the following institutions that are usually
         not covered by other sub-sectors:

         	    Executive Branch: As the most crucial element of government for planning and responding to recovery
             •
              needs, it is the primary focus of a Governance PDNA. The following components of the Executive Branch
              should be consulted:

         		º	leadership and coordination bodies, consisting in President’s Office, Prime Minister’s Office/Cabinet
                      secretariat (including spokesperson);

         		º	 Inter-sectoral planning entities;
         		º	Public finance management consisting in Ministry of Finance, Treasury, Central Bank, Audit Board;

         		º	Civil service management consisting in Ministry of Public Administration or Civil Service Commission,
                      civil service training institutions;


47   |   GOVERNANCE
         		º	Human rights system, which includes the national human rights institution, the ombudsman’s office,
                      the government body responsible for gender issues/women’s affairs;

         		º	Electoral management body, if elections are scheduled within 12 months after the disaster;

         		º	Law and order institutions consisting in the Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Justice, the police
                      and the army.

         	   • Judicial Branch:

         		º	 District courts;
         		º	 Ministry of Justice (see also under the Executive Branch);
         		º	 Correction facilities (in particular for juvenile/women’s detention).
         	    Legislative Branch: extraordinary measures assigning special executive powers to the president or prime
             •
              minister, or the national recovery agency, and appropriating public resources to the recovery effort, as
              well as the overall recovery strategy, should be discussed in parliament. Legislatures also play an important
              role in overseeing public administration efforts to respond to the needs of affected populations in a rapid,
              effective and inclusive manner. In certain cases, commissions of inquiry may be established by legislatures
              to look into allegations of neglect or misconduct by the government in preventing and/or responding to a
              disaster. Rebuilding the capacity of legislatures, if they have been significantly affected by a disaster, is con-
              sidered an important confidence-building measure since it increases the accountability and transparency
              of the government-led recovery process. It is usually not a priority in the immediate post-disaster period,
              however.

         2) LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN AFFECTED AREAS
         Local governments/authorities need to be consulted and involved not only at their lowest and most directly im-
         pacted level in the disaster areas (e.g. municipalities, villages), but also at provincial or governorate levels, since
         these play an important linking role between central and local governance levels.

         “Local authorities or governments” refer to the following institutions:

         	   • The office of the mayor or governor (political head);

         	    The office of the chief executive officer (when this is a separate function from that of the mayor
             •
              or governor);

         	   • The local council of representatives (designated via elections or else) and its sub-committees;

         	    The technical and administrative units organising the services delivered by the local government to
             •
              citizens. These services may be reporting directly to the local authority (mayor/governor) or to the
              central line ministries (in which case, they will be referred to as ‘deconcentrated services’ or subject
              to dual reporting);

         	    Local offices of government agencies, in particular the National Disaster Management Agency, but also
             •
              Regional Development Corporations, the Water Authorities, the Transportation Authority, the Housing
              Authority, the Environmental Authority, etc.).


48   |   GOVERNANCE
         3) COMMUNITY-BASED GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES AND CIVIL SOCIETY:
         In developing countries with a limited presence of the state outside of urban areas, community governance
         structures prevail in the management of local affairs. It is also often the case in informal urban areas. The PDNA
         needs to cover the disaster impact on such structures to ensure that they receive the support needed in order to
         assess needs of, mobilise, inform and organise affected populations during the recovery phase. Attention should
         be given to analysing possible exclusion of women, youth and other minority groups from community-based
         governance systems and whether supporting them may exacerbate such exclusion.

         Local community-based organisations (CBOs) and civil society organisations (CSOs) are important for the same
         purpose and for providing social services when state institutions are not present/weak in doing so or when
         service delivery is (partially) outsourced to non-state partners. Community structures, CBOs and local CSOs
         are prime sources of information in assessing the disaster impact on social relations and social cohesion of
         a disaster-affected community. They will also provide invaluable insights into the community’s capacity to self-or-
         ganise for recovery.

         National and local NGOs are crucial as implementing partners for humanitarian and development partners and
         for state institutions. During the PDNA, the Governance Team (GT) should at least gather some information on
         the management capacity of main NGO interlocutors and include them in the recovery response if their expe-
         rience is relevant. NGOs are also important for advocacy and monitoring.

         The GT should also consult with the main political party leaders (not just those in the government but in the
         opposition as well) to hear their views on the recovery process. In certain countries, large political parties main-
         tain an important social and charitable infrastructure that can be very active during the recovery period. Political
         parties also play a crucial role in maintaining social cohesion during hardship, and their attitude can greatly in-
         fluence the confidence that people have in their government’s capacity to respond to their recovery needs. By
         consulting with political parties, especially those that might be affiliated with particular minority groups that may
         feel discriminated against during the recovery phase, the GT would help prevent future tensions and conflicts
         that would adversely affect the recovery phase.

         4) THE MEDIA
         The media is at the centre of many crucial information flows during the post-disaster phase, by: (i) reporting and
         consolidating impact on the population, infrastructure and economy; (ii) conveying the needs of the affected
         population to those institutions in charge of providing assistance and planning for recovery; (iii) monitoring the
         delivery of recovery assistance and progress in recovery programmes; (iv) ensuring accountability of assistance
         providers and identify cases of possible neglect and wrongdoing; and (v) educating citizens about disaster risks
         and risk reduction measures, and helping disseminate important factual information on recovery programmes,
         contributing to confidence-building and to managing expectations of affected populations.

         The GT should look for data on media consumption by women and men of all ages prior to the disaster so that
         the most strategic media outlets can be targeted during the recovery process for public messaging. It should also
         look at the extent of media presence at the local level and media capacities. For example, following disasters,
         people – especially women, children, and disadvantaged groups – require information through channels and in
         accessible formats to be able to claim their rights and entitlements. An unresponsive or weak media can hinder
         the provision of protection to all, especially to the marginalised sections of society.


49   |   GOVERNANCE
         5) THE PRIVATE SECTOR
         Businesses, small and large, play a very important role in post-disaster recovery. A vibrant business community at
         the local level is essential for economic recovery. The private sector also often plays an important role in public
         service delivery (health care, education, solid waste management, public transportation, etc.) in its own capacity
         or through public-private partnerships. Larger corporations, including state-owned enterprises, also have an
         important corporate social responsibility to play in rebuilding disaster-hit areas and in providing assistance to af-
         fected communities. They can contribute essential technical and management expertise, such as civil engineering
         for example, to local governments that have been badly affected in their technical capacities by the disaster. The
         private sector will be heavily involved in the reconstruction efforts funded by government and donors.

         6) THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
         Disasters often lead to an influx of international organisations and NGOs into affected areas. Many act to sup-
         plement basic government capacity and functions in affected areas. They may work with varying degrees of
         independence, though their effectiveness depends considerably on the support they receive from national and
         sub-national governments. They may advocate for transparency and accountability in the use of relief funds, or
         at times, they work in isolation, leading to duplication and overlapping. The Assessment Team should consider
         the degree to which NGOs and international organisations work in concert with government agencies or in iso-
         lation, and the consequent impact on the capacity of local institutions.

         The GT should also seek to carry out a quick mapping of governance-related interventions and programmes
         run or supported by the international community and see how these relate to immediate and mid-term needs
         of the Governance Sector for recovery. Such resources and programmes can be of invaluable use to tackle im-
         mediate needs if agreement can be reached on their reprogramming and recalibration. Usually, such information
         would be available with the aid management structure in the central government and/or with donor coordina-
         tion platforms.




50   |   GOVERNANCE
         ANNEX 2. SOURCES OF BASELINE INFORMATION
                    Governance Areas                                  Potential Sources of Information for Assessment
                                                                    National Level
          Development visions                      Ministry of Economy and/or Planning (or equivalent)
          Planning and development systems         Prime Minister’s Office or Cabinet Secretariat (or equivalent)
          Management of foreign aid/aid            Inter-ministerial planning committees
          coordination
          Gender strategies                        Ministry of Women’s Affairs or the National Women’s Council
                                                   Women’s caucus (parliament)
                                                   National women’s civil society coalitions and networks
          Local governance system                  Ministry of Local Government or Administration
                                                   School of Public Administration and academia
                                                   Local Government Associations
                                                   Civil society coalitions and networks
          Finance and budgeting                    Ministry of Finance
                                                   Treasury
                                                   Central Bank
          Auditing standards and systems           National Audit Office (or equivalent)
                    Governance Areas                                  Potential Sources of Information for Assessment
                          National Level
          Legal and institutional framework for    National Platforms or Offices for Disaster Risk Reduction
          disaster management                      National Offices for Disaster Preparedness
                                                   National Disaster Management Authority
          Role of the International Community      Leading international non-governmental organisations (INGOs9 working in affected areas
                                                   – including women’s organisations
                                                   INGO coordination forum
                                                   Donor coordination committee
          Rule of law, human rights issues/        Ministry of Law, Justice, Human Rights
          women and children’s rights/             National human rights institution
          entitlements, empowerment,               Media, human rights groups, reports etc.
                                                   UN Women, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), United
                                                   Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), UNDP, etc.
                                                   Women in politics
          Vulnerability to/risks of disaster or    Ministry of Social Affairs
          violence                                 Inclusive and wide ranging national stakeholders (academic institutions, civil society,
                                                   government and opposition)
                                                   National observatories
          Civil society                            Ministry of Interior or other ministry in charge of civil society affairs
                                                   National Civil Society Organisation (CSO) Registry
                                                   National CSO coalitions and networks
          Private sector role in governance        National Business Associations, Chambers of Commerce
                                                   Ministry of Economy
                                                   Labour unions
                                                   Academia
                           Local Level
          Provincial and local development plans   Ministry of Economy and/or Planning (or equivalent)
          Spatial plans / land-use plans           Ministry of Local Government or Administration
          Management of foreign aid/aid            Planning Departments at provincial / governorate level
          coordination                             Planning Office in Municipalities
                                                   Governor’s Office / Mayo’s Office
                                                   Provincial / Governorate Assembly – Local Assembly

51   |   GOVERNANCE
             Coordination, and communication           Governor’s office; Mayor´s office; Local development associations
             processes
             Service delivery (for services not        Municipal administrations
             covered by other sectors)                 Citizen’s monitoring groups / CSOs, local observatories
             Law and order, access to justice          Police commissioners and police stations
                                                       Prisons
                                                       Local courts
                                                       Lawyers’ Associations, human rights associations
             Vulnerability to/risks of disaster or     Women and men of all ages and sub-groups of the affected population living along
             violence                                  potential lines of division (e.g. different livelihood activities, identities)
             Civil society                             Local CSO umbrella groups
                                                       Women and men of all ages and sub-groups of the affected population, local
                                                       organisations
             Private sector role in local governance   Local business associations
                                                       Micro-credit institutions
                                                       Professional associations
                                                       Municipalities
                                                       Local economic development agencies or boards
                                                       Chambers of commerce and agriculture

         Recommended Global Governance Indicators

         	       • Worldwide Governance Indicators (http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.aspx#home)

         	       • Country Policy and Institutional Assessment CPIA (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IQ.CPA.PUBS.XQ)

         	        Sustainable Governance Indicator (http://www.bertelsmann-stiftung.de/cps/rde/xchg/SID-
                 •
                  8F4259C0-24574219/bst_engl/hs.xsl/prj_52957_53423.htm)

         	       • Afro barometer (www.afrobarometer.org)

         	       • Civil Society Index (www.civicus.org/new/default.asp)

         	       • Latino Barometro Surveys (www.latinobarometro.org)

         	       • Global Barometer Surveys (www.globalbarometer.org)

         	       • Media Sustainability Index (www.irex.org/msi/)

         	       • Corruption Perception Index (www.transparency.org)




52   |   GOVERNANCE
         ANNEX 3. EXAMPLE OF TEMPLATE FOR RECORDING EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE
         AND ASSETS
         DAMAGES
                      Institution                Infrastructure          Equipment         Vehicles   Other
                                                  (No. and %)             (% only)          (No.)     (Cash,
                                                Partial      Total    Partial      Total              Partial   Total
                                                          National Recovery Management
          National Recovery Management
          Body
          (if present)
          Prime Minister’s Office
          President’s Office
          Ministry of Finance
          Ministry of Economy
          Ministry of Planning
          (Civil Service
          Commission Body)
                                                                Aid Management
          Aid Management Body
                                                                Local Governance
          Governorate /
          Provincial Level
          •Chief Executive Office (Governor)
            including the Planning
            Department
          •Land and property
          • Treasury and Audit
          • Civil registry
          • Courts and Judiciary
          • Police and Security
          • Provincial Assembly
          •Other (not covered
            by sectors)
          •Key civil society organisations
            (CSOs) for governance
          Municipal / District Level
          •Chief Executive Office/Mayor
          •Treasury and Audit
          • Legislature
          • Civil registry
          • Courts and Judiciary
          • Police and Security
          • Land and property
          •Other (not covered
            by sectors)
          •Key CSOs and private
            service providers
            (not covered by sectors)




53   |   GOVERNANCE
         LOSSES: ONE PER KEY INSTITUTION(S) CONTRIBUTING TO EACH CORE GOVERNMENT FUNCTION
         NAME OF INSTITUTION

         FUNCTION




                             Item                         Need                             Details
                                                    Yes          No
          Rubble removal                                              m3 to be removed and distance to disposal site
          Facilities
          • Temporary facilities                                      No., type and size
          • Extra office space                                        m2, not/fully/partially equipped
          • Additional equipment                                      Type, specifications, number of units
          Staffing
           Missing staff due to death dead
          •                                                          Number, type (admin. / managerial / technical)
                                                                      and contractual status (to determine benefits)
           Missing staff due to injury
          •                                                          Number, type (admin. / managerial / technical)
                                                                      and contractual status (to determine benefits)
           Missing staff who abandoned post
          •                                                          Number and type
          • Recruitments to replace missing staff                     Number, type and recruitment process
                                                                      (secondment, consultant, civil service)
           Recruitments of additional staff
          •                                                          Number, type and recruitment process
           (over pre-disaster)                                        (secondment, consultant, civil service)
          • Induction training                                        Number of trainees, duration (days)
          Operating budgets
           Increased fuel and energy needs
          •                                                          Number of extra units /month or year during
                                                                      the recovery period
           Increased office and other supplies
          •                                                          Number of extra units /month or year during
           needs                                                      the recovery period
           Increased travel and logistics
          •                                                          Number of extra units /month or year during
           (for events, meetings)                                     the recovery period
           Increased communication costs
          •                                                          Number of extra units /month or year during
                                                                      he recovery period
          Documents and records
          • Loss of paper-based archives                              Type and % of all archive lost. Options for
                                                                      replacement and how.
           Loss of electronic records
          •                                                          Type and whether back-up accessible.
                                                                      If not, possible options for replacement.
          Loss of revenues
          • Service fees                                              Type of service(s) considered, estimation of
                                                                      amounts lost and loss per month or day
          • Tax revenues                                              Type of tax(es) considered, estimation of
                                                                      amounts lost to date and loss per month
           Losses of contractors
          •                                                          Number, type of contracts, reasons for losses
           (NGO and companies)                                        (suspension, cancellation), amounts



54   |   GOVERNANCE
         ANNEX 4. EXAMPLE OF GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE GOVERNANCE OF RECOVERY
         COORDINATE CENTRALLY, IMPLEMENT LOCALLY
         Central coordination is most critical for setting standards, policies and principles to support recovery and re-
         construction. On the other hand, local government and communities represented by NGOs, CBOs, including
         women’s organisations, labour unions, and the private sector are best placed to lead implementation. Thus, the
         Recovery Strategy that emerges from a PDNA exercise should facilitate central coordination and local implemen-
         tation of recovery and reconstruction efforts.

         ENCOURAGE TRANSFORMATION THROUGH FOCUS ON CAPACITY BUILDING OF LOCAL INSTITUTIONS
         Local government institutions are well placed to serve the needs of communities but they tend to lack technical,
         administrative, human and financial capacity to deliver services. Disasters worsen that capacity deficit. Thus, PD-
         NAs should not only emphasize decentralised model for service delivery but also give blueprints for the capacity
         building of local government institutions. This should include strengthening the capacity of local governments to:
         (i) coordinate disaster response and relief operations; (ii) plan, coordinate and monitor the recovery and recon-
         struction activities undertaken by other government and non-government entities at local level; (iii) communicate
         to citizens on the recovery process and mobilise their active participation in it; and (iv) mainstream gender and
         women’s rights. Further, it also involves engaging with communities represented by non-governmental organi-
         sations (NGOs), civil society organisations (CSOs), women’s organisations, labour unions, and private sector and
         strengthening their capacity to support reconstruction efforts.

         FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
         In order to prevent the reconstruction activity from being taken hostage by bureaucratic sluggishness, the pace
         of the project and the requisite sense of urgency must be instilled and emphasised. Countries usually have a
         financial management system in place before disasters for tracking pledges, commitments, disbursements and
         actual expenditures, as well as planned and actual results. The adequacy of such institutional arrangements for
         financial management, transparency and accountability is a significant requirement for aid coordination and ef-
         fectiveness. International experience, however, shows that pre-disaster systems do not facilitate quick disburse-
         ment of funds to support recovery and reconstruction. While transparency and accountability are important
         concerns, they should in no way obstruct recovery and reconstruction. Similarly, while planning processes are
         typically long and drawn-out in normal times, such lengthy procedures need to be tweaked post-disaster to fit
         the urgency facing a country or a region.

         CHANNEL FUNDS INTO THE HANDS OF THOSE WITH THE STRONGEST INCENTIVES TO USE THEM
         FOR THE INTENDED PURPOSES
         Residual cracks in accountability mechanisms can be filled by handing over ownership of the projects to the af-
         fected communities through community-driven implementation arrangements. The beneficiary community be-
         comes directly involved in creating transparency for funds allocation and germinating efficiency in reconstruction
         activities. However, attentions should be given to ensure that mechanisms are put in place for involving women
         and men of all ages as well as sub-groups of the population in project decision-making, and such practices
         should be continuously promoted with the community.




55   |   GOVERNANCE
         USE AN EFFECTIVE OVERSIGHT SYSTEM FOR MONITORING
         Although the government must have control over the reconstruction process, an independent board repre-
         senting the interests of stakeholders should provide oversight on recovery and reconstruction efforts. This ar-
         rangement is of particular interest in a politically sensitive, post-conflict environment where competing groups
         do not trust each other. To strengthen oversight, a strong national information platform capturing the activities
         of donors, international and local NGOs, CBOs, and local government institutions should also be in place. The
         oversight board will ensure that activities envisaged in the Recovery Strategy are on track. The success of a mon-
         itoring system is based on a dedicated team of analysts, which can be held responsible for collecting, updating,
         analysing, aggregating, correcting and communicating the data. The design of information management system
         should ensure that data collected is disaggregated by sex and age. This allows state structures to respond to
         women and men’s differential needs in the future.

         USE COMMUNICATION TO PROMOTE AWARENESS OF RIGHTS AND ENTITLEMENTS DURING RECOV-
         ERY AND RECONSTRUCTION
         Communication can be a strategic tool to educate, warn, inform and empower people to take practical steps to
         minimise the impact of a disaster; the media plays a significant role in this process. Accordingly, public relations/
         outreach units of key government agencies as well as the media should be enabled, through capacity building
         initiatives, to create and sustain information flows that protect the rights and individuals and communities espe-
         cially ones that are marginalised or disadvantaged like women, children, older persons, and others. Communica-
         tion tools also inform people of the needs of those affected together with the constraints of service providers,
         thus creating expectation bands, within which the performance of service providers should be appraised.

         ARRANGE FOR TEMPORARY INFRASTRUCTURE
         Immediate actions should be taken to set,up temporary public administration offices and rapidly restore essential
         services in accordance with the needs and barriers highlighted by women and men of all ages, or alternatively,
         they should be rapidly repaired to enable the functioning of core administrative and early recovery activities.

         STRENGTHEN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ARRANGEMENTS

         Assess the support needed to set up a financial tracking system to promote accountability and transparency,
         which may include the provision of technical expertise, equipment, software, etc. To secure the financial resourc-
         es needed to support the country’s recovery, the capacity for resource mobilisation strategies should be assessed
         and supported, which may include advocacy efforts, the organisation of a donor pledging conference, commu-
         nication materials and media briefings, etc.

         CONSOLIDATE COMMUNITY COHESION AS A DETERRENT TO POST-DISASTER VIOLENCE

         Disasters create immense stress on communities and put their cohesion and resilience under pressure. In most
         cases, solidarity mechanisms will reinforce individual survival strategies and bring households closer together
         across social/income/identity groups. Yet, in areas where there were prior tensions between different communi-
         ties in the disaster-affected area, rivalries can develop on the allocation of humanitarian and recovery assistance.
         Certain communities that are the most isolated can feel discriminated against if they do not receive what they
         consider as their share of the recovery package, even if it is mostly due to access issues. In short, the stress caused
         by the disaster can re-ignite old tensions or make conflict-prone situations tip into open conflict. Furthermore,
         post-disaster periods can sometimes witness a breakdown in community security, with an increase in opportu-

56   |   GOVERNANCE
         nistic criminality, a mismanagement of aid, trafficking and gender-based violence. All efforts must be made to
         support governance for recovery to analyse conflict risks and take pre-emptive actions, and at a minimum follow
         a ‘do-no-harm’ policy. The use of participatory processes, dialogue and an early focus on ensuring targeting
         towards the most disadvantaged groups can help diffuse early tensions before they escalate into confrontations.




57   |   GOVERNANCE
         ANNEX 5. THE ANALYSIS PROCESS
         The recovery strategy for core governance functions addresses the standard five key dimensions of the effects
         of an event as shown below:

         	   •	 Damage to infrastructure and assets of institutions and actors fulfilling the functions;

         	   •	 Effects on delivery of functions;

         	   •	 Effects on changes in demand for the functions;

         	   •	 Disruption of decision-making processes involved with each function;

         	   •	 Changes in risks and vulnerability of affected institutions and populations.

         Together, these elements provide the information required for formulating a governance recovery strategy and
         costed action plan. It should be noted that the PDNA team, which collects data and information on Infra-
         structure, will most probably collect such information on public administration infrastructure as well and assets
         relevant to governance. When the Governance Team (GT) of the PDNA collects such information, it should be
         conveyed to the Infrastructure Team for inclusion in their report. It is with regard to the delivery of services that
         the Governance Team will be better placed to collect this data as part of the effects and estimate the costs of
         disruption of these services. There are no Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that can be directly linked to
         the governance functions analysed in this chapter, but this situation could change with the new set of Sustain-
         able Development Goals (SDGs), which will address peace and governance aspects.

         GOVERNANCE RECOVERY STRATEGY

         In order to build the governance recovery strategy according to the template provided in Table 1 below, an an-
         alytical process that looks at the disaster’s impact on the various core government functions is needed. Table 2
         provides a standardised and systematic protocol for assessment data collection and analysis.




58   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 1. Governance Recovery Strategy
                                                                     Recovery Strategy
                                                                  Pre-disaster baseline
                                         Disaster Effects                                      Governance Recovery Needs
                                                                               Restore Pre-Disaster                      Building Back Better
                                                                                   Conditions
          Infrastructure        Damage of administrative                 Establish temporary administrative        Ensure that all infrastructure is
          and assets            buildings and other assets of            facilities, including for law and         hazard-resilient. Rationalise the
                                state and non-state institutions         order functions.                          public administration network
                                (national, local) involved in core                                                 (e.g. integrated administrative
                                functions.                                                                         complexes rather than
                                Reconstruct and repair destroyed                                                   separate buildings). Improve
                                and/or damaged infrastructure,                                                     communications infrastructure
                                replace assets lost.                                                               between national/local
                                                                                                                   administrations.
          Delivery of functions Reduced ability to deliver core          Restore capacity to deliver core          Address possible pre-existing
                                functions, leading to disruption in      functions and possibly to support         capacity gaps and performance
                                service delivery by sub-sectors.         higher levels of delivery to meet         issues in institutions involved
                                                                         increased and possible new                in core functions. Adapt the
                                                                         demands.                                  civil service workforce as
                                                                                                                   required, create new skills
                                                                                                                   and competences, and adjust
                                                                                                                   availability of public financial
                                                                                                                   resources.
          Access and Demand     Increased demand for core                Ensure effective and equal access         Reduce pre-existing and new
                                government functions, but                of affected local governments             imbalances in the relationships
                                possibly limited access in certain       to central government support             between local and national
                                geographic areas (especially for         (regulatory, technical, financial).       government institutions and in
                                rule of law). Local governments          Ensure access to protection and           access to security and justice
                                face higher constraints to access        justice services, in particular for old   within affected communities.
                                central government support.              and new vulnerable groups.
          Good governance       Reduced capacity of the state            Strengthen existing consultative          Support legal reforms and capacity
          (participation,       authorities to manage recovery           and participatory decision-               development of core government
          inclusion and         with sufficient community                making processes at the national          institutions involved with recovery
          accountability)       participation, inclusive of              and local levels, including               response (national/local) to plan,
                                vulnerable groups, and to uphold         representation and oversight              implement and report on recovery
                                sufficient transparency and              role of parliamentary bodies.             with heightened participation and
                                accountability in the use of public      Reinforce existing accountability         accountability.
                                and aid resources for the recovery       frameworks, including the role
                                process.                                 of audit institutions. Support civil
                                                                         society and the media’s roles in
                                                                         supporting social accountability.
          Risks                 Effects on pre-existing violence         Control and mitigate the impact           Support community resilience
                                and conflict risks, political tensions   of pre-existing and new risks to          against insecurity and violence
                                between local and national               security, peace and corruption.           in crisis contexts.
                                governance levels and within the         Take specific measures to reduce          Strengthen accountability
                                central government, heightened           security risks to vulnerable groups.      frameworks and develop crisis-
                                opportunities for corruption in                                                    sensitive measures to limit
                                public finance management.                                                         opportunities for corruption
                                                                                                                   while maintaining rapid
                                                                                                                   disaster response capacity
                                                                                                                   (link with above).




59   |   GOVERNANCE
         Table 2. Analytical Matrix for Governance Aspects

           Core government functions                          Baseline              Effect of the             Immediate               Recovery                   Key                   Estimated
                                                             indicators             disaster/Key               response               response,               monitoring               costs and
                                                             / Pre-crisis            challenges                provided               including               indicators               resources
                                                             challenges             for recovery                                     BBB, for the                                       required
                                                                                                                                      short and
                                                                                                                                      mid term
          National recovery management
          • Assigning leadership
          • Setting a vision
          • Coordinating sectors
          • Appropriating resources
          • Executing plan
          • Maintaining accountability
          •R eporting and
            communicating
          Aid management
          • Aid coordination structures
          • Aid modalities
          •T racking financial and
            non-financial aid flows
            (including private sources)
          •L inking aid to national policy
            and budget cycle
          •Transparency and
            accountability
          Local governance
          •L ocal governments’
            operations
          •L eadership over local
            recovery planning and
            management
          •C oordinating sectors and aid
            providers
          •P articipation and
            inclusiveness
          •Accountable management of
            recovery resources devolved
            to the local level
          •D elivery of other local
            government services
          Rule of law
          • Policing and citizen security
          • Protection of public assets
          •P rotection of vulnerable
            groups
          •Dispute resolution
            mechanisms
          • Access to formal justice
          •P ersonal and property
            documentation




            However, while DAC members are required to report their ODA flows to the DAC, donors might only report inconsistently to the Financial Tracking Service (FTS). Definitions and reporting are not
         14	
            yet fully streamlined; therefore under-,over- or double reporting may occur.


60   |   GOVERNANCE
         Guided by the headings, examples and the indicators in the table, the GT collects and provides the information
         based on the best available data, evidence and/or professional expert judgments. The analysis of the effects and
         its impacts will then help in defining the overall governance recovery strategy to address the needs identified,
         including priorities for BBB.

         There is a growing number of governance assessment tools and indicators in each country that relate directly to
         the core functions earmarked under the governance PDNA and will be useful to the GT, especially to establish
         baseline indicators. These are presented in the next section. However, there are few other standard governance
         specific assessments that are conducted systematically in the aftermath of a disaster, except for aid flow moni-
         toring, such as OCHA’s Financial Tracking Service (FTS) which provides real-time data on humanitarian funding at
         the project level. It also includes flows from non-DAC donors and private contributors.




61   |   GOVERNANCE
