   CROSS-CUTTING SECTOR




            GENDER




PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
ii   |   GENDER
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION	1
n ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                        3
n PRE-DISASTER SITUATION	                                   12
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS	                           15
n ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER	      20
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                            23
n CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES INCLUDING CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES	   24
n THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY	                             24
n REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING ON GENDER AND DISASTER	    29
n ADDITIONAL RESOURCES	                                     31
n ANNEXES	32
        INTRODUCTION
        The main goal of conducting a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) is to assist governments to assess the full
        extent of a disaster’s impact on the country and, on the basis of these findings, to produce an actionable and
        sustainable Recovery Strategy for mobilizing financial and technical resources. A PDNA is a government-led exer-
        cise, with integrated support from the United Nations (UN), the European Union (EU), the World Bank (WB) and
        other national and international actors. A PDNA gathers information into a single, consolidated report with infor-
        mation on the physical impacts of a disaster, the economic value of the damages and losses, the human impacts
        as experienced by the affected population, and the resulting early and long-term recovery needs and priorities.

        The PDNA Guidelines has been developed to provide technical support to practitioners as they plan for and
        implement the needs assessment and design the recovery framework. Volume A of this Guidelines provides a
        general overview of the PDNA framework and process. Volume B provides sector-specific guidance for all the
        sectors that could potentially be covered by a PDNA, depending on the context and the scale of the disaster. A
        PDNA, depending on the nature and resulting impact of the disaster, includes a number of sectors and cross-cut-
        ting issues (Table 1).

        Social sector       Infrastructure sector           Productive sector               Cross-cutting sector
        •	 Housing          •	 Water & Sanitation           •	 Agriculture, Livestock and   •	 Gender
        •	 Education        •	 Community Infrastructure        Fisheries                    •	 Governance
        •	 Health           •	 Telecommunications           •	 Commerce                     •	 Employment, Livelihood and
        •	 Culture          •	 Transport                    •	 Tourism                         Social Protection
                                                            •	 Manufacturing                •	 Disaster risk reduction
                                                            •	 Macro-Economics              •	 Environment

        As indicated above, Gender has been identified as an important cross-cutting issue in PDNAs. This is due to the
        increased acknowledgement that disasters have different impacts on women, girls, boys and men. They face dif-
        ferent risks and have different capacities and resources on which to draw to respond and cope. Gender relations
        tend to be culturally-specific and characterized by unequal distribution and/or access to power and resources,
        differences in mobility and in the ability to make life decisions and to voice priorities and needs, as well as to
        explore and use individual potential and capacities.

        The aftermath of emergency disaster can present opportunities for new and more progressive gender roles and
        relationships to emerge: for example, women assume enhanced roles in providing for their families and emerge
        as leaders and decision-makers in their communities; girls who may not have had a chance to attend school may
        do so; boys are protected from recruitment or forced labour; and men take on expanded roles in child care.
1   |    GENDER
        It is therefore critical that gender is mainstreamed in every step of the PDNA in order to ensure that recovery
        interventions are relevant, effective and sustainable for women and men of the affected population. Gender
        mainstreaming ensures that recovery efforts will reduce, rather than reinforce, inequalities by avoiding assump-
        tions, generalizations and stereotypes, and by promoting positive change. Gender-sensitive PDNAs can also
        increase and broaden ownership and sustainability of recovery initiatives by ensuring greater ownership through
        equal involvement of the population as a whole.

        The Gender Sector Guidance aims to provide practical advice to national and international gender experts par-
        ticipating in PDNAs on how to facilitate the identification and integration of gender equality issues across sectors
        and across the elements of the PDNA: pre-disaster baseline information, the effects of the disaster, the estima-
        tion of the economic value of damage and loss, the disaster's impact on the economy and human development,
        and identification of recovery and reconstruction needs, including build back better (BBB) and its cost. A draft
        Terms of Reference for a gender expert for a PDNA is included in Annex 5.

        Gender focal points identified from within PDNA sector teams who are responsible for coordinating with the
        gender expert as well as ensuring gender mainstreaming in sector assessments and reports would also benefit
        from familiarizing themselves with this chapter. To fully benefit from this guidance and become a valuable
        resource in the PDNA process, it is obligatory that the gender expert becomes familiar with Volume A of the
        PDNA Guidelines.

        The systematic integration of gender as a cross-cutting issue in PDNAs is a relatively new undertaking. However,
        the Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) methodology of the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
        America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)1, which is incorporated in the PDNA methodology, includes guidance on
        gender mainstreaming on which this document largely draws on. This guidance should be considered a working
        document that will be continuously strengthened based on feedback from practitioners and the accumulation
        of lessons learned and best practices.

        The structure of this chapter mirrors the various steps of the PDNA; however, due to the cross-cutting nature of
        the Gender issue, some steps are more elaborate than others:

                      •	 Section 2 provides an overview of the assessment process, the role of the gender expert, the
                         analytical framework for gender analysis, as well as suggested assessment methods.

                      •	 Section 3 provides guidance on how to develop the pre-disaster baseline gender analysis to
                         inform the gender section of the final PDNA Report as well as to inform the sector overviews and
                         baselines of the social, productive and infrastructure sectors.

                      •	 Section 4 provides guidance on how to define and describe the four dimensions of the disaster
                         effects: (i) damages of infrastructure and physical assets; (ii) economic losses to production, effects
                         on production of services, and access to goods and services; (iii) disruption of governance services
                         and decision-making processes; and (iv) increased risks and vulnerabilities.

                      •	 Section 5 gives guidance on how to estimate the economic value of the effects of the disaster
                         specific to the gender issues, focusing on the change in flows as a result of women’s
                         reproductive role.


        1	
             Often members of the water and sanitation assessment team are drawn from the WASH Cluster created as part of the response to
             a disaster.

2   |        GENDER
                      •	 Section 6 provides guidance on how to contribute to the analysis of the disaster impact in terms
                         of macro-economic impact and human development impact, looking at the pre-disaster and ex-
                         pected trend for gender equality after the disaster.

                      •	 Section 7 provides a short description of the linkages with other sectors and cross-cutting issues.

                      •	 Section 8 provides guidance on the development of the Gender Sector Report, and how to
                         contribute to the development of the recovery strategies and plans of the additional sectors.



        ASSESSMENT PROCESS
        MULTI-SECTOR PROCESS
        The Gender Sector Assessment is the basis for the cross-sectoral gender analysis. The objective of the gender
        assessment is to establish a clear understanding of gender issues within the dimensions of the disaster effects
        and likely impact across all sectors2 to inform the recovery strategy and planning. The gender expert will there-
        fore undertake the gender analysis in order to:

                      •	 inform and feed into the analysis and recovery strategy and planning of the Social, Productive and
                         Infrastructure sectors to the greatest extent possible;

                      •	 develop a stand-alone gender report to be included in the overall PDNA report. The report will
                         primarily cover issues that are not reflected in the sector reports and sometimes also emphasize
                         the main findings related to sector-specific analysis.

        ADVISORY, ADVOCACY AND TECHNICAL ROLE OF THE GENDER EXPERT
        Throughout the PDNA process, in addition to undertaking an assessment to inform the Gender Analysis, the
        gender expert should advise and advocate with the identified sector assessment teams to:

                      •	 strive for gender balance in the assessment teams;

                      •	 appoint a sector gender focal point to coordinate information sharing with the PDNA gender expert;

                      •	 promote and facilitate equal opportunities for women and men in the assessment process and all
                         recovery interventions;

                      •	 strive for gender balance of key informants with particular expertise relevant to the assessment;3

                      •	 consult with affected women, men, boys and girls to identify their needs and priorities through
                         surveys, individual interviews and same-sex meetings;

                      •	 encourage and support the participation of women’s organizations and networks as well as the
                         government structures responsible for gender/women’s affairs and its local-level presence (national
                         gender equality machinery), throughout the assessment process;

        2	
             The Gender Expert may have to focus on supporting a few priority sectors to avoid spreading too thin.
        3	
             Providing such guidance and advice at the very start of the assessment would ensure that all sector teams provide the necessary
             estimations of gender-disaggregated effects and impact for the gender expert to finalize the analysis.


3   |        GENDER
                  •	 provide advice and support in the collection and analysis of sex- and age-disaggregated data
                     (SADD) and gender-sensitive information throughout the assessment;

                  •	 work with the PDNA gender expert to ensure that all assessment data collection forms, question-
                     naires etc. are designed to collect SADD, and if tools developed by national stakeholders are used,
                     negotiate revisions to include SADD ;

                  •	 refrain from extensive use of collective terms such as ‘households’, ‘families’, ‘Internally Displaced
                     Persons (IDP)’, etc., since these aggregated terms hide important gender differences;

                  •	 participate in the PDNA gender training session if planned prior to the assessment.

        A gender session should be incorporated into the broader preparatory methodological training for the PDNA
        and be undertaken by the gender expert. This would provide an opportunity to place the PDNA in the context
        of existing gender-related legislation and policies, and present evidence of the gender-differentiated impacts
        from past disasters.

        COORDINATION
        Upon request from a government to support the PDNA process, the Assessment Team of the government is
        joined by recovery and technical experts from United Nations, World Bank and the European Union (EU). In some
        cases, gender expertise is requested in its own merit and in others, support is requested through inclusion into
        social sectors. Ideally, several Gender Experts led by the government, in collaboration with the United Nations,
        the World Bank and the EU and the civil society would compose the Gender Sector Assessment Team. The
        participation of a focal point from the national gender machinery in planning and implementing the assessment
        process should be actively encouraged. Depending on the context, and if gaps have been found in the data
        necessary for the assessment, the gender expert could also engage local partners to carry out some aspects
        of the Gender Sector assessment.

        Where a national gender and development coordination mechanism exists, such as a Gender Coordination
        Group comprised by the national gender machinery, women’s/civil society organizations, multilateral agencies
        and donors, the gender expert should engage and consult with this group throughout the PDNA process to en-
        sure coordination and alignment with existing national gender equality efforts, policies and strategies. If no such
        coordination mechanism exists, the PDNA process could be used as an opportunity to promote its establishment.

        The PDNA should build on assessments carried out during the humanitarian response phase. The gender expert
        should draw on information gathered through, for example, the Multi-Cluster/Sector Initial Rapid Assessment
        (MIRA), secondary data reviews, rapid gender assessments or analyses carried out by other organizations, sectors
        etc. Pending on the context, the gender expert, in coordination with the PDNA Team, needs to establish linkages
        with the national humanitarian coordination mechanism.

        ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK – GENDER ANALYSIS
        During a disaster, as well as during the recovery phase, women often endure extreme hardships such as ele-
        vated levels of violence and insecurity, restricted mobility, and additional load in care, domestic and livelihoods
        activities. Additionally, there is a risk that international relief efforts, based on assumptions of cultural norms and
        women’s role in society, can increase insecurity and roll back space and rights that women may have previously


4   |    GENDER
        enjoyed, for example, by excluding women in decision-making processes related to humanitarian response,
        which have a direct impact on their own lives and future.

        The cross-sector gender analysis combines primary and secondary gender-sensitive information about the pre-di-
        saster situation, the effects and likely impact of the disaster in order to identify gender equality gaps, needs and
        priorities, which should inform the various elements of the PDNA, in particular, the recovery framework.

             A gender analysis examines the relationships, and their inherent inequalities and power dynamics between
             men and women. A gender analysis also looks at women and men’s respective access to and control of re-
             sources, their roles and responsibilities in the household and the community, and the constraints they face
             when interacting with each other due to gender roles and power imbalances. The analysis seeks to identify
             the specific institutional, economic and the social factors that underlie, support, or influence the situation of
             women and men and their relationships.


        A set of cross-sectoral key questions adapted from CEPAL4 (Annex 2) have been identified for information col-
        lection of the gender analysis of both the pre-disaster baseline and the effects of the disaster in relation to the
        PDNA and the development of the Recovery Framework.

        It is advisable, to the extent possible, that the information for the Gender Analysis be structured in accordance
        with the four dimensions and four elements of the PDNA in order to align with the information needs of the
        other sectors.

        The four PDNA assessment dimensions are:
               1.	 Damage to infrastructure and physical assets;

               2.	 Change in flows to production and effects on supply and access to goods and services;

               3.	 Disruption of governance services and decision-making processes;

               4.	 Increased risks and vulnerabilities.

        The four PDNA assessment elements are:
               1.	 Pre-disaster situation;

               2.	 Effects of the disaster, including estimation of the economic value of damage and changes in flows;

               3.	 Disaster impact on the macro-economy and human development;

               4.	 Recovery and reconstruction needs, including building back better (BBB) considerations.

        This is illustrated in the suggested analytical framework in Table 2, which also includes the indicative questions
        from Annex 2.

        The collected relevant information should be included into either the various sector assessments and recovery
        plans, or the Gender Sector Report.




        4	
             CEPAL, adapted from Socio-Economic Impact of Natural Disasters: A Gender Analysis (2004: p. 21).

5   |        GENDER
        Table 2: Analytical Framework for Gender assessment

        Dimensions 1 Pre-disaster                    2 Effects of the                 3 Disaster impact on  4 Recovery
                   situation                         disaster including               the macro-economy and needs including
                                                     estimation of the                human development     Building Back
                                                     economic value of                                      Better
                                                     damage and loss                                        considerations
        General          Demographics, gen-          SADD on affected popula-         How are pre-disaster trends
        context          der equality context?       tion                             toward gender equality and
        1                What resources (e.g.        Have any of the resources        the position of women in society     Are there any new
        Damages to       land, housing, stor-        owned/ used by men and           with regard to specific social and   resources available to
        infrastructure   age, income, money,         women been destroyed?            economic indicators likely to be     women and/or men?
        and physical     valuables, livestock,                                        impacted due to the effects of
                                                     Have infrastructure and          the disaster?                        Who (men, women,
        assets           crops, tools/equip-         physical assets of the gender                                         widows, female heads
                         ment) do men and            machinery been affected?         Examples of indicators: birth,       of households) has
                         women use to carry                                           adolescent fertility rate, death,    priority access to these
                         out their activities?                                        injury, labour and income (per-      new resources, and
                         Who owns and/or                                              sonal and household), employ-        what are the effects
                         controls the use of                                          ment, schooling, labour market       in terms of power
                         these resources?                                             participation, participation in      relations,
                                                                                      decision making, home and land
                                                                                      ownership, debt                   What capacities, skills
                                                                                                                        and knowledge do
                                                                                      What are the consequences for     women and men in
                                                                                      women, girls, boys and men of     the community have?
                                                                                      these changes in terms of time-
                                                                                      use, foregoing other activities
                                                                                      such as education, income-gen-
                                                                                      eration, etc.?


        2                What were the activ-        Have the activities of                                                Can identified
        Economic         ities of women, girls,      women, girls, boys and men                                            spontaneous recovery
        losses to        boys or men (pro-           changed since the disaster?                                           activities be support-
        production       ductive, reproductive       Why?                                                                  ed? How?
        and effects      and community work,                                                                               What opportunities
                                                     Has the production of goods
        on the supply    educational activities)                                                                           are there to develop
                                                     and services that was the re-
        and access to    prior the disaster,                                                                               the existing capacities
                                                     sponsibility of women been
        goods and        when (e.g. each day,                                                                              of women and men?
                                                     reduced by the disaster?
        services         twice a year, etc.) and     How and how much?                                                     How can needs
                         where?
                                                     What barriers are identified                                          identified by women,
                         Which services did          by women and men to                                                   men, girls and boys in
                         women, girls, boys          accessing services? Examples                                          the affected popula-
                         and men use to have         might include destroyed                                               tion be met?
                         access to (including        infrastructure, lack of or
                         financial, credit, etc.)?   unsafe transport, no same-
                         Were there differenc-       sex service provider staff,
                         es in                       cost, etc.
                         access based on
                         gender? Why?                What spontaneous recovery
                                                     activities are carried out by
                                                     women and men?
                                                     What priority needs identi-
                                                     fied by women and men are
                                                     not being met as a result of
                                                     the disaster, including access
                                                     to services?




6   |    GENDER
        Dimensions 1 Pre-disaster                   2 Effects of the                3 Disaster impact on  4 Recovery
                   situation                        disaster including              the macro-economy and needs including
                                                    estimation of the               human development     Building Back
                                                    economic value of                                     Better
                                                    damage and loss                                       considerations
        3                 Are women and men         Have the ability of women
        Disruption of     equally represented       and men to raise or have
        governance        in governance and         representation regarding
        services and      decision-making           their concerns and priorities
        decision-mak-     processes affecting       in governance and
        ing processes     their lives?              decision-making
                                                    processes changed as a
                          Are there barriers to
                                                    result of the disaster?
                          women’s participation
                          in governance, includ-
                          ing civil and political
                          participation
                          What governance
                          mechanisms/capac-
                          ities are in place to
                          enhance gender
                          equality?

        4                 Are there existing                                        Have the disaster increased        How can further risks
        Increased         structural gen-                                           exposure to GBV (e.g. route to     and vulnerabilities be
        risks and         der-based risks and                                       and location of water points and   mitigated?
        vulnerabilities   vulnerabilities that                                      fuel)?                             Are negative coping
                          could be exacerbated                                      Are some groups more affected      mechanisms increasing
                          by disaster? (e.g. gen-                                   than others and have limited       existing structural risk
                          der-based violence                                        resources to cope? (pregnant       and vulnerability?
                          [GBV] trafficking,                                        women, elderly women and
                          feminization of pov-                                      men, single-headed households
                          erty, limited mobility,                                   female/male/child)
                          access to services)



        ASSESSMENT METHODS
        The gender analysis should be based on a mix of methods to collect as much relevant information as possible.
        The assessment efforts, made clear through the details of the effects of the sectors, are also likely to generate
        relevant information to be included and relevant for the gender sector assessment.

        QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT METHOD

        Sample survey: Where sufficient gender-sensitive information about the post-disaster situation is not available
        from either national post-disaster data sets and reports, or humanitarian assessments such as the Multi-Cluster/
        Sector Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA), additional detailed data collection methods, such as a rapid household
        survey based on personal interviews with affected women (and possibly observation) could be considered (an
        example is provided in Annex 3). To yield the desired results and ensure the reliability of the data and the subse-
        quent findings, due consideration must be made to methodology in terms of questionnaire design, training of
        interviewers, sampling strategy, etc. It would be required to bring in the necessary expertise (which can usually
        be found in the Statistical Offices) and knowledge on the national context through, for example, contracting or
        partnering with local research or academic institutions. A rapid household survey can bring out critical inputs to
        the cross-sectoral analysis and in particularly to the quantification of damage, loss and time use of women relat-


7   |    GENDER
        ed to their productive, reproductive and community responsibilities5 following a disaster. The results of a
        rapid household survey could also inform the scoping of qualitative methods such as key informants, interviews
        and focus group discussions. However, due to the level of planning, implementation and information processing
        time required for a household survey, it may not be possible during the PDNA process. In this case, and where
        relevant, it could be included in the Gender Sector Report as a suggested recovery intervention, which would
        allow for further understanding of the impact of disaster on women and inform the longer-term implementation
        of the recovery framework.

        QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT METHODS

        Desk review: It is essential to undertake a desk review to obtain information to mainly inform the baseline, iden-
        tifying pre-existing gender inequalities and constraints that contribute to the differentiated impact of the disaster
        on women, girls, boys and men and therefore also gender equality needs and recovery priorities. Reviewing
        humanitarian assessments of the disaster can also provide important information on disaster effects and already
        identified needs, which can direct the gender analysis further. Suggested key sources and documents for the
        desk review are provided below. Country offices of the United Nations, the World Bank and the EU may be able
        to support the identification of such documentation even prior to arrival of the PDNA team in-country or suggest
        women’s organizations or contacts within the national gender machinery that would be able to supply these.

                      •	 Census reports (statistical offices, regional databases)

                      •	 Household surveys, time and allocation studies

                      •	 Poverty assessment reports (MDG, WB)

                      •	 Status of women reports (CEDAW report submissions and shadow reports)

                      •	 Human Development Report/Index

                      •	 Gender Inequality Index

                      •	 Social Institutions and Gender-related Development Index

                      •	 National development plans

                      •	 National gender policies and strategies.

                      •	 Available gender equality studies

                      •	 Labour force survey reports

                      •	 Special study reports (higher learning institutes, United Nations, national and international
                         Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)

        5	
              Women’s productive role refers to work for pay in cash or kind. It includes both market production with an exchange-value, and sub-
              sistence/home production with actual use-value, and potential exchange-value. For women in agricultural production, this includes
              work as independent farmers, peasant wives and wage workers.

             Women’s reproductive role refers to childbearing/rearing responsibilities, and domestic tasks performed by women, required to
             guarantee the maintenance and reproduction of the labour force. It includes not only biological reproduction, but also the care and
             maintenance of the work force (male partner and working children) and the future work force (infants and school-going children).

             Women’s community role refers to activities undertaken at the community level, as an extension of their reproductive role, to ensure
             the provision and maintenance of scarce resources of collective consumption, such as water, health care and education. This is vol-
             untary unpaid work, undertaken in 'free' time. Adapted from 1998 ILO/SEAPAT's OnLine Gender Learning & Information Module.

8   |        GENDER
                  •	 Sector reports, industry reports

                  •	 Disaster management/emergency documents, legislation, plans and guidelines

                  •	 Vulnerability and Risk Assessment and Mappings

                  •	 Humanitarian assessments, SitReps surveillance reports (e.g. MIRA)

        Key informant interviews: The assessment of the disaster effects structured interviews with key informants
        on gender equality issues would include government counterparts from the national gender machinery, wom-
        en’s organizations, donors, and members of national gender coordination mechanisms. Also include in-country
        gender experts from World Bank/United Nations and the EU. UN Women, if present in the country, would be
        able to support the identification of relevant informants.

        The PDNA Gender Team will also undertake field visits to selected affected areas. Key informants here would
        likely include local departments of the national gender machinery, or the local government institution responsible
        for social affairs, as well as community-based organizations (CBOs) ideally with a gender equality track record.
        Women’s organizations will likely be able to support the identification of the latter as well as the identification
        of, in particular, female community influencers who would be relevant to interview. These could include religious
        and community leaders (and their wives in case they are male), church groups, midwives and traditional birth
        attendants, health/social workers, teachers, cooperatives, fishers groups and market vendor associations, etc.

        Furthermore, semi-structured interviews or informal conversations with affected households, both male and
        female members, and in particular female-headed households, should also be prioritized during the field visit in
        order to gain further insights into the needs and priorities of the affected women and men.

        Focus group discussions: It is also advisable to have group discussions with mixed groups or single sex-groups
        of women and men, including youth and elderly from the affected location. Focus groups concentrate the lim-
        ited research time, and group dynamics may allow for other topics to be explored from different angles and to
        provide information to supplement individual interviews.

        Observation: Respectful observation during the field visit can also provide important information in terms of
        the location, roles and activities of women, girls, men and boys.

        The gender expert, with the other sector teams, should emphasize the need for gender-sensitive qualitative
        methods, ensuring women are included in the sector assessments, with particular attention to the time and ac-
        cess constraints of female-headed households, women in minority groups, and women whose cultures restrict
        male-female interaction. Women may need to interview women. Local leaders may also need to be sensitized
        on the intent and importance of the consultations.

        In regard to approach to data collection, data collection teams should be gender-balanced and as much as possi-
        ble reflect the make-up of the affected communities in terms of age, ethnic, linguistic and other context-specific
        population characteristics. Finding adequate numbers of female survey personnel can, however, be challenging
        in some contexts. Some of the methods used in past PDNAs to overcome this obstacle include:

                  •	 utilizing trained male and female community facilitators from ongoing programmes;

                  •	 recruiting male and female students from local universities as an exercise to build
                     fieldwork experience;

9   |    GENDER
                •	 creating appropriate work conditions that are socio-culturally acceptable, such as allowing women
                   to work in pairs or groups, to conduct their fieldwork during daylight hours and providing childcare
                   arrangements;

                •	 identifying local women’s groups or CBOs, such as women’s religious or community associations
                   that can do fieldwork in locations closer to their homes.6

     Ethical Considerations: Following the World Health Organization’s Ethical and Safety Recommendations for
     Researching, Documenting, and Monitoring Sexual Violence (WHO, 2007), special care should be taken to
     ensure that the individuals who participate in the interviews were not exposed to further risks while providing
     information on sensitive subjects, and additional safeguards are put in place when children between 15 and
     18 years old are involved. These ethical considerations should be emphasized during targeted training to those
     involved in data collection, focus group discussions, and in-depth interviews, as well as throughout the data
     collection process.

     OUTPUTS
     Depending on the context and resources available, the gender expert has the following three outputs/delivera-
     bles in the PDNA process:

                •	 facilitation of consultation of PDNA sector teams with national gender machinery and women’s
                   organizations throughout the PDNA process to ensure that gender considerations are duly incorpo-
                   rated and addressed;

                •	 a cross-sectoral gender analysis to inform sector assessments and recovery plan as well as the Gen-
                   der sector report. This is a background document and may not be a final complete product but
                   rather, a collection of data, information and analyses, which is shared throughout the assessment
                   process with the relevant sectors as the information is retrieved and analysed;

                •	 a brief gender sector report and sector recovery plan with targeted interventions (approximately
                   5 pages). This report includes main findings from the gender analysis and the estimation of the
                   economic value of damage and loss related to women’s productive and reproductive roles. This
                   report also includes key recommendations for the recovery planning including gender equality-re-
                   lated targeted interventions for the short, medium and long term that address the needs and rights
                   of women and girls in particular, and that may not be sector-specific, and therefore not included in
                   the sector reports.




     6	
          The World Bank, partly adapted from Guidance Notes on Gender and Disaster Risk Management (2012).




10   |    GENDER
     KEY ACTION POINTS
     Below is an overview of the various elements or steps of a PDNA process and indicative actions for the gender
     expert (Table 3)

     Table 3: Elements or steps of a PDNA process and indicative actions for the gender expert
         Phases of PDNA                  Action Points
                                        •	 Incorporate requirements for sex-disaggregated data collection,
         Planning                          gender-sensitive analysis and sector gender focal points into the PDNA’s guiding
                                           principles, scope, Terms of Reference and budget.
                                        •	 Identify gender focal points in all sector teams and agree on meetings frequency,
                                           means of communication, need for support etc.
                                        •	 Identify and connect with relevant gender stakeholders from the government, civil
         Coordination/Consultation
                                           society, donors and United Nations organizations (e.g. through a national gender
                                           coordination mechanism).
                                        •	 Distribute sector notes to relevant sectors.
                                        •	 Promote the participation of gender stakeholders in the PDNA Training Workshop.

         Training Workshop              •	 Provide gender training session to entire PDNA Assessment Team and possibly
                                           provide separate orientation on gender to gender machinery/women’s organiza-
                                           tions, UN Women colleagues, and/or gender focal points for sectors.
                                        •	 Undertake desk review and consultation with gender stakeholders.
         Baseline                       •	 Develop a pre-disaster cross-sectoral situation analysis of women and gender.
                                        •	 Disseminate relevant findings of gender baseline to sector teams.
                                        •	 Work with gender stakeholders to identify relevant key informants
                                           including for the various sectors.
                                        •	 Provide support to sector teams on consultations with women and on the identifica-
         Field visit                       tion of female key informants including SADD and gender aspects in questionnaires,
                                           interview guides, forms.
                                        •	 If possible, carry out a rapid household survey.
                                        •	 Set up focus groups and conduct interviews with key informants where possible.
         Assessment of                  •	 Develop gender analysis based on field visits, surveys, sector assessment information.
         Disaster Effects               •	 Share sector-specific findings to sector teams and collect information from them.
                                        •	 Estimate the value of the effects on reproductive work.
         Estimating the Value of
         Disaster Effects               •	 Provide support to calculating the value of disaster effects in targeted sectors in
                                           coordination with social, productive and infrastructure teams.
                                        •	 Identify the gender dimension of disaster impact (mainly on human development).
         Disaster Impact                •	 Provide guidance on the inclusion of gender-sensitive indicators and findings from
                                           the gender analysis in the human development Impact analysis.
                                    •	 Based on analysis of needs, elaborate sector-specific report with prioritized, targeted
                                       gender equality activities that addresses the needs and right of women and girls in
         Recovery Strategy and Plan    particular, including Build Back Better, and provide related cost estimates.
                                    •	 Provide technical support to gender mainstreaming in sectors and an overall
                                       recovery and reconstruction plan.
                                        •	 Support the national gender machinery and/or women’s organizations to provide
                                           inputs/statement on the recovery framework.
         Stakeholder Consultations
                                        •	 Promote and facilitate the inclusion of the national gender machinery and women’s
                                           organizations in the consultation on the recovery framework.


11   |    GENDER
     PRE-DISASTER SITUATION
     The pre-disaster situation is an essential part of the cross-sectoral gender analysis and is based on the desk re-
     view. In order to understand gender dimensions of the effect of the disaster and in order to ensure sustainable
     and inclusive recovery in general and for BBB in particular, it is crucial to understand the situation prior to the
     disaster. This should include the underlying causes of vulnerability to hazards and the existing physical, political
     and socio-economic factors, including gender and other inequalities that limit the ability of women and men
     and sub-groups of the population to respond to and cope with a disaster. Below are some examples of issues
     that could be included in the pre-disaster situation analysis to help answer the questions of the Gender Analysis
     (Table 4). It is structured in accordance to general context and the four dimensions7 of the PDNA. When SADD is
     not available, the analysis will depend more on qualitative secondary information from the desk review. Findings
     should be shared with the relevant sectors.

     7	
          Infrastructure and assets, production and delivery of, and access to goods and services and access to goods and services, governance
          and decision-making processes, and vulnerability and risks.

12   |    GENDER
     Table 4: Pre-disaster Baseline Information	
         Context
         •	 composition of population by sex (age, ethnicity, indigence, religion, vulnerable groups, poverty, literacy, education,
            and intersections e.g. feminization of poverty);
         •	 women’s fertility rate, birth rate, death rate by sex, female/male life-expectancy at birth, female/male malnourishment;
         •	 total households and distribution of household headship (single, female, male, child), average family size and total
            and differentiated household income, household food security: consumption patterns, responsibility for household
            food security, responsibilities assigned to household (in particular women) for family health care;
         •	 power relations within the household (i.e. decision-making processes, who controls the use of money and resources,
            bargaining power and intra-household distribution of resources);
         •	 roles of women and men in the community’s disaster prevention and preparedness efforts;
         •	 the gendered context and status of gender equality in the country/affected areas, context-specific gender-based
            discrimination and particular disadvantages facing women and girls.
         Infrastructure and physical assets
         •	 housing arrangements (urban and rural) and living conditions by sex;
         •	 official and traditional ownership/ inheritance arrangements/practices of land, housing, productive resources;
         •	 community spaces/facilities and their use by women and men;
         •	 existing infrastructure/assets for care of children and the elderly, and their use.
         Production and access to goods and services
         •	 formal and informal economic activities (job, income, employment and unemployment levels) by sex
         •	 roles and responsibilities (division of labour) of females and males (including micro-businesses/backyard production)
            and daily time-use patterns of women and men for productive, reproductive, and community activities;
         •	 access, control and use of resources: who owns (controls) and who has access (uses) including land and land tenure
            patterns by sex, including procedures for acquiring access to other natural resources (rivers, forests, etc.);
         •	 practices and norms that regulate the mobility of females and males, and either facilitate or prevent access to re-
            sources, such as education, employment, credit and control of productive resources such as land;
         •	 women and men’s access to and use of credit, saving schemes and other micro-finance services through credit-lend-
            ing agencies (banks, credit union, co-operatives, etc.);
         •	 access to and provision of health care, reproductive health care, pre-natal and post-natal care, and infant and elderly
            care, common health problems of women and men;
         •	 description and numbers of users of education systems by sex, education levels, functional literacy levels, girls/boys
            (disaggregated by age groups) school enrolment and dropout rates, education and training institutes to which wom-
            en and men have access;
         •	 access to potable water and sanitation, electricity, telephone, transportation by women, girls, boys and men;
         •	 access and participation of women and men in ongoing livelihood programmes, training, food-for work, exten-
            sion services, etc.




13   |    GENDER
         Governance and decision-making processes
         •	 legal/regulatory/policy frameworks related to women’s rights and gender equality including any discriminatory laws/
            regulation and/or practices;
         •	 policies and laws that govern national disaster preparedness, mitigation and response and their gender responsiveness;
         •	 government structure responsible for gender/women’s affairs and local presence (national gender equality machin-
            ery), women’s organizations, non-governmental and community-based organizations (NGOs and CBOs) and their
            engagement and capacity in promotion of gender equality and women’s rights;
         •	 organizations at the national, regional and community levels responsible for prevention, emergency and rehabilita-
            tion activities and their capacity/frameworks for gender equality;
         •	 participation and leadership roles of women and men in local, regional and national governance, sex ratio of regis-
            tered voters;
         •	 customary institutions and arrangements for decision making at the local level and the participation/leadership of
            women and men;
         •	 main means of communication within the communities and access of women to information, popular modes of
            communication for women in communities (radio, cell phones);
         •	 type of social security system and male/female/household entitlements and use.
         Vulnerability and risks
         •	 prevalence, types and trends of SGBV, including trafficking, child labour, transactional sex, prevalence and nature of
            any harmful cultural practices (e.g. early marriage, female genital mutilation, widow cleansing);
         •	 services available for female and male survivors of SGBV;
         •	 unpaid work trends by sex;
         •	 rate of very young (under 15 years) and older persons (65 years) by sex;
         •	 migration patterns by sex, cause;
         •	 people – disaggregated by sex and age – with a physical/mental disability;
         •	 common negative coping mechanisms to crisis, food insecurity by sex;
         •	 excluded and/or disadvantaged groups (minorities, people living with HIV/AIDS) by sex.
     Source: Adapted from Deare, Fredericka, 2004; Savitri Bisnath, Ricardo Zapata, ECLAC, 2007; IASC, 2009.




14   |    GENDER
     ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS
     This section highlights key issues as well as questions useful for guiding the information gathering and gender
     analysis of the effects of the disaster. The effects (quantifiable and non-quantifiable8 ) identified should again be
     described as the changes in the four PDNA dimensions.9

     DESTRUCTION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
     Attention should be given to identify gender issues in regard to access, ownership, control and use of physical,
     natural and financial assets that may be crucial to have an adequate overview of how the livelihoods and food
     security of women and men are affected by loss of property, productive resources and communal infrastructure.

     When collecting information on destruction of infrastructure and physical assets, either through the sector-spe-
     cific assessments or the gender assessment, issues pertaining to gender dimensions include the following:

     Ownership of land and housing: Women’s share of household wealth may not be formalized. Formal, infor-
     mal and traditional land tenure practices and inheritance rights may be disadvantageous to women, including
     widows, women in polygamist relationships or female-headed households, who may not have formal ownership
     of their land and/or houses. Women’s rights might also deteriorate if husbands have died during the disaster
     and ownership is patrilineal. Due to informal marriages, polygamy, lack of knowledge about how their partners
     acquired the land and the variety of types of land tenure, female heads of households are extremely vulnerable
     to losing their right to their land. Such issues must be identified so that specific arrangements are put in place for
     women, and in particular, widows and minors to claim property and land (UNDP and UNISDR, 2010).

     Productive assets: Women may lack ownership of their productive assets either or use different productive
     assets than men for their activities. Productive assets used for activities in the informal sector and for subsistence
     farming must also be assessed. Often women may operate micro- and small enterprises from their homes to
     supplement family food and income. The corresponding activities in the agricultural sector are known as the
     backyard economy.10 The gender expert must coordinate with the relevant sectors in order to ensure that de-
     struction of productive assets such as home-based business equipment and production tools as well as backyard
     economy assets such as chickens, pigs and other small animals are considered in the assessment.

     Communal spaces: The identification of communal spaces such as markets, childcare centres, wells, and gath-
     ering spaces also require consultation with women and men. Community ownership of replanted trees, commu-
     nal infrastructure, etc. must comprise management arrangements that include women and men equally.




     8	
           Some effects are not quantifiable in monetary terms but are relevant for providing a full picture of the human development impact
           and to inform the process of estimating needs (quantified as investments or resources required to compensate for those effects)
     9	
           Infrastructure and assets, production and delivery of and access to goods and services, governance and decision-making processes,
           and vulnerability and risks.
     10	
           ECLAC, Handbook for Estimating the Socio-economic and Environmental Effects of Disaster(2003).

15   |     GENDER
     Table 4: Pre-disaster Baseline Information	
         Additional key issues to consider:
         •	 damage to economic sectors (agriculture, industry, tourism, fisheries) and the engagement of women and men in
            them;
         •	 damage/destruction of key economic assets for women and men such as land, markets;
         •	 damage/destruction of productive assets used by women and men e.g. livestock, small animals, seeds, tools, equip-
            ment;
         •	 types of households with damaged assets (female-, child-headed, elderly) and their need for housing assistance
            (SADD);
         •	 women’s preferences in regard to housing design and reconstruction and planning and rebuilding of communities,
            e.g. regarding the location of public areas such as playgrounds and water points;
         •	 decline in production of women-owned or operated activities, including crops, arts and crafts, etc.,
         •	 enterprises including informal business operations of women and men (artisans, market/street vendors, home-based
            producers) and other livelihood activities directly or indirectly affected by the damage to community infrastructure;
         •	 effects on communal child-caring facilities/playgrounds/markets/urban furniture and the consequences for time use,
            safety and activities of women;
         •	 the roles of women and men in community infrastructure reconstruction/repair and their opportunities to participate
            in such activities (time and/or childcare constraints and need for compensation);
         •	 schools with adequate bathroom facilities within easy reach of girls and boys from the affected areas.




     EFFECTS ON PRODUCTION AND SUPPLY OF AND ACCESS TO GOODS AND SERVICES
     Due to the time-intensive nature of women’s reproductive roles and household tasks, time constraints or ‘time
     poverty’ may be major barriers to their access to basic services as well as their engagement in livelihood and
     economic activities. As a consequence of a disaster, these activities take up even more time and face decline in
     production and value.

     When collecting information on effects on production and delivery of and access to goods and services, either
     through the sector assessments or the gender assessment, attention should be paid to the following possible
     gender equality gaps to identify needs:

     ACCESS

     When evaluating the effect of the disaster on women and men’s need for and access to services, consideration
     on how to ensure access to and adequacy of temporary services while restoring and improving permanent infra-
     structure and processes should be included.

     Simple changes in service delivery such as taking the differentiated needs of women, girls, boys and men into
     account when deciding on location and operating hours of, for example, health clinics, providing safe trans-
     portation, ensuring female staff among service providers and providing childcare arrangements, can facilitate
     increased access to and adequacy of services. Other considerations may be cultural norms dictating that women
     and children must be accompanied by a male relative. Death, injury, displacement and migration caused by or
     resulting from the disaster may also result in a change in household composition. Since women and men may
     have different mobility and levels of access to and control over income, specific attention must then be paid to
     access to services of households newly headed by women, elderly or children.


16   |    GENDER
     Women’s saving and credit arrangements may differ from that of men and may also include informal arrange-
     ments (ECLAC, 2003). Inquiries into the types of formal and informal saving and credit arrangements existing
     before the disaster and the access and use by women and men should be undertaken. If the use by women and
     men is differentiated, it would be important to establish the reasons and how access after the disaster can be
     promoted or enabled.

         Additional key issues to consider:
         •	 the direct and indirect financial costs of the disaster on households, in particular female-headed households, which
            could impede access to services;
         •	 changes in school attendance rates of girls and boys in elementary and/or secondary schools due to work or safety;
         •	 changes in access of women and men to water, sanitation, markets, workplaces, health facilities changed and conse-
            quences in terms of cost, access, time-use, and safety issues;
         •	 processes and rights that women and men engage in to attain formal documents, including identification docu-
            ments and land deeds lost in the disaster as well as registration of post-disaster births, deaths and marriages;
         •	 need, access and participation of women and men in new assistance, housing and livelihood programmes;
         •	 provision of adequate and up-to-date information through accessible channels to women and men regarding their
            homes, communities, family members, services offered, etc.

     PRODUCTION

     Women are highly engaged in subsistence farming (backyard economy) or the informal sector through micro-en-
     terprises. The loss of assets and crops, decreased demand or increase in reproductive and community work as a
     consequence of the disaster may directly affect income and food security. Loss of income earning family mem-
     bers may also have this effect and increase vulnerability. The assessment can help identify how the gendered
     division of labour may lead to a differential impact on women and men due to their different representation in
     various sectors; for example, women may be predominant in service sectors such as tourism where demand for
     services is likely to decrease after a disaster.

         Additional key issues to consider:
         •	 the effects on employment and occupations that are predominantly or exclusively male or female in terms of loss or
            partial loss of income/livelihoods/subsistence activities;
         •	 the interruption to seasonal crop cycles and other income-generating activities and in what direct and indirect ways
            women and/or men were involved in these sectors;
         •	 women and men’s post-disaster time-use patterns and increase in unpaid reproductive and or community work and
            effect on productive work/income;
         •	 the permanent or temporarily loss of livelihoods;
         •	 short- to medium-term income-generation strategies and needs of women and men;
         •	 the required needs for additional and targeted assistance for women and men in terms of livelihoods;


     EFFECTS ON GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
     When collecting information on effects on governance and decision-making processes, either through the
     sector assessments or the gender assessment, attention should be paid to possible gender equality gaps to
     identify needs:

     Governance systems reflect the power dynamics in a society and, therefore, often determine citizens’ ability to
     access services, resources, to mobilize and to speak out. Gender relations and women’s realities often limit wom-


17   |    GENDER
     en’s ability to negotiate with the state including through civil society organizations. Factors obstructing women’s
     ability to benefit from the recovery process and outcomes, to build capabilities and to exercise their rights include
     discriminatory practices, gender-based violence (GBV), and women’s lower literacy levels. These structural bar-
     riers are often deepened by non-responsive legal systems, ineffective public policy design, inadequate service
     provision and investments.

     Disasters can exacerbate these barriers and create new ones. To remove these obstacles, meaningful and ac-
     tive participation by women in planning and other decision-making processes must be promoted actively, and
     women’s needs, interests and priorities concerning service delivery and institutional arrangements, policies and
     procedures included in the recovery framework. Disasters also provide an opportunity to build back better. The
     assessment can help identify how government functions and services can be improved so as to respond to
     inequalities, addresses imbalances in programming and investment, and eliminates biases in public policy and
     processes that deepen exclusion of women.

         Additional key issues to consider:
         •	 effects on the capacity of the national gender machinery to manage its functions or other government structures
            responsible for gender/women’s affairs and its local presence, if for example, there is no Women’s Affairs/Gender
            Equality Ministry/Commission/Office;
         •	 effects on the capacity of the national gender machinery and women’s organizations to engage in the humanitarian
            response and recovery process;
         •	 additional capacities to enhance gender equality brought to the disaster response through international aid agencies,
            which can be used to ensure a gender-responsive recovery process;
         •	 equal consultation and participation of women and men in the post-disaster recovery decision making;
         •	 effects on customary institutions and arrangements for decision making at the local level and opportunity for
            strengthened engagement of women.


     VULNERABILITY AND RISKS
     Gender equality issues should be considered when collecting information on effects on vulnerability and risks,
     either through the sector assessments or the gender assessment. Due to structural inequalities such as gender
     based discrimination and feminization of poverty women often are among the most vulnerable prior to the
     disaster. Vulnerability due to gender inequality may be compounded due to intersection with other factors of
     exclusion and discrimination such as poverty, age, gender identity and sexual orientation, ethnicity, religion,
     caste/class and HIV/AIDS. Such intersection can further influence the capacities and social and economic re-
     sources available to cope with and recover from disaster and enhance vulnerability. Disadvantaged groups,
     and particularly women and girls within them, are therefore often more severely affected by the disaster, but
     also tend to remain invisible in post-disaster and recovery efforts, which create new or enforce existing risks
     and vulnerabilities due to lack of access to services and information. For example, ethnic minorities and indige-
     nous communities tend to live in remote regions with poor accessible roads or on marginalized land with high
     exposure to disasters. Often, their livelihoods are heavily reliant on natural resources and consequently, their
     needs and priorities after a disaster may be different from the general population and they may not be able to
     access available services. Even in societies where there is no visible discrimination of sub-groups, disasters and
     competition for resources in the aftermath of a disaster can dramatically change the social and cultural roles
     of different sub-groups within a society.



18   |    GENDER
         Additional key issues to consider:
         •	 changes in the practices, norms and regulations that contribute to vulnerabilities experienced by women and girls,
            e.g. customary norms preventing women from access to, and control of, credit and property;
         •	 accessibility of services for pregnant and lactating women;
         •	 availability and access to services to address the distinct psychological needs of women, girls, boys and men;
         •	 changes in prevailing attitudes and cultural norms and practices that could constrain women's participation in recov-
            ery efforts and limit their well-being;
         •	 food insecurity of older women and men living alone, female or child-headed households, etc. that have lost or have
            reduced livelihoods;
         •	 social exclusion or lack of access of certain groups to service provision;
         •	 lack of access to information about assistance and services;
         •	 increase in gender-based violence (GBV) and provisions in place to prevent and respond to GBV, including shelters;
         •	 orphaned/unaccompanied boys and girls;
         •	 spontaneous recovery efforts of vulnerable groups and opportunities to facilitate and enable their participation in
            early recovery activities;
         •	 households that have lost their primary or sole income earner (SADD);
         •	 negative coping mechanisms such as:
              -- distress sales or consumption of assets (e.g. seeds, food stocks, livestock and fishing and forestry equipment);
              -- reduced food consumption by women, men, girls or boys of certain ages increased intra-family dependence due to lost employ-
                 ment compounding existing power imbalances within households
              -- increased migration;
              -- transactional sex;




19   |    GENDER
     ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER
     To estimate the value of the effects of the disaster, the PDNA calculates the total or partial destruction of phys-
     ical assets and infrastructure in the affected areas, i.e. damage. It also calculates the changes in economic flows
     arising from the disaster, which continue until the achievement of full economic recovery and reconstruction.

     Calculation of the value of damage and changes in flows is undertaken by the sectors and should be disaggre-
     gated by sex and age (SADD) when possible and where relevant. The gender expert should work with the sector
     assessment teams to ensure that a gender analysis is undertaken as far as is possible in regard to damage to
     infrastructure and physical assets as well as changes in production flows when considering these estimations.

     Specific sector guidance is included in Annex 1. for the Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Forestry Sectors, for
     the Health Sector, and for the Livelihoods Sector, which provides more detailed information on gender dimen-
     sions of the estimation of damage and losses related to the sectors.

     Economic value of changes to production and access to services and goods

     The gender expert should work with the sector experts to ensure sector estimations consider the follow-
     ing key issues:

          1.	 Changes in the patterns of women’s productive employment outside the home. “This refers
              to the temporary loss of a paid job that a woman holds outside her home, whether its nature is
              domestic, industrial or commercial or, for that matter, technical, professional or executive. Such
              temporary unemployment stems from damage caused to formal production systems, and its dura-
              tion will depend on the time needed to re-establish or reconstruct them (ECLAC, 2003: 48).” An
              example could be the temporary loss of a job in the tourist sector due to less demand for services as
              a consequence of the disaster.

          2.	 Changes in women’s household production and income. This relates to the temporary loss of
              production and income from women’s home-based income-generating activities, such as the backyard
              economy and of small and micro-businesses run by women from home. An example would be lost in-
              come due to destroyed fruit trees temporarily impeding home-based jam production. The estimates of
              the backyard economy and the related recovery time should be undertaken by the housing or agricul-
              ture experts with support from the gender expert. Losses in production in formal and/or informal small
              and micro-enterprises should be assessed by the commerce/industry expert with support from the
              employment and livelihoods expert, in regard to the related temporary employment or income loss, as
              well as the gender expert. A survey with affected women such as in Annex 3 can help ensure that all
              aspects of the backyard economy are taken into account (ibid).

          3.	 Other changes in financial flows. This relates to losses stemming from outstanding debts or loans
              of women. The loss or damage of goods purchased through formal or informal credit should be in-
              cluded under damage of property and or housing. However, in addition, there may be penalty interests
              for late payment due to temporary decrease in income because of the disaster or higher interests for
              refinancing the debt and additional funds replace the lost goods (ibid). Another aspect of changes in
              financial flows is the possible loss of women’s access to social welfare schemes following the death of
              her husband if the social security entitlement is under the name of the male head of household.
20   |   GENDER
          4.	 Furthermore, there could be other direct and indirect financial losses due to the disaster effects on the
              households, in particular female-headed households, such as:

              •	 loss due to changes in school attendance rates of girls and boys and due to work, safety or addi-
                 tional transportation costs for school attendance further from home;

              •	 transportation costs related to changes in access of women and men to water, sanitation, markets,
                 workplaces, health facilities;

              •	 costs related to attaining formal documents, including identification documents and land deeds
                 lost in the disaster as well as registration of post-disaster births, deaths and marriages.

     Changes in women’s reproductive work

     In addition to these three areas, there are losses that only affect women due to their reproductive role. This
     estimation is not included in other sectors and should be undertaken by the gender expert with support from
     damage and loss experts on the PDNA team. Under normal circumstances, women’s share of unpaid reproduc-
     tive work is more than 3 times that of men, and this burden is always greatly increased following a disaster. This
     entails a high opportunity cost in terms of lost income as the reproductive work prevents women from spending
     time on income-generating activities or paid work (ECLAC, 2014; 256). To fully capture the cost of a disaster on
     women, it is therefore necessary to quantify this additional unpaid workload in monetary terms. Estimates of
     the increase of women’s reproductive work should be made based on the change compared to the pre-disaster
     situation. There may be variations in type of activities and time-use for urban and rural areas, etc. It is therefore
     important to base estimates on sample surveys and/or interviews with affected women and key informants, as
     discussed below:

          If no such quantitative information is available, data can be obtained from a sampling of affected wom-
          en; failing this, one may assume that they dedicate at least eight hours a day to this unpaid work. Later
          it will be necessary to determine the new pattern of reproductive activities that women have to perform
          as a result of the disaster, based on either representative samplings or, if this is not possible, estimates.
          In addition to the usual baseline activities cited previously, this assessment should consider that women
          have assumed new activities connected with the performance of emergency-related tasks, rehabilitation
          and reconstruction, and that other activities they performed previously will now take longer. Typical ex-
          amples of reproductive tasks during the post-disaster stages are volunteer work in refugee camps and
          time spent queuing to receive food. When gauging the increased time devoted to household work one
          should include the additional time spent hauling water and collecting firewood because usual sources
          have been damaged or curtailed; collectively preparing meals in refugee camps; caring for children
          whose schools have been closed; purchasing goods that require transport along roads in bad state of
          repair; and so forth. By comparing the time dedicated to reproductive work, in the post-disaster situation
          with the normal or baseline situation, it is possible to determine the additional time (with the appropriate
          disaggregation’s or specialization’s) women spend in reproductive work every day due to the disaster
          (ECLAC 2003: 48).

     The additional time spent every day should be multiplied by the estimated duration of the abnormal situation.
     This should then in turn be multiplied by an hourly rate for reproductive work. It is suggested that the hourly rate
     used for reproductive work be based on the hourly rate for community, social and health services, or personal
     services in the affected context.

21   |   GENDER
     A simplified example is shown in box below:

                         A simplified example for estimating rates of reproductive work

         Number of hours of additional reproductive work per day compared to the pre-disaster situation
                                                       X
                             Number of days until recovery to pre-disaster situation
                                                       X
          hourly rate for reproductive work based on hourly rate for community/social/health services
                                                       X
                                          Number of affected women
                                                       =
            Total economic loss due to increase in women’s reproductive work due to the disaster


     However, it is important to avoid double counting. In cases where women are forced to perform reproductive
     work on a temporary basis instead of continuing their normal productive work due to crisis, only the temporary
     loss of paid work should be included in the calculation of loss. This is because the value of the lost income is likely
     to be higher than the value of the increase in reproductive work (ECLAC, 2003: 48).

     Economic value of changes to governance
     Key issues to consider in terms of losses due to changes in governance include:

              •	 cost for increased coordination and capacity needs of the national gender machinery to manage its
                 functions, or other government structures responsible for gender/women’s affairs and its local pres-
                 ence, for example, if there is no Women’s Affairs/Gender Equality Ministry/Commission/Office;

              •	 cost for increased coordination and capacity needs of the national gender machinery and women’s
                 organizations to engage in the humanitarian response and recovery process;

              •	 cost for increased coordination and capacity needs to ensure consultation and participation of
                 women and men in the post-disaster recovery decision making.

     Economic value of increased risks and vulnerabilities
     Key issues to consider in terms of estimating losses due to changes in risks and vulnerabilities include:

              •	 costs of increased accessibility of services for pregnant and lactating women;

              •	 costs of services to address the distinct post-disaster psychological needs of women, girls,
                 boys and men;

              •	 cost of targeting the food insecurity of elderly women and men living alone, female- or
                 child-headed households, etc. that have lost or reduced livelihoods;

              •	 cost of increased GBV prevention and response services, including shelters;

              •	 cost of care for orphaned/unaccompanied boys and girls;

              •	 cost of targeted assistance to households that have lost their primary or sole income earner (SADD);

              •	 cost of mitigating negative coping mechanisms.

22   |   GENDER
     ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
     The Impact Assessment undertaken by the PDNA Team estimates the Social and Economic Impact of the event at
     both the macro and at the micro level. The economic and human impact analysis identifies the gap between the
     pre-disaster scenarios in terms of economic and human development indicators (i.e. variables to be used in the
     assessment, such as Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Balance of Payment, fiscal impact, price fluctuations on the
     economic side, and poverty, employment and personal and household income and other human development
     indicators in terms of health, nutrition, education, access to social services, gender equality, social development
     goals) and their evolution in the post-disaster scenarios. It is based on the assessment of the disaster effects,
     sector development plans, lessons from past experiences and the emerging concerns that derive from the events.
     The analysis of the impact of the disaster provides the medium and long-term projection of the effects on the
     sector. The impact analysis forms the basis of defining the recovery and reconstruction strategy.

     The gender expert can contribute to the analysis of the human development Impact by ensuring that assump-
     tions used to forecast human development performance into the future take into account gender equality trends.

     For example, disasters can have long-term and cumulative implications on the education of girls in the affected
     communities. Since disasters often erode the resource base of households, boys’ education might be prioritized
     over girls’ education. Discrimination against girls in education, compounded by existing inequalities in access to
     resources and economic empowerment can consequently seal the future socio-economic status and the resil-
     ience of the next generation of women to disasters. The gender expert can try to bring these aspects into the
     assessment. The gender expert can provide the additional sector teams with trends on past performance related
     to gender equality in general and for the individual sector if information is available that can then inform the
     forecasts of impact of the disaster for the individual sector. The gender expert should work closely with the rest
     of the PDNA Assessment Team to ensure the baseline and trends for gender inequality are taken into account.
     Examples of measures of gender equality related human development indicators which the gender expert can
     refer to, if country specific data are available, are:

                  •	 The Gender Inequality Index

                  •	 Global Gender Gap Index

                  •	 Trends of Millennium Development Goals 3 and 5

                  •	 Poverty index

                  •	 Minimum Set of Gender Indicators11

                  •	 The Women's Empowerment in Agriculture Index.




     11	
           http://genderstats.org

23   |     GENDER
     CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES INCLUDING
     CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
     As a cross-cutting sector, gender is to be mainstreamed across all other sectors. Additionally, gender intersects
     with all other cross-cutting issues and sectors of the PDNA. The gender experts, through the gender sector focal
     points, will continuously share findings and encourage inputs from the sectors, including from other cross-cut-
     ting sectors, into the gender analysis.



     THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY
     SECTOR RECOVERY VISION
     The vision describes the desired long-term recovery outcome in a sector, which should include measures to
     improve sector performance and to build resilience. The Gender Sector Recovery vision should be based on the
     country’s existing gender equality policy or strategy, the post-disaster conditions and discussions with the nation-
     al women’s machinery and women’s organizations.

     The development of the overall as well as sector-specific recovery strategies must also be relevant to women’s
     realities, which can be achieved by including the national gender machinery and women’s organizations in the
     formulation and, if available, taking national gender policies and strategies into account. The gender expert can
     furthermore provide sector-specific objectives of the national gender equality policy and/or strategy to sector
     assessment teams as well as identify gender equality references in the sector-specific development plans, policies
     and strategies, if any, for inclusion in the formulation of sector visions.

     STAKEHOLDERS’ CONSULTATIONS
     The gender expert should consult with relevant stakeholders, including the national women’s machinery, in particular
     on data collection, gender analysis and development and implementation of the recovery strategy. Women’s groups
     and community organizations should also be included in both the data collection and analysis. These groups have
     knowledge of and credibility within the communities as well as networks and insights that can facilitate gender anal-
     ysis and identification of strategic entry points to empower women. Women’s groups may also be able to assist in
     identifying hidden needs that women and men themselves may not raise in front of foreigners, outsiders or indeed
     among themselves, such as those related to reproductive health, personal hygiene and sexual violence in societies
     where the survivors are stigmatized or even ostracized for having suffered this crime. Women and girls’ experiences,
     needs, priorities, concerns and capacities tend to be marginalized in assessment processes for a variety of reasons,
     including political, structural and cultural discrimination. Women’s inclusion must, therefore, be sought proactively.

     The gender expert should facilitate the connection between gender stakeholders and the rest of the Assessment
     PDNA team throughout the PDNA process as part of the assessment. This includes providing suggestion for key
     informants including in the affected areas. If relevant, the gender expert can also advise national gender stakehold-
     ers on how to advocate their inclusion in the process and the subsequent recovery and reconstruction phase, such
     as requesting meetings with key government actors, drafting position papers and open letters in the press, etc.

24   |   GENDER
     RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILDING BACK BETTER12
     The gender analysis will bring out gaps and needs that are sector-specific as well as cross-cutting. The gender
     expert should work with the sector assessment teams to integrate the identified sector-specific gender needs
     into their respective sector plans and suggest targeted gender equality interventions to address the cross-cutting
     needs in the Gender Sector Plan.

     BUILDING BACK BETTER

     The aftermath of an emergency and the early recovery phase can present opportunities for new and more
     progressive gender roles and relationships to emerge. Seizing the opportunities that an emergency and early
     recovery can offer requires recognition that women and girls – like men and boys – possess skills and capacity to
     prepare for, respond to and recover from crises.

     Building Back Better (BBB) concerns not only rebuilding and improving infrastructure, restoring systems and pro-
     moting resilient livelihoods, but also to seizing the opportunities to rebuild in a way that is inclusive of women,
     girls, boys and men from the affected population. Recovery provides an opportunity to influence the direction
     of development patterns that, prior to the disaster, may not have placed enough attention to gender equality
     and women’s empowerment. The gender expert can identify opportunities to improve pre-disaster conditions
     through recovery interventions.

     BBB could include strengthening the capacity of the governments and communities to build resilience to and
     reduce the risk of future disasters. If relevant, a gender-targeted intervention could be included to strengthen
     gender mainstreaming in the implementation of the government’s commitments under the Hyogo Framework
     of Action (HFA). The HFA includes provisions in relation to gender equality and empowerment of women in the
     context of Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR). The Framework states that a “gender perspective should be integrated
     into all disaster risk management policies, plans and decision-making processes including those related to risk
     assessment, early warning, information management, and education and training (HFA, 2005: 4).”

     BBB considerations, which should be highlighted with the additional sectors, must include how restoration, replace-
     ment and compensation of lost assets and damages can decrease existing gender-based inequalities and make the
     sector more inclusive of women by taking into account the gender- differentiated needs identified in the assessment.

     THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN
     For the gender sector recovery plan, following the four dimensions of the PDNA, identify key outcomes, outputs
     and interventions that relates specifically to the gender sub-sector and are not included in other sectors. There
     should be constant consultations and communications with the other sectors in order to avoid contradictory
     recommendations, gaps or overlaps.

     If important sector-specific gender issues have been identified that have not been included by the sector assess-
     ment team in the recovery plan, these can also be highlighted here. Then, prioritize and sequence needs over
     time (in the short, medium and long term), and distinguish those interventions that are related to restore/resume
     from BBB interventions. The recommended gender equality-targeted interventions should focus on a limited


     12	
           Need for BBB-related activities should be aligned to or informed by pre-existing national gender equality strategies.



25   |     GENDER
     number of strategic and realistic actions that will have the widest potential impact on the disaster recovery of
     affected men, women, boys and girls. These choices should be made based on available resources, partner gov-
     ernment capacity to implement, and the socio-cultural context.

     Depending on the context, examples of interventions that are not sector-specific:

              •	 providing the national gender machinery with capacity and resources to engage in the implemen-
                 tation of the recovery phase;

              •	 carrying out national household/time-use study for in-depth analysis of the differential effect of
                 the disaster on women and men;

              •	 strengthening national capacity and systems for data collection to ensure SADD;

              •	 strengthening participation of women in disaster management decision making at all levels;

              •	 revising the National Disaster Plan to include provisions on gender equality;

              •	 promoting changes in discriminatory laws and practices, e.g. of land tenure and inherence;

              •	 promoting women’s participation in the management of community assets and joint ownership or
                 sharing of replaced assets between spouses;

              •	 promoting gender-sensitive, community ownership and management of communal infrastructure

              •	 supporting a national conference for women’s organizations on recovery;

              •	 supporting women’s organization and participation in decision-making mechanisms in the sector
                 at both national and local levels;

              •	 developing emergency GBV standard operating procedures and a referral system

              •	 campaigning for organization of female informal workers to ensure their entitlements to compen-
                 sation of lost income;

              •	 supporting gender-sensitive early warning systems;

              •	 implementing recovery work programmes targeting female-headed households;

              •	 supporting spontaneous coping strategies of vulnerable females and facilitate and enable their
                 participation in recovery activities;

              •	 expanding women’s employment and work opportunities through training and tailored gender-re-
                 sponsive credit schemes and financial services to recommence livelihood activities;

              •	 revising discriminatory regulations and/or practices affecting the access of women to sectoral ser-
                 vices and programmes.

     When supporting the sector teams in mainstreaming gender in the sector recovery plans based on findings of
     the gender analysis, the gender expert should highlight the following points:

              •	 The sector recovery plan should explicitly reflect the sector-specific gender needs identified by the
                 sector assessment as well as the gender analysis.



26   |   GENDER
              •	 Outcomes, outputs and indicators, and interventions of the Recovery Plan and the Monitoring Plan
                 should specify beneficiaries and participants by sex and age.

              •	 Constraints on women’s independence, time, mobility and security that may impede their
                 participation in interventions should be taken into account in design of interventions as well as
                 their costing.

              •	 Specific gender-targeted actions responding to the particular needs or problems facing women or
                 men in the sector should be included in the Recovery Plan.

              •	 Activities must be included that focus on strengthening national and local capacity and systems of
                 line ministries and institutions to collect SADD and mainstream gender in strategies, preparedness
                 plans, services.

              •	 A gender focus should be included in all capacity building activities planned with national stakeholders.

              •	 Resource allocation and goods and services proposed should be analysed with a view of ensuring
                 an equal distribution of benefits between men and women.

     COST

     The gender expert should draw on the extensive expertise available in the PDNA assessment team as well as use
     national colleagues and partners when developing cost-estimates for the gender equality target interventions
     included in the gender sector report. Any assumptions on which the costing-estimates are based should be
     made explicit, and references used for unit costs for each budget line item. This information can be attached as
     an annex to the gender sub-sector report.

     IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
     The gender sector report should, as much as possible, provide recommendations in relation to implementation
     of the recovery plan on:

              •	 partnerships, coordination and management arrangements to implement recovery for gender equality;

              •	 monitoring tools or considerations, coordination mechanisms and the links to development and
                 humanitarian assistance;

              •	 possible resource mobilization mechanisms;

              •	 the challenges that might be expected in the implementation process for the sector recovery and
                 should be supported with key assumptions and constraints.

     The gender expert should highlight with sector teams that the proposed implementation arrangements for the
     sector recovery plans includes consultation with both women and men and that all proposed mechanisms devel-
     oped to monitor the implementation and effectiveness of the Recovery plan must: (i) include representatives of
     women’s organizations/stakeholder groups; and (ii) monitor progress with a view to assessing whether the needs
     of women and girls are addressed consistently and financed adequately.

     All formal mechanisms developed to monitor the application and effectiveness of the Recovery Framework must:
     (i) include representatives of women’s organizations/stakeholder groups; and (ii) monitor progress with a view to
     assessing whether the needs of women and girls are addressed consistently and financed adequately.

27   |   GENDER
     Monitoring, progress and evaluation reports must include information on how the differential needs of women
     and men have been met in each sector, area and through each phase. Information concerning challenges to
     meet these needs should be included as well as measures taken to improve the response.

     The communications strategy should emphasize dissemination of gendered information at every stage of
     the process as well as dissemination methods that allow for a variety of stakeholders to be represented and
     kept informed.

     Additional information sources and guidelines can be found in the annexes to this chapter. Also available in
     the annexes are checklists for gender-responsive pre-assessment planning, assessment and early recovery and
     post-disaster recovery planning and an example of a Terms of Reference for a gender expert.




28   |   GENDER
     REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING ON GENDER
     AND DISASTER
     Angeles Arenas Ferriz. 2001. The Relevance of Considering a Gender Perspective in Damage Assessment and
     Recovery Strategies: A Case Study in El Salvador, Central America. Available at: www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/
     csw/env_manage/documents/EP9-2001Nov26.pdf.
     Asian Development Bank. 2003. Gender Checklist – Resettlement. Available at: http://www.adb.org/publica-
     tions/gender-checklist-resettlement.
     Baden, S. and H. Reeves. 2005. BRIDGE Report 55. Gender and Development Concepts and Definitions. Institute
     of Development Studies UK.
     Bisnath, Savitri and Ricardo Zapata, ECLAC. 2007. Practical Guide to Engendering Post-Disaster Needs Assessments.
     Deare, Fredericka and CEPAL. 2004. A methodological approach to gender analysis in natural disaster
     assessment: A guide for the Caribbean.
     Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (2014), Handbook for Disaster Assessment.
     Available at: http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Handbookfordisasterassessment.pdf
     ECLAC. 2003. Handbook for Estimating the Socio-economic and environmental Effects of Disasters.
     Santiago, Chile.
     ECLAC. 2014. Handbook for Disaster Assessment. Santiago, Chile.
     FAO. 2011. The State of Food and Agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture - Closing the Gender Gap for
     Development. Rome, Italy.
     IASC. 2005. Guidelines for Gender-based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings, focusing on pre-
     vention of and response to sexual violence in emergencies. Available in English, French and Spanish at: www.
     humanitarianresponse.info/themes/gender
     IASC. 2006. Women, Girls, Boys and Men: Different Needs – Equal Opportunities. Gender Handbook for Hu-
     manitarian Action. Available at: http://www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/documents/subsidi/tf_gender/IASC%20
     Gender%20Handbook%20(Feb%202007).pdf
     IASC Cluster Working Group on Early Recovery, 2010, Guide to Gender-Aware Post-Disaster Needs Assess-
     ment. Available at http://er.humanitarianresponse.info/document/cwger-guide-gender-aware-post-disaster-
     needs-assessment
     International Labour Organization. 2002b. Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture. Avail-
     able at: www.ilo.org/public/libdoc/ilo/2002/102B09_139_engl.pdf
     International Recovery Platform (IRP). 2008. Joint Declaration on Post-Crisis Assessments and Recovery Planning.
     2008. Available at http://www.recoveryplatform.org/pdna/
     International Recovery Platform (IRP) Gender Issues in Recovery. 2009. Draft V.1 October, 2009. Available at:
     http://www.recoveryplatform.org/outfile.php?id=494&href=/assets/tools_guidelines%2FGender+Issues+in+Re-
     covery-irp-V.pdf
     Mazurana, Dyan, Prisca Benelli, Huma Gupta and Peter Walker. 2011. Sex and Age Matter: Improving Humani-
     tarian Response in Emergencies. Feinstein International Center, Tufts University.
     Mehta, M. 2007. Gender Matters: Lessons for Disaster Risk Reduction in South Asia. ICIMOD (International Cen-
     tre for Integrated Mountain Development), Kathmandu. Available at: http://books.icimod.org/index.php/search/
     publication/145
29   |   GENDER
     Menon, Roshni R. 2010. Natural Hazards and Unnatural Disasters: A Survey of the Gendered Terrain of Risk,
     Vulnerability and Disaster Relief. In Risk, Shocks, and Human Development: On the Brink, ed. R. Fuentes and P.
     Seck. London: Palgrave Macmillan
     OCHA. 2005. OCHA Tool Kit: Gender Equality Tools to Support Implementation of OCHA’s Policy on Gender.
     Available at: http://ochaonline.un.org/HumanitarianIssues/GenderEquality/GenderToolkit/tabid/1192/language/
     en-US/Default.aspx
     OXFAM. 2012. Gender Equality in Emergencies Programme Insights. Available at http://policy-practice.oxfam.
     org.uk/our-work/climate-change-drr/gender-and-drr
     Pincha, Chaman (2008) Gender-Sensitive Disaster Management - A Toolkit for Practitioners. Oxfam America
     & NANBAN Trust. Available at: http://www.gdnonline.org/resources/Pincha_GenderSensitiveDisasterManage-
     ment_Toolkit.pdf
     UN Women, Gender Mainstreaming. Available at: www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/gendermainstreaming.htm
     UNDP Oslo Governance Centre/UNIFEM. 2009. A User’s Guide to Measuring Gender-Sensitive Basic Service
     Delivery.
     UNDP and UNISDR, International Recovery Platform. 2010. Guidance Note on Recovery – Gender. Available at
     www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/16775
     UNISDR. 2009. Making disaster risk reduction gender-sensitive: policy and practical guidelines. Available at:
     http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/9922
     UNISDR. 2005. The Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communi-
     ties to Disasters. Geneva.
     Yonder, A., Akcar, S. and Gopalan, P. 2005. Women’s Participation in Disaster Relief and Recovery. Population
     Council, New York.
     World Bank, 2012. Guidance Notes on Gender and Disaster Risk Management. Available at: http://www-wds.
     worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/10/25/000386194_20121025033328/Ren-
     dered/PDF/733710BRI0P1300idance0Note0080final.pdf
     World Health Organization (WHO). 2005a. Gender and Health in Natural Disasters. Factsheet. Department of
     Gender, Women and Health, Geneva. World Health Organization (WHO). 2005b. Violence and Disasters. Fact-
     sheet. Department of Injuries and Violence Prevention, Geneva.




30   |   GENDER
     ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
     CEPAL. 2004. Series Manuals: Socio-Economic Impact of Natural Disasters: A Gender Analysis by Bradshaw,
     Sarah. Available at: http://www.eclac.cl/mujer/reuniones/conferencia_regional/manual.pdf.
     GDN. 2008. Gender and Disaster Net Sourcebook on Gender and Disaster. Available at: http://www.gdnonline.
     org/sourcebook
     International Labour Organization (ILO). 2002a. Crises, Women and other Gender Concerns. Working Paper 7.
     Recovery and Reconstruction Department, Geneva.
     IASC Gender Sub-Working Group. Available at: http://www.humanitarianresponse.info/themes/gender.
     World Bank. 2011. World Bank. 2011. Making Women’s Voices Count: Integrating Gender Issues in Disaster Risk
     Management in the East Asia and the Pacific Region.

              •	 Guidance Note 1: Making Women’s Voices Count in Addressing Gender Issues in Disaster Risk
                 Management in East Asia and the Pacific.

              •	 Guidance Note 3: Gender-Informed Monitoring and Evaluation in Disaster Risk Management

              •	 Guidance Note 5: Integrating Gender Issues in Recovery and Reconstruction Planning

              •	 Guidance Note 7: Making Livelihoods and Social Protection Gender-Sensitive

     Guidance Note 8: Gender-Sensitive Post-disaster Assessments




31   |   GENDER
     ANNEXES
          1.	 Gender mainstreaming into PDNA sectoral guidelines:

              •	 Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Forestry

              •	 Health

              •	 Employment, Livelihoods and Social Protection

          2.	 Key question to guide cross-sector gender analysis

          3.	 Example of household survey

          4.	 Gender concept definitions

          5.	 Example of Terms of Reference for the Gender Expert

          6.	 A Case Study: Information and Coordination Issues in the 2010 Haiti PDNA




32   |   GENDER
     ANNEX 1. GENDER MAINSTREAMING INTO PDNA SECTORAL GUIDELINES:
     AGRICULTURE, LIVESTOCK, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY; HEALTH; EMPLOYMENT,
     LIVELIHOOD AND SOCIAL PROTECTION
     INTRODUCTION

     Disasters have different impacts on women, girls, boys and men. They face different risks and have different capacities
     and resources on which to draw to respond and cope. Gender relations tend to be culturally-specific and character-
     ized by unequal distribution and/or access to power, resources and services. There are also differences between men
     and women in terms of mobility and their ability to make life decisions and to voice priorities and needs, as well as
     to explore and use their individual potential and capacities. Gender analysis studies the different roles of women and
     men in order to understand what they do, what resources they have and what their needs and priorities are. It is also
     important to distinguish between the specific needs of women and men, taking into account different factors with-
     in each group (education, wealth, health, ethnic group, etc.). Gender mainstreaming is the process of assessing the
     implications for women and men of any planned action in all areas and at all levels. It is critical that gender be main-
     streamed in every step of the Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) in order to ensure that recovery interventions
     are relevant, effective, and sustainable by identifying and responding to the distinct needs and priorities of women
     girls, boys and men. Gender mainstreaming ensures that recovery efforts will reduce, rather than reinforce, inequalities
     by avoiding assumptions, generalizations and stereotypes, and by promoting positive change in facilitating women’s
     access to resources and services and increase their participation in decision-making structures.

     GENDER MAINSTREAMING THROUGHOUT THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS

     The PDNA Sectors teams should:

              •	 be comprised of both women and men;

              •	 appoint a Sector Gender Focal Point for the sector team to coordinate information sharing with the
                 PDNA Gender Advisor from UN Women, the World Bank or the European Commission.

              •	 take into account the gender mainstreaming guidance provided in this document .

              •	 promote and facilitate equal opportunities for women and men to participate in the needs assess-
                 ment process and planning of and recovery interventions;

              •	 strive for gender balance of key informants;

              •	 consult with affected women, girls, boys and men to identify their needs and priorities through
                 surveys, individual interviews and same-sex meetings;

              •	 encourage and support the participation of women’s organizations and networks and strengthen
                 the government structures responsible for gender/women’s affairs and its local presence (national
                 gender equality machinery), throughout the assessment process;

              •	 collect, analyse and use sex- and age-disaggregated data (SADD) and gender-sensitive indicators
                 throughout the assessment and targeting;

              •	 refrain from extensive use of collective terms such as ‘households’, ‘families’, ‘IDPs’, etc., because
                 these aggregated terms hide important gender differences and assess the situation of individual
                 women and men within the households;


33   |   GENDER
                •	 work with the PDNA Gender Advisor to ensure that all assessment data collection forms, ques-
                   tionnaires etc. are designed to collect SADD and, if formats developed by national stakeholders are
                   used, negotiate revisions to include SADD;

                •	 participate in the PDNA gender training session if planned prior to the assessment.

     AGRICULTURE, LIVESTOCK, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY:
     PRE-DISASTER BASELINE INFORMATION/SECTOR OVERVIEW

     The sector overview and pre-disaster baseline should be gender-sensitive and the data and information used
     should be disaggregated by sex and age. When SADD is not available, the analysis will depend more on qualita-
     tive secondary information. In this section, strive to include the type of information shown in the Box 1.

         Box 1: Context analysis
         •	 The type of information that should be included in a context analysis is as follows:
         •	 number of female-, male- and child-headed households in total and under the poverty line (Special note should
            be made of households where the male head is absent, but may not define themselves as female-headed e.g.
            migrated spouse);
         •	 number of unemployed women and men;
         •	 females, males with full-time, secure employment in the sector;
         •	 female, males with part-time, secure employment in the sector;
         •	 females, males engaged in informal income-generation activities (backyard economy);
         •	 females, males with seasonal employment;
         •	 composition of households needing special assistance (i.e. unaccompanied children, widows without families, the
            elderly, the disabled and men and women, boys and girls affected by HIV/AIDS);
         •	 official and traditional ownership arrangements of land, housing, productive resources as well as heritage practices
            influencing women and men’s access to resources (patrilineal/matrilineal systems, polygamy, treatment of widows)
         •	 number of landless poor by sex;
         •	 number of herdless pastoralists by sex;
         •	 household responsibility for household food security (disaggregated by women, girls, boys and men)
         •	 local cultural food practices for women and men;
         •	 sex- and age-disaggregated calories intake deficit among target men and women, boys and girls;
         •	 overall pre-disaster economic situation of women, men and marginalized communities in the formal and informal
            agricultural economy;
         •	 existing community-based safety nets (women’s groups) .
         •	 a source of income.
         Infrastructure and physical assets
         •	 land and land tenure patterns by sex, including procedures for acquiring access to land, and any discriminatory laws,
            regulations and/or practices affecting the access of women to certain agricultural services;
         •	 resources used (tools, seeds, livestock, storage/market facilities) owned and used by women, men, boys and girls;
         •	 infrastructure and technologies needs of women to reduce their work burden and time poverty (i.e. bridge to reduce
            time to reach the market or labour- and water-saving techniques such as fuel-saving stoves).




34   |    GENDER
         Production and delivery of goods and services and access to goods and services
         •	 literacy levels by sex and age;
         •	 power relations within the household (i.e. decision-making processes, who controls the use of money and resources,
            bargaining power and intra-household distribution of resources);
         •	 roles, responsibilities and specific skills (division of labour) of females and males (including boys and girls) in agricul-
            ture, livestock-keeping, fisheries/aquaculture and forestry (including gardening/backyard production/processing/mar-
            keting/vending, etc.) and daily time-use patterns of women and men in the sector;
         •	 women and men’s access to and use of credit, saving schemes, insurance schemes and other micro-finance services
            through credit-lending agencies (banks, credit union, co-operatives, etc.);
         •	 natural resource use and management by women and men for agricultural and domestic purposes (rivers, forests, etc.);
         •	 current levels of involvement of women and men from the affected area in agriculture programmes, extension ser-
            vices etc. (where such programmes exist);
         •	 access to and use of advisory services, farming practices, education and training institutions by women and men in
            the sector;
         •	 conditions of access to food for men and women;
         •	 practices and norms that regulate the mobility of females and males and either facilitate or prevent access to re-
            sources such as education, employment, credit and control of productive re
         Governance and decision-making processes
         •	 integration of gender in sector institutions (e.g. gender units/focal points), policies and plans;
         •	 differentiated female, male participation and leadership in marketing associations, cooperatives or producers’ organi-
            zations, advocacy and interest groups and policy-making bodies;
         •	 level of organizations of women and men in the affected areas;
         •	 the customary institutions and arrangements relating to livestock production and natural resource management, and
            the roles of women and men;
         •	 community power structures in relation to the use of food, land and other productive resources
         •	 existing solidarity networks and community self-help capacities.
         Risks and vulnerabilities
         •	 Dependency Index: How many very young (under 15 years) and older persons (65 years)
         •	 number of older women and men (over 65 years) living alone;
         •	 work migration patterns and causes for women/men;
         •	 usual patterns of negative coping strategies of women, men, girls, boys during crisis (e.g. distress sales, reduced food
            consumption by sex, etc.).

     DISASTER EFFECTS IN AGRICULTURE SECTOR (ASSESSMENT AND VALUATION)

     To identify reconstruction and recovery needs in a gender-sensitive way the following information should be
     sought, analysed and included as part of the assessment of the disaster effect in terms of the affected popula-
     tion; destruction and damage of infrastructure and physical assets (‘damage’); and losses in terms of changes in
     economic flows resulting from disruption to availability of and access to goods and services, disruption of gover-
     nance and social processes as well as increased risks and vulnerabilities: 	

                 •	 Who are the most affected men and women?

                 •	 Are there changes in types of households after the crisis (female- and child-headed households)?

                 •	 What are the priority needs identified by women and men, boys and girls after the disaster to
                    resume their livelihood activities in the sector, including access to services and technologies?

35   |    GENDER
                 •	 How can these specific needs be met? How should food and agricultural inputs be distributed?

                 •	 What barriers are identified by women and men to accessing assets and services after the disaster?
                    (Examples might include unsafe transport, cost, no same sex service provider staff, etc.)

                 •	 What are the consequences for women, girls, boys and men of the effects of the disaster in terms
                    of time use, income-generation, and access to productive assets, increased risks/vulnerabilities?

                 •	 How will “food for asset creation” labour requirements affect women and men’s activities? Will
                    this have a negative impact on subsistence crops that are often grown by women?

                 •	 What opportunities are there to develop the existing capacities of women and men? How can we
                    strengthen women’s negotiation and leadership skills so they can participate in decision-making
                    and planning?

                 •	 What community recovery activities are carried out by women and men, boys and girls?

                 •	 Can these recovery activities be further supported or scaled up? How?

                 •	 Are there any new resources available, and do women and men have equal access to them?

                 •	 Who is in need of temporary employment related to agriculture, by sex and age?

                 •	 How is the security situation taken into consideration? Is there any difference between men and
                    women, boys and girls?

                 •	 What negative coping mechanisms needs to be mitigated? Examples include:

                       -- distress sales or consumption of agricultural assets (e.g. seeds, food stocks, livestock and fishing and forestry
                          equipment);

                       -- reduced food consumption by women, men, girls or boys of certain ages;

                       -- increased interfamily dependence due to lost employment compounding existing power imbalances within
                          households;

                       -- increased migration due to loss of employment in the sector or food insecurity;

                       -- transactional sex due to loss of employment in the sector or food insecurity;

                       -- decrease in school attendance of girls or boys due to increased unpaid family work, lost or reduced household
                          income.

                 •	 What increased vulnerabilities due to the disaster effect on the sector needs to be addressed, such
                    as food insecurity, for example, of older women and men living alone, female- or child-headed
                    households that have lost or reduced livelihoods?

     Due to the time-intensive nature of women’s reproductive roles and household tasks, time constraints or ‘time
     poverty’ may be a major barrier to their access to services and technologies. As a consequence of a disaster,
     these activities take up even more time. This aspect must be included in the qualitative analysis and reflected in
     the sector assessment on which recovery needs will be identified. However, costing of the loss due to increase in
     women’s reproductive work will be undertaken by the Gender Advisor because it cuts across all sectors.13

     13	
           Refer to guidance in the Gender Sector chapter for further details on tasks of the Gender Advisor.

36   |     GENDER
     Building on the ECLAC methodology (ECLAC, 2014), when identifying the effects of the disaster in terms of de-
     struction of infrastructure and assets, as well as disruption of service delivery and production in the sector, there
     should estimations should be not only be disaggregated by sex, but an estimation of the backyard
     economy14 should also be made. Losses of chickens, pigs and other small animals represent losses of stock in
     the backyard economy. Their quantification is difficult and is usually estimated indirectly for each affected area as
     a percentage of the family’s total assets (housing, storage, seeds, household goods and furniture). Values ranging
     between 10 and 40 percent of those assets are used, depending on whether the family belongs to subsistence
     or more developed agriculture. Asset losses in the backyard economy are additional to asset losses estimated for
     the agricultural sector. Any decrease in backyard-economy production also represents indirect damage that must
     be estimated. The AT – with the Gender Advisor– must estimate this loss as a percentage of household income,
     taking into consideration the direct loss of stock in this same heading and who is most affected (by sex) by the
     losses. Indirect damage may be estimated at between 20 and 40 percent of the household’s formal income,
     depending on the corresponding income level. The production losses are also in addition to those estimated by
     the assessment team for the agriculture sector. Field visits must be made in order to directly interview the men
     and women affected, and surveys or samplings developed in collaboration with the PDNA Gender Advisor must
     be made to decide on the values to be adopted for both types of losses.

     The particular effect on women’s employment and income in agricultural, livestock, fisheries and forestry
     related activities must be estimated with support from the Gender Advisor and the Employment Sector
     Team. The resulting estimates of the effects on women’s assets and contribution to the backyard economy
     must not be added to the total losses for the sector because their components are not yet included in the
     national accounts.

     Total damage figures are used to analyse the effect on macroeconomic variables, which are estimated based
     precisely on the use of national accounts. Examples of estimations that the Assessment Team must obtain, in
     coordination with the PDNA Gender Advisor, through surveys or sampling are shown in Box 2.15

     Box 2: Direct damages
         Examples of estimations that need to be obtained for estimating direct damages are:
         •	 total number and/or proportion totally destroyed and partially damaged of productive lands, by sex;
         •	 total number and/or proportion totally destroyed and partially damaged of subsistence agricultural production al-
            ready harvested or about to be harvested, by sex;
         •	 total number and/or proportion totally destroyed and partially damaged of export agricultural production already
            harvested or about to be harvested, by sex;
         •	 total number and/or proportion totally destroyed and partially damaged of agriculture productive assets in
            cooperatives, by sex;
         •	 total number and/or proportion totally destroyed and partially damaged of major or minor animal stocks, by sex;
         •	 total number and/or proportion totally destroyed and partially damaged of fishing/aquaculture assets (vessels,
            engines, nets and tackle) by sex.




     14	
           In other productive sectors, women operate micro- and small enterprises from their homes to supplement family food and income.
           The corresponding activities in the agricultural sector are known as the backyard economy (ECLAC, 2014).
     15	
           Sex disaggregation of losses should be attempted to the extent possible, although it may be difficult because women and men may
           be contributing to different steps in the chain of production of different crops.


37   |     GENDER
         Indirect losses15
         •	 future losses of agricultural production, by sex;
         •	 future losses of livestock production, by sex;
         •	 losses of livestock production in cooperatives, by sex;
         •	 future losses of fish catches, by sex;
         •	 losses of employment and income by women/men wage earners in the sector.

     ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT

     If an assessment of human development impact is included in the assessment (depending on severity of the
     disaster), estimations should include SADD when forecasting the future effects on poverty and food security
     levels and reflect gender inequalities, such as the feminization of poverty, the increase in women’s work burden
     with a redistribution of tasks within the household and the community between men and women, the increase
     in migration, pre-disaster trends and baseline information. As relevant, the Gender Advisor will provide findings
     from the gender analysis, which should be taken into account in the disaster impact projections.

     THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY

     Sector recovery vision: The development of the sector recovery vision and guiding principles must be relevant
     to both women and men, as well as boys and girls. The AT should include the national gender machinery and
     women’s organizations in its formulation and, if available, taking into account references to the sector in national
     gender policies and strategies.

     Stakeholders’ consultation: As the AT consult with key stakeholders, women’s and youth concerns must be
     represented equitably. Consultations should be held with the national gender machinery and women’s organi-
     zations including representatives of community-based organizations (CBOs) and grassroots groups, representing
     rural areas, ethnic minorities, and displaced women, in particular on needs identification and prioritization as well
     as costing. The Gender Advisor can facilitate identification of key informants.

     RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILD BACK BETTER

     The identification of reconstruction and recovery needs should draw on the findings of the gender-sensitive
     assessment of disaster effects as described above. Building Back Better (BBB) considerations must include how
     restoration, replacement and compensation of lost assets and damages can decrease existing gender-based in-
     equalities and make the sector more inclusive of women by taking into account the gender differentiated needs
     identified in the assessment. This approach will allow addressing both practical and strategic needs of men and
     women, boys and girls. This could include:

                 •	 promoting women in management of community assets;

                 •	 promoting joint ownership or sharing of replaced productive assets and livestock between spouses.

                 •	 expanding women’s employment and work opportunities in the agriculture sector through training
                    opportunities and tailored gender-responsive credit schemes and financial services to recommence
                    agriculture-based livelihood activities;

                 •	 revising discriminatory laws, regulations and/or practices affecting the access of women to agricul-
                    tural services, credits, programmes, etc.;


38   |    GENDER
              •	 supporting women smallholder farmers through the organization and establishment of cooperatives;

              •	 promoting dissemination of gender-sensitive information on available services.

     THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS	

     In collaboration with the PDNA Gender Advisor, ensure that the sector recovery plan explicitly reflects identified
     needs of women and men:

              •	 Gender-sensitive, participatory and results-based management: Outcomes, outputs and indicators,
                 and interventions of the Recovery Framework and Monitoring Plan specify beneficiaries and
                 participants by sex and age.

              •	 The potential consequences for women and men of participating in interventions taken into
                 account in design: Constraints on women’s time, mobility and security that impede their partici-
                 pation are mediated by providing support to women’s other responsibilities so that they are not
                 overburdened, but rather have time and the opportunity to participate in recovery activities. Some
                 examples are:

                  -- providing safe transportation and child-care support;

                  -- ensuring that activities and meetings take place at times that are convenient to women;

                  -- ensuring that women are compensated materially for the time and skills they contribute.

                  -- Specific gender-targeted actions responding to the particular needs or problems facing
                     women or men are included, for example:

                  -- training women contractors at the local level;

                  -- establishing an operation line for women contractors;

                  -- disseminating information on seed credit for women, etc.

     Gender-responsive capacity development: Activities are included that focus on strengthening national and
     local capacity and systems of sector ministry and institutions to collect SADD and mainstream gender in
     strategies, preparedness plans, services etc. A gender focus is included in all capacity development activities
     planned with national stakeholders. All training activities planned in the Recovery Plan should include a gen-
     der focus in the training curriculum, taking into account the different education and information levels of men
     and women, boys and girls.

     Costing of the Recovery Plan includes allocations for the implementation of targeted actions for women and/or
     girls. Analyse resource allocation and goods and services proposed to identify distribution of benefit between
     men and women.

     HEALTH SECTOR: PRE-DISASTER BASELINE INFORMATION/SECTOR OVERVIEW

     The sector overview and pre-disaster baseline should be gender-sensitive and the data and information used
     should be disaggregated by sex and age. When SADD is not available the analysis will depend more on qualita-
     tive secondary information. In this section strive to include the type of information shown in Box 3.




39   |   GENDER
         Box 3: Context Analysis in the Health Sector
         •	 female-, male- and child-headed households in total and under the poverty line (Special note should be made of
            households where the male head is absent, but may not define themselves as female-headed e.g. migrated spouse);
         •	 women’s fertility rate, birth rate, death rate by sex, female/male life-expectancy at birth;
         •	 literacy levels by sex and age;
         •	 females/males malnutrition rates;
         •	 sex and age-disaggregated health status, coverage indicators, epidemiological indicators, consultation rates, etc.
         Infrastructure and physical assets
         •	 For the usual health infrastructures, is adequate privacy and confidentiality of patients guaranteed?
         •	 In addition, map existing shelters for victims of violence against women (private/public).
         Production and delivery of and access to goods and services
         •	 power relations within the household (i.e. decision-making processes, who controls the use of money and resources,
            bargaining power and intra-household distribution of resources) – affecting access to health;
         •	 household responsibility for household food security (disaggregated by women, girls, boys and men)
         •	 responsibilities assigned to household (women and men) for family health care,
         •	 female/male employment patterns in the sector. Number of male and female officials and health workers by
            category (e.g. doctor, nurse, midwife, traditional birth attendant, community health worker, etc.);
         •	 particular programmes for vulnerable groups (pregnant women, children, older persons);
         •	 traditional practices and norms of behaviour influencing female and male access to and use health care facilities (e.g.
            male relative required to accompany women and children, taboos, misconceptions regarding Sexual and Reproduc-
            tive Health and Rights (SRHR), and food intake by females and males;
         •	 the need for having female medical practitioners for the provision of certain medical services (without which women
            will not attend the health services);
         •	 access to and provision of health care, including reproductive health care, pre-natal and post-natal care, and infant
            and elderly care;
         •	 current access to and use of sexual and reproductive health services, traditional delivery practices;
         •	 capacity, performance and constraints of service delivery for SRHR and SGBV
         •	 GBV prevention efforts
         •	 services available for survivors of GBV, referrals systems, etc.
         Governance and decision-making processes
         •	 degree of integration of gender in sector institutions at all levels (e.g. gender units/focal points), policies, plans,
            including sexual and reproductive health, and gender-based violence (referral systems, prevention and response
            programmes, private/public) as well as sector preparedness plans;
         •	 women’s organizations, and community-based organizations with health mandates and their engagement and
            capacity in promotion of gender equality and women’s rights;
         •	 participation of women and men in participatory governance mechanisms at all levels;
         •	 access to and use of health information of women and men, main means of communication within the communi-
            ties, popular modes of communication for women in the communities (radio, cell phones);
         •	 level of organizations of women and men in the affected areas including existing solidarity networks and community
            self-help capacities;
         •	 health information systems able to produce SADD.




40   |    GENDER
         Risks and vulnerabilities
         •	 Dependency Index: How many very young (under 15 years) and older persons (65 years) by sex;
         •	 number of older women and men (over 65 years) living alone;
         •	 prevalence, types and trends of SGBV, including domestic violence, trafficking, forced recruitment, prostitution,
            forced and child labour, transactional sex, prevalence and nature of any harmful cultural practices ( e.g. early mar-
            riage, female genital mutilation, widow cleansing);
         •	 people – disaggregated by sex and age – with a physical/mental disability;
         •	 Excluded and/or disadvantaged groups (minorities, people living with HIV/AIDS) by sex.

     DISASTER EFFECTS IN HEALTH SECTOR (ASSESSMENT AND VALUATION)

     To identify reconstruction and recovery needs in a gender-sensitive way the following information should be
     sought, analysed and included as part of the assessment of the disaster effect in terms of the affected popula-
     tion; destruction and damage of infrastructure and physical assets (‘damage’); and losses in terms of changes in
     economic flows resulting from disruption to availability of and access to goods and services, disruption of gover-
     nance and social processes as well as increased risks and vulnerabilities:

                •	 What are the main new post-disaster health problems experienced by affected population disag-
                   gregated by sex and age?

                •	    Are these different from the unaffected population? If so, why?

                •	 Are there changes in types of households after the crisis (female- and child-headed households,
                   loss of primary or sole income earner (SADD) and how is this influencing health risks and access to
                   health services?

                •	 What are the priority needs and barriers identified by women and men to access health services?

                •	 Are there adequate family planning, maternal, newborn, and GBV health services, taking into
                   account the cultural context related to privacy and cultural sensitivity and particular needs of single
                   mothers, pregnant, lactating, undernourished, adolescents, the elderly, unaccompanied boys and
                   girls, people with disabilities or other special groups who may have lost or reduced livelihoods?

                •	 Has access of women and men to water, sanitation, and health facilities changed and consequenc-
                   es in terms of cost, affordability, access, time use, safety issue? How can old and new barriers to
                   health services be reduced to ensure equitable access?

                •	 Are there increased reports of gender-based violence (GBV) during and after the disaster, by form
                   of violence, sex and age of survivor, if such data are available?

                •	 Are the survivors of sexual violence and/or other forms of GBV seeking medical help? From which
                   agency/agencies are they requesting assistance? Are these agencies staffed and resourced adequate-
                   ly to respond? If not, what mechanisms are needed to ensure that survivors get the assistance they
                   require? How can local government be supported to provide effective services to survivors of GBV?

                •	 Are awareness programmes in place to increase knowledge about and violence against women?

                •	 Are there mechanisms in place to identify persons at risk of GBV? Who is leading these programmes?

                •	 Are there individuals at risk of or suffering from malnutrition, by sex and age


41   |    GENDER
                  •	 Are the medical facilities accessible to women and men within the affected community? In this re-
                     gard, it is essential that both women and men’s perspectives on ‘accessibility’ are sought and issues
                     such as distance, whether women can attend male health staff, the availability of private consul-
                     tancy rooms, health fees, etc. should be considered.

                  •	 Has the disaster affected the employment situation in the health sector? Are female and male staff
                     returning to work or not? Why? How can this be mitigated? Is there need for gender-responsive
                     packages to encourage staff to return or to be deployed to affected areas (e.g. family-friendly
                     packages)?

                  •	 What types of additional medical personnel are needed? Do women and men have equal oppor-
                     tunity to benefit from skills adaptation programmes?

                  •	 Do households (women) have increased burden of care for injured family members? How can this
                     be supported?

     Due to the time-intensive nature of women’s reproductive roles and household tasks, time constraints or ‘time
     poverty’ may be a major barrier to their access to health services As a consequence of a disaster, these activities
     take up even more time. This aspect must be included in the qualitative analysis and reflected in the sector as-
     sessment on which recovery needs will be identified. However, costing of the loss due to increase in women’s
     reproductive work will be undertaken by the Gender Advisor as it cuts across all sectors.16 The health expert
     should work with the gender expert to identify the extent of increased burden of care for injured family mem-
     bers due to the disaster and to estimate if this has a significant effect on women’s reproductive work. In such a
     case, this should be included in the indirect loss-assessment. Also, women’s employment in the health sector is
     often higher than men. Loss in income and employment in the sector will therefore affect women more. Further-
     more, the possible need for working overtime in the sector will increase women’s overall work load due to their
     reproductive role. The work load is likely to be increased beyond the compensation of the additional income that
     women may receive, because they must still discharge their reproductive activities after returning home late. This
     aspect may also need to be included in the loss estimate and should be defined in collaboration with the gender
     expert and the livelihood expert.

     When identifying the effects of the disaster in terms of destruction of infrastructure and assets, as well as dis-
     ruption of service delivery and production in the sector, estimations should be disaggregated by sex and age to
     the extent possible. Destruction of infrastructure and assets of shelters for survivors of violence against women,
     both public and private (NGO-run), must be included.

     ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT

     If an assessment of human development impact is included in the assessment (depending on severity of the
     disaster), estimations should include SADD levels and reflect gender inequalities when forecasting the future
     impact on health and wellbeing. As relevant, the gender expert will provide findings from the gender analysis
     which should be taken into account in the disaster impact projections.




     16	
           Refer to guidance in the Gender Sector chapter for further details on tasks of the Gender Advisor.



42   |     GENDER
     THE HEALTH SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY

     Sector recovery vision: The development of the sector recovery vision and guiding principles must be relevant
     to both women and men, as well as boys and girls. The AT should include the national gender machinery and
     women’s organizations in its formulation. and if available, take into account references about the sector in na-
     tional gender policies and strategies.

     Stakeholders’ consultation: During AT consultations with key stakeholders, women’s and youth concerns
     must be represented equitably. Consultations should be held with the national gender machinery and women’s
     organizations including representatives of community-based organizations (CBOs) and grassroots groups, repre-
     senting rural areas, ethnic minorities, and displaced women, in particular on needs identification and prioritiza-
     tion as well as costing. The gender expert can facilitate identification of key informants.

     RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILD BACK BETTER

     The identification of reconstruction and recovery needs should draw on the findings of the gender-sensitive
     assessment of disaster effects as described above. Building Back Better (BBB) considerations must include how
     restoration, replacement and compensation of lost assets and damages can decrease existing gender-based in-
     equalities and make the sector more inclusive of women by taking into account the gender differentiated needs
     identified in the assessment. This approach will allow addressing both practical and strategic needs of men and
     women, boys and girls. This could include:

              •	 re-establishing access to health services of women, girls, boys and men;

              •	 promoting women’s leadership in participatory governance mechanisms of the sector;

              •	 revising discriminatory laws, regulations and/or practices affecting the access of women to
                 health services;

              •	 promoting the dissemination of gender-sensitive information about available services;

              •	 exploring opportunities to reinforce and expanding SGBV and SRHR services and campaigns,
                 including shelters for survivors of violence against women;

              •	 exploring opportunities to strengthen services addressing the distinct psychological needs of
                 women, girls, boys and men;

              •	 promoting compensation/social support for home care of injured/sick family members;

              •	 exploring opportunities to strengthen the collection and analysis of SADD in the sector

     THE HEALTH SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS	

     In collaboration with the PDNA gender expert, ensure that the sector recovery plan explicitly reflects identified
     needs of women and men:

              •	 Gender-sensitive, participatory and results-based management: Outcomes, outputs and
                 indicators, and interventions of the Recovery framework and monitoring plan specify beneficiaries
                 and participants by sex and age.




43   |   GENDER
                •	 The potential consequences for women and men of participating in interventions taken
                   into account in design: Constraints on women’s time, mobility and security impeding their par-
                   ticipation are mediated (e.g. by providing support to women’s other responsibilities so that they are
                   not overburdened, but have time and opportunity to participate in recovery activities), for example:

                     -- providing safe transportation and child-care support;

                     -- ensuring that activities and meetings take place at times that are convenient to women;

                     -- ensuring that women are compensated materially for the time and skills that they contribute.

                •	 Specific gender-targeted actions responding to the particular needs or problems facing
                   women or men are included, for example:

                     -- supporting the rebuilding and strengthening shelters for survivors of violence against women;

                     -- establishing a referral system for GBV;

                     -- promoting women’s participation and leadership in community-level participatory governance mechanism for
                        the Health Sector.

                •	 Gender-responsive capacity development: Activities are included that focus on strengthen-
                   ing national and local capacity and systems of sector ministry and institutions to collect sex-and
                   age-disaggregated data (SADD) and mainstream gender in strategies, preparedness plans, services
                   etc. A gender focus is included in all capacity development activities planned with national stake-
                   holders. All training activities planned in the Recovery Plan should include a gender focus in the
                   training curriculum, taking into account the different education and information level of men and
                   women, boys and girls.

                •	 Costing of the Recovery Plan includes allocations for the implementation of targeted
                   actions for women and/or girls. Analyse resource allocation and goods and services proposed
                   to identify distribution of benefit between men and women.

     EMPLOYMENT AND LIVELIHOODS: PRE-DISASTER BASELINE INFORMATION/SECTOR OVERVIEW

     The sector overview and pre-disaster baseline should be gender-sensitive and the data and information used
     should be disaggregated by sex and age. When SADD is not available the analysis will depend more on qualita-
     tive secondary information. In this section strive to include the type of information shown in Box 4:

         Box 4: Context analysis for employment and livelihoods
         •	 female-, male- and child-headed households in total and under the poverty line (special note should be made of
            households where the male head is absent, but may not define themselves as female-headed e.g. migrated spouse);
         •	 formal and informal economic activities (job, income, employment full/part-time, seasonal, self-employment and
            unemployment levels) including backyard economy, micro-enterprises, petty trade, handicraft, by sex;
         •	 predominance of females, males in various employment categories/sectors;
         •	 household and individual income trends/ including mixed types of livelihoods in the area including from pension and
            remittances, by sex;
         •	 unpaid work trends, by sex (unpaid family help, unpaid servants);
         •	 household responsibility for household food security (disaggregated by women, girls, boys and men).




44   |    GENDER
         Infrastructure and physical assets
         •	 resources (tools, equipment, storage/ market facilities, workshops, etc.) owned and/or used by women, men, boys
            and girls in economic activities;
         •	 infrastructure and technology needs of women to reduce their work burden and time poverty (i.e. bridge to reduce
            time to reach the market or labour- and water-saving techniques such as energy-saving stoves);
         •	 official and traditional ownership/ inheritance arrangements/practices of land, housing, productive resources;
         •	 community spaces/facilities and their use by women and men
         •	 existing infrastructure/assets for care of children and older persons, and their use.
         Production and delivery of goods and services and access to goods and services
         •	 literacy levels by sex and age;
         •	 power relations within the household (i.e. decision-making processes, who controls the use of money and resources,
            bargaining power and intra-household distribution of resources);
         •	 roles, responsibilities and specific skills (division of labour) of females and males (including boys and girls) in home-
            based economic activities including gardening/backyard production/processing/marketing/vending, etc.) and daily
            time-use patterns of women and men;
         •	 women and men’s access to and use of credit, saving schemes, insurance schemes and other micro-finance services
            through credit-lending agencies (banks, credit union, co-operatives, etc.);
         •	 practices and norms that regulate the mobility of females and males and either facilitate or foreclose access to
            resources such as education, employment, credit and control of productive resources e.g. gender stereotyping,
            discriminatory attitudes and social norms;
         •	 access, control and use of productive resources such as tools, equipment, storage/ market facilities, workshops,
            licences, etc. Who owns (controls) and who has access (allocations, uses) to what?
         •	 Local enterprises for relief and rehabilitation by sex and capacity for competitive biddings;
         •	 access of men and women to local and external markets;
         •	 type to social security system including care of children and older persons and male/female/household entitlements and use;
         •	 access to and use of livelihood programmes, vocational training programmes, cash for work, programmes of women
            and men from the affected area;
         •	 gender division of labour in house and infrastructure construction and reconstruction.
         Governance and decision-making processes
         •	 integration of gender in sector institutions (e.g. gender units/focal points), policies, plans;
         •	 differentiated female, male participation and leadership in unions, trade associations, cooperatives marketing associ-
            ations, producers’ organizations, advocacy and interest groups and policy-making bodies;
         •	 access to and use of employment information and placement services, and training institutions by women and men
         •	 level of organizations of women and men in the affected areas including existing solidarity networks and community
            self-help capacities;
         •	 the customary institutions and arrangements relating to production and natural resource management and the roles
            of women and men;
         •	 community power structures in relation to the use of food, land and other productive resources.
         Risks and vulnerabilities
         •	 Dependency Index: The number of very young (under 15 years) and older persons (65 years) and size of households;
         •	 number of older women and men (over 65 years) living alone;
         •	 work migration patterns and causes for women/men/girls/boys;
         •	 child labour trends, early/forced marriage trends;
         •	 prevalence, causes and conditions of sex work;
         •	 usual patterns of negative coping mechanisms of women, men, girls, boys during crisis (e.g. distress sales, reduced
            food consumption by sex, etc.).
45   |    GENDER
     DISASTER EFFECTS IN EMPLOYMENT AND LIVELIHOODS SECTOR (ASSESSMENT AND VALUATION)

     To identify reconstruction and recovery needs in a gender-sensitive way the following information should be
     sought, analysed and included as part of the assessment of the disaster effect in terms of the affected popula-
     tion; destruction and damage of infrastructure and physical assets (‘damage’); and losses in terms of changes in
     economic flows resulting from disruption to availability of and access to goods and services, disruption of gover-
     nance and social processes as well as increased risks and vulnerabilities: 	

                  •	 Who are the most affected among men and women?

                  •	 What is the loss of livelihoods and who is in need of temporary employment, by sex and age?

                  •	 Are there changes in types of households after the crisis (i.e. female- and child-headed households,
                     loss of primary or sole income earner disaggregated by sex and age

                  •	 What are the priority needs and constraints identified by women and men to resume their employ-
                     ment and livelihood activities, including access to employment and credit services, replacement and
                     repairs of assets, replenishment of lost working capital?

                  •	 What are the short- to medium-term income-generation strategies of women and men?

                  •	 How can these be supported?

                  •	 What opportunities are there to develop the capacities of women and men?

                  •	 Are there any new resources available?

                  •	 Do women and men have equal access to resources such as information on and access to rehabili-
                     tation assistance to micro/small enterprises, cash for work, social welfare?

                  •	 How can it be ensured that women access and benefit equally from income-generating opportuni-
                     ties in rehabilitation of infrastructure and other recovery activities?

                  •	 How is the security situation taken into consideration? Is there any difference between men and
                     women, boys and girls?

                  •	 What negative coping mechanisms of women and men needs to be mitigated?

                       -- distress sales or consumption of productive assets;

                       -- reduced food consumption by women, men, girls or boys of certain ages;

                       -- increased interfamily dependence due to lost employment compounding power imbalances within households;

                       -- increased migration due to loss of employment/livelihoods;

                       -- transactional sex due to loss of employment/livelihoods;

                       -- increase in child/forced marriages or child labor as a source of income.

     Due to the time-intensity of women’s reproductive roles and household tasks,17 time constraints may be a major


     17	
           Women’s reproductive role refers to childbearing/rearing responsibilities, and domestic tasks done by women, required to guarantee



46   |     GENDER
     barrier to their access. As a consequence of a disaster, these activities take up even more time. This aspect must
     be included in the qualitative analysis and reflected in the sector assessment on which recovery needs will be
     identified. However, costing of the loss due to increase in women’s reproductive work will be undertaken by the
     Gender Advisor as it cuts across all sectors.18

     The AT should cooperate closely with the gender expert to facilitate the breakdown of loss of productive
     employment outside the home and related income by sex. Building on the ECLAC methodology (ECLAC,
     2003, and updated version of 2014), when identifying the effects of the disaster in terms of destruction of
     infrastructure and assets as well as disruption of service delivery and production in the sector, estimations
     should not only be disaggregated by sex but estimation of the informal economic activity such as
     home-based microenterprises and backyard economy19 should also be made. Consideration regarding
     the backyard economy is covered in the PDNA Gender Mainstreaming Sector Note on Agriculture, Livestock,
     Fisheries and Forestry.

     Often, a large share of economic activities are undertaken within the informal sector, e.g. home-based microen-
     terprises (e.g. production of soap, sewing and tailoring, craft-making) and subsistence agriculture and backyard
     economy.20 These sectors constitute essential sources of employment, income and survival of women in partic-
     ular but are rarely, if ever, counted in official statistics and may not be included in the damage and loss estimate
     for the productive sectors.

     With respect to temporary loss of household production and income from micro- and small home-based
     women’s enterprises, this should be estimated regardless of whether the head of the household is a woman
     (International Labour Organization (2002b); FAO (2011); ECLAC, 2014: 249). Data from public or private mi-
     cro-lending institutions can provide important information to support estimation of informal economic activ-
     ities. However, since women may not have the same access and use of formal financial services as men and
     therefore interviews with key informants from civil society, crafts or agricultural associations, micro-lenders,
     women’s organizations are essential. Estimation of damage to women-owned assets for home-based micro
     and small enterprises will be over and above those estimated by the livelihood Expert. Field visits must be
     made in order to directly interview the men and women affected. A sampling or survey developed in collabo-
     ration with the PDNA gender expert would be helpful to determine if all the components of informal/home-
     based economic activity are considered when estimating the unemployment or temporary loss of income by
     sex and as well as damage to home-based productive assets in order to decide on the values to be adopted
     for both types of losses.

     Examples of estimations of the effects on women’s employment, income and assets including from informal
     and/or home-based production that the Assessment Team must obtain, in coordination with the PDNA gender
     expert, through surveys, samplings or estimations, as shown in Box 5.




           the maintenance and reproduction of the labour force. It includes not only biological reproduction, but also the care and mainte-
           nance of the work force (male partner and working children) and the future work force (infants and school-going children).
     18	
           Refer to guidance in the Gender Sector Chapter for further details on tasks of the Gender Advisor.
     19	
           In other productive sectors, women operate micro- and small enterprises from their homes to supplement family food and income.
           The corresponding activities in the agricultural sector are known as the backyard economy (ECLAC, 2014).
     20	
           In other productive sectors, women operate micro and small enterprises from their homes to supplement family food and income.
           The corresponding activities in the agricultural sector are known as the backyard economy (ECLAC, 2003, and updated version of
           ECLAC in 20142014).

47   |     GENDER
           Box 5: Direct damages in Employments and Livelihoods sector
         •	 total number and/or proportion destroyed and partially damaged assets (infrastructure, machinery and equipment
            and stocks) in private industrial and commercial establishments, broken down into larges, medium-sized, small and
            micro enterprises by sex;
         •	 total number and/or proportion destroyed and partially damaged assets of family micro enterprises run out of homes
            by sex.
         Indirect losses12
         •	 future losses of production in formal private enterprises – large, medium, small and micro-enterprises, by sex of owner;
         •	 future losses of production in informal, home-based enterprises run from homes by sex;
         •	 losses of employment and income by women/men wage earners;
         •	 loss of social security/welfare.

     ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT21

     If an assessment of human development impact is included in the assessment (depending on severity of the
     disaster), estimations should include SADD levels and reflect gender inequalities when forecasting the future im-
     pact on income and employment. As relevant, the gender expert will provide findings from the gender analysis
     which should be taken into account in the disaster impact projections.

     THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY

     Sector recovery vision: The development of the sector recovery vision and guiding principles must be relevant
     to both women and men, as well as boys and girls. The AT should include the national gender machinery and
     women’s organizations in its formulation and, if available, take into account references about the sector in na-
     tional gender policies and strategies.

     Stakeholders’ consultations: During the AT consultations with key stakeholder, women and women’s and
     youth concerns must be represented equitably. Consultations should be held with the national gender machinery
     and women’s organizations including representatives of community-based organizations (CBOs) and grassroots
     groups, representing rural areas, ethnic minorities, and displaced women, in particular on needs identification
     and prioritization as well as costing. The gender expert can facilitate identification of key informants.

     RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILD BACK BETTER

     The identification of reconstruction and recovery needs should draw on the findings of the gender-sensitive
     assessment of disaster effects as described above. Building Back Better (BBB) considerations must include how
     restoration, replacement and compensation of lost assets and damages can decrease existing gender-based in-
     equalities and make the sector more inclusive of women by taking into account the gender differentiated needs
     identified in the assessment. This approach will allow addressing both practical and strategic needs of men and
     women, boys and girls, which could include:

                  •	 promoting women in management of community assets;

                  •	 promoting joint ownership or sharing of replaced productive assets, which expand women’s
                     employment and work opportunities through vocational training opportunities and tailored
                     gender-responsive credit schemes and financial services to recommence livelihood activities;

     21	
           Sex disaggregation of losses should be attempted to the extent possible, although it may be difficult due to the fact that women and
           men may be contributing to different steps in the chain of production of different crops.
48   |     GENDER
              •	 revising discriminatory laws, regulations and/or practices affecting the access of women to
                 employment, livelihood and social protection services, credits, programmes, etc.;

              •	 supporting women entrepreneurs through the organization and the establishment of associations

              •	 promoting the dissemination of gender-sensitive information about available services;

              •	 promoting support and preferential treatment of female contractors and enterprises in
                 recovery efforts;

              •	 promoting decent work and social security and services (e.g. child/elderly care) to facilitate
                 women’s participation in the formal labour force;

              •	 facilitating women’s participation in paid rehabilitation and reconstruction work programmes.

     THE EMPLOYMENT AND LIVELIHOODS SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN AND
     IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS	

     In collaboration with the PDNA gender expert ensure that the sector recovery plan explicitly reflects identified
     needs of women and men:

              •	 Gender-sensitive, participatory and results-based management: Outcomes, outputs and
                 indicators, and interventions of the Recovery framework and monitoring plan specify beneficiaries
                 and participants by sex and age.

              •	 The potential consequences for women and men of participating in interventions are
                 taken into account in design: Constraints on women’s time, mobility and security that impede
                 their participation are mediated by providing support to women’s other responsibilities so that they
                 are not overburdened, but rather have time and the opportunity to participate in recovery activi-
                 ties. Some examples are:

                  -- providing safe transportation and child-care support;

                  -- ensuring that activities and meetings take place at times that are convenient to women;

                  -- ensuring that women are compensated materially for the time and skills that they contribute.

              •	 Specific gender-targeted actions responding to the particular needs or problems facing
                 women or men are included, such as:

                  -- training women contractors at the local level;

                  -- establishing an operation line for women contractors;

                  -- disseminating information on entrepreneur up-start services for women

              •	 Gender-responsive capacity development: Activities are included that focus on strengthening
                 national and local capacity and systems of sector ministry and institutions to collect SADD and
                 mainstream gender in strategies, preparedness plans, services etc. A gender focus is included in all
                 capacity development activities planned with national stakeholders. All training activities planned in
                 the Recovery Plan should include a gender focus in the training curriculum, taking into account the
                 different education and information levels of men and women, boys and girls.



49   |   GENDER
              •	 Costing of the Recovery Plan includes allocations for the implementation of targeted
                 actions for women and/or girls. Analyse resource allocation and goods and services proposed
                 to identify distribution of benefit between men and women.

     ANNEX 2: KEY QUESTIONS TO GUIDE CROSS-SECTOR GENDER ANALYSIS
     Key questions on roles and responsibilities

              •	 What barriers are identified by women and men to accessing services? Examples might include
                 destroyed infrastructure, lack of or unsafe transport, no same sex service provider staff, cost, etc.

              •	 What capacities, skills and knowledge do women and men in the community have?

              •	 What were the activities of women, girls, boys and men (productive, reproductive and community
                 work, educational activities) prior to the disaster and what has changed since?

              •	 When do women, girls, boys and men do these activities, (e.g. each day, twice a year, etc.)?

              •	 Where are these activities performed?

              •	 What are the consequences for women, girls, boys and men of these changes in terms of time-
                 use, exposure to risks and threats of violence (e.g. the route to and location of water points and
                 fuel), foregoing other activities such as education and income-generation?

              •	 What opportunities are there to develop the capacities of women and men?

              •	 What spontaneous recovery activities are carried out by women and men?

              •	 Can these spontaneous recovery activities be supported? How?

              •	 What are the priority needs identified by women and men prior to and after the disaster, including
                 access to services?

              •	 How can these needs be met?

     Key questions on resources, access and control

              •	 What resources (e.g. land, housing, storage, skills, income, money, valuables, livestock, crops, tools/
                 equipment, savings, loan arrangements) do men and women use to carry out their activities? Who
                 owns these resources?

              •	 Have any of the resources used by men and women been lost?

              •	 Do men and women have the same control over these resources or the ability to decide how and
                 when to use them?

              •	 Are there any new resources available to women and/or men?

              •	 Who (men, women, widows, female heads of households) has priority access to these new
                 resources, and what are the effects in terms of power relations, etc.?




50   |   GENDER
     ANNEX 3: ECLAC MODEL INTERVIEW – HOUSEHOLD SURVEY22
     Location of interview: __________________________________________________

     County: ___________________________ Department: ______________________________

     Respondent's age and sex: ________

     A. Household composition

             1.	 How many people live in the household, including yourself? (Indicate with an X):
                 1	   2	     3	        4	      5	      6	       7	    8 Other
                 []	   [] 	  [] 	      [] 	    [] 	   [] 	     [] 	   [] 	      [] 	   Indicate amount: _______

             2.	 Who contribute to the household income? (Indicate with an X):
                 Mother Father Daughters Sons Grandmother Grandfather Aunt Uncle Other
                 [] [][] [] [] [] [] [] [] Indicate who: _____

             3.	 Do you receive remittances? (Indicate with an X):
                 Yes []		        No []

             4.	 Of all the people who financially contribute to the household, indicate with a 1 the member of the
                 family who brings the highest income to the home, with a 2, the person who provides the second
                 highest income, and a 3, the person who provides the third highest income, and so on.
                 Mother, Father, Daughters, Sons, Grandmother, Grandfather, Aunt, Uncle, Other
                 [[]	     [] 	   [] 	    [] 	    [] 	     [] 	    [] 	   [] 	     [] 	   Indicate any if others : _____

     B. Psychological impact

             5.	 Following the disaster, indicate with an X if you or anyone in your family from the following disorders:
                 Sleep disturbances 				[]
                 Constant fear 					[]
                 Nervousness 					[]
                 Frequent crying					[]
                 Aggression and violent behavior 		                []
                 Loss of appetite 				                             []
                 Headache					[]
                 Nausea						[]
                 Other (indicate) ____________ 		                  []

     C. Damage to backyard economy and productive activities in the home

             6.	 Have you lost the house in the disaster? (indicate with an X):
                 Yes [] 		        No []
                 State the value of domestic animals, fruit trees or crops handled by you that you lost as a consequence
                 of the disaster (circle the type of animal or crop lost and its approximate value in local currency)

     22	
           Unofficial translation of Annex 1 of Análisis de género en la evaluación de los efectos socioeconómicos de los desastres naturales,
           CEPAL, Series, Manuales, 2004, trans. by Sarah Bradshaw and Ángeles Arenas.


51   |     GENDER
              Hens or chickens 	     [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Other birds		          [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Pigs 			               [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Cow 			                [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Oxen			                [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Horses			              [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Other animals		        [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Fruit trees		          [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Banana			              [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Corn 			               [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Other crops 		         [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____

          7.	 Do you generate an income from any of the following activities undertaken from your home? (Indicate
              with an X the activity or activities):
              Selling food, sodas, bread or sweets	    []
              Selling fruit, eggs or animals 	         []
              Small shop service	                      []
              Tailoring and sewing clothing 	          []
              Laundry or ironing service	              []
              Crafts	[]
              Other (please specify) __________	       []

          8.	 Please circle the approximate number of weekly earnings in local currency obtained by tasks identified
              in the previous question:
              [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____

          9.	 Have you continued performing these tasks after the disaster? (indicate with an X):
              Yes []		       No []

          10.	Do you carry out any paid work outside the home? (Indicate with an X):
              Farm work 	                                []
              Fishing jobs	                              []
              Factory work	                              []
              Sale on the market	                        []
              Teaching	[]
              House work for a different household 	     []
              Babysitting for a different household 	    []
              Caring for sick or diseased 	              []
              Collecting firewood 	                      []
              Other(s) (please specify)	                 []




52   |   GENDER
          11.	Please circle the approximate number of weekly earnings in local currency obtained by the
              above-mentioned tasks:
              [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____

          12.	Have you lost your job as a result of the disaster? (indicate with an X)
              Yes []		        No []

          13.	State the value of your property that you lost in the disaster (circle the type of property and its approxi-
              mate value lost in local currency):
              Kitchenware 	 [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Sewing machine [ value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] ___
              Fridge 		        [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Iron 		          [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] ____
              Blender		        [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              TV		             [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Radio		          [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Food		           [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Oven		           [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Clothes 	        [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Jewels		         [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____
              Other(s) (specify) [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____

          14.	Do you have debts you? (indicate with an X the appropriate box):
              Yes [] 	 No []

          15.	Please circle the figure closest to the amount you still need to pay:
              [value 1] [value 2] [value 3] [value 4] [value 5] [value 6] [another number] _____

          16.	Indicate with an X the answer that you have been given by the lender/creditor after the disaster:
              Remit a portion of the outstanding payment 		         []
              Remit the entire outstanding payment			               []
              Give you more time to pay 				                        []
              Grant a new loan to pay off the old			                []
              No reply 						[]
              Another answer (indicate) __________			               []

     D. Emergency and Rehabilitation Tasks

          17.	After the disaster, how many hours do you dedicate to perform the following tasks related to your
              temporary shelter or rehabilitation? (Please circle the number of hours):
              Standing in line to obtain food 			                [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Standing in line to obtain other aid 		            [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____




53   |   GENDER
              Water collection				                             [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Collection of firewood				                       [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Food preparation 				                            [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Dishwashing 					                                [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Laundry 					                                    [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Cleaning					                                    [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Care of children 				                            [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Care of the sick or the diseased			              [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Community organization 			                       [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Food distribution 				                           [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Epidemiological control 			                      [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Search and rescue 				                           [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Vigilance 					                                  [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Removing debris 				                             [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Housing reconstruction 			                       [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Reconstruction of roads				                      [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Reconstruction of wells and latrines		           [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____
              Other tasks (indicate)______			                  [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [8] [10] [12] [14] [16] [other] ____

          18.	Do the tasks outlined above allow you time to do other activities from which you earn an income?
              (indicate with an X):
              Yes [] 		       No []

          19.	Following the suspension of the school year, do you spent less time earning an income?
              (indicate with an X):
              Yes [] 		       No []

          20.	Are you involved in any tasks that involves decision-making? (If yes, indicate with an X):
              Organization of shelter and relocation		         []
              Distribution of aid 				                         []
              Planning for urban reconstruction		              []
              Design of new homes 				                         []
              Reconstruction projects 			                      []
              Other tasks_______________ (indicate) 	          []

          21.	Indicate with an X if it is men or women who usually perform the following community tasks and
              whether they are paid or unpaid:

              •	 Search and rescue: 	                                                 women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Standing in line to obtain food or help: 	                           women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []




54   |   GENDER
              •	 Collection of water or firewood 	                                 women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Food preparation / dishwashing and laundry / cleaning hostel: 	   women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 care of children, sick or infirm: 	                               women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Epidemiological control: 	                                        women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Community organization: 	                                         women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Food distribution: 	                                              women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Security: 	                                                   women [] men [] paid [] unpaid

              •	 Removal of debris: 	                                          women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Rebuilding (housing, roads, wells, latrines, etc): 	          women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

              •	 Other task(s) (indicate): ________________________ 	          women [] men [] paid [] unpaid []

     E. Type of help needed

          22.	Please circle in order of importance the type of help you need for your recovery. Indicate on a scale of
              one to ten, assigning 1 to the aid you consider most necessary.
              Foods 						                                     [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Water						                                      [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Drugs 						                                     [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Clothing 					                                   [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Household items 				                             [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Housing					                                     [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Care of children 				                            [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Care of the sick					                            [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Other household chores (specify) _______	        [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Counseling					                                  [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Employment 					                                 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Sowing seed 					                                [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Backyard animals 				                            [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Productive tools/equipment			                    [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
              Other (specify) _______________		                [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]

          23.	Would you like to add something that has not been covered?

     ANNEX 4: DEFINITIONS
     Gender “refers to the social differences between females and males throughout the life cycle that are learned,
     and though deeply rooted in every culture are changeable over time, and have wide variations both within and
     between cultures, are. “Gender”, along with class and race, determines the roles, power and resources for fe-
     males and males in any culture. Historically, attention to gender relations has been driven by the need to address
     women’s needs and circumstances as they are typically more disadvantaged than men. Increasingly, however,
     the humanitarian community is recognizing the need to know more about what men and boys face in crisis

55   |   GENDER
     situations (IASC, 2006:12).”

     Gender analysis “examines the relationships between females and males and their access to and control of
     resources, their roles and the constraints they face relative to each other. A gender analysis should be integrated
     into the humanitarian needs assessment and in all sector assessments or situational analyses to ensure that gen-
     der-based injustices and inequalities are not exacerbated by humanitarian interventions and that where possible
     greater equality and justice in gender relations are promoted. (ibid)”

     Gender equality “or equality between women and men, refers to the equal enjoyment by women, girls, boys
     and men of rights, opportunities, resources and rewards. Equality does not mean that women and men are the
     same, but that their enjoyment of rights, opportunities and life changes are not governed or limited by whether
     they are born female or male” (ibid).

     Gender relations are “[h]ierarchical relations of power between women and men that tend to disadvantage
     women. These gender hierarchies are often accepted as ‘natural’ but are socially determined relations, culturally
     based, and are subject to change over time. They can be seen in a range of gendered practices, such as the di-
     vision of labour and resources, and gendered ideologies, such as ideas of acceptable behaviour for women and
     men) (Baden and Reeves, 2005: 18).

     Gender division of labour refers to “the socially determined ideas and practices which define what roles and
     activities are deemed appropriate for women and men” (ibid).

     Gender mainstreaming “is a globally-accepted strategy for promoting gender equality. Mainstreaming is not
     an end in itself but a strategy, an approach, a means to achieve the goal of gender equality. Mainstreaming in-
     volves ensuring that gender perspectives and attention to the goal of gender equality are central to all activities -
     policy development, research, advocacy, dialogue, legislation, resource allocation, and planning, implementation
     and monitoring of programmes and projects (UN Women)”.

     Gender-targeted actions – “A gender analysis should inform the deliverers of humanitarian protection and
     assistance of the specific needs of the individuals or groups within the affected population requiring targeted
     action. In many cases, these actions will be targeted to women and girls — but there are a number of situations
     where boys or men will be targeted for action, for example when boys are the target of recruitment for armed
     conflict or when boys are unable to feed themselves due to lack of cooking skills. Addressing the specific needs
     of women and girls may best be done in some circumstances by taking targeted action. In effect, women and
     girls may need different treatment in order to produce equality in outcomes — in other words, to level the play-
     ing field so that women can benefit from equal opportunities… Targeted actions should not stigmatize or isolate
     women and girls; they should compensate for the consequences of gender-based inequality such as the long-
     term deprivation of rights to education or health care. This is important as in many situations women and girls
     are more disadvantaged than men and boys, have been excluded from participating in public decision-making
     and have had limited access to services and support. Targeted actions should empower women and build their
     capacity to be equal partners with men in working towards resolving conflict, solving problems caused by dis-
     placement, helping with reconstruction and return, and building durable peace and security. Each sector should
     identify specific actions that could promote gender equality and support the capacity of women to enjoy their
     human rights” (IASC, 2006: 3).

     Practical and strategic gender needs –“Women, girls, boys and men have immediate, “practical” survival


56   |   GENDER
     needs particularly in humanitarian crises. They also have longer-term “strategic” needs linked to changing the
     circumstances of their lives and realizing their human rights. Practical needs of women may include needs as-
     sociated with their roles as caretakers, needs for food, shelter, water and safety. Strategic needs, however, are
     needs for more control over their lives, needs for property rights, for political participation to help shape public
     decisions and for a safe space for women outside the household, for example women’s shelters offering protec-
     tion from domestic violence. The practical needs focus on the immediate condition of women and men. Strate-
     gic needs concern their relative position in relation to each other; in effect strategic needs are about resolving
     gender-based inequalities. A girl’s practical need for an education can be addressed in a strategic way if that
     education includes a rights-based curriculum that expands her horizons and enables her to consider a life differ-
     ent from one that is pre-determined by her gender. A woman’s practical need for health care can be addressed
     in a strategic way if it includes access to services giving her greater control over her reproductive decisions. in
     the context of radical changes in people’s lives, loss of livelihoods and changed social roles (when, for instance,
     women take sole charge of families), humanitarian interventions can either address people’s needs in ways that
     can confirm traditional gender roles or can contribute to greater gender equality by, wherever possible, address-
     ing strategic needs for changes in gender relations” (ibid).

     ANNEX 5: EXAMPLE OF TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE GENDER EXPERT
     A gender-aware PDNA enables the documentation of recovery needs of affected areas and populations, differ-
     entiating those of women, men, boys and girls, through the deployment of various gender-sensitive methodol-
     ogies and sector-specific questions. Such a process facilitates the identification of specific post-disaster needs,
     priorities and synergies which can be used to inform the planning, design and implementation of multi-sectoral
     actions that are gender-aware, effective and coordinated.

     Main Tasks (this should be carried out by a team of gender experts)

     The gender expert contributes to the following elements of the PDNA:

              •	 compiles sex- and age-disaggregated quantitative and qualitative pre-disaster demographic and
                 sector-specific data from the affected areas and country at large;

              •	 compiles pre-disaster information on the roles, responsibilities, status, and positions of women,
                 men, boys, girls, and marginalized communities from the affected areas and country at large;

              •	 identifies practices, norms and regulations that contribute to the vulnerability experienced by
                 women, men, boys, girls and marginalized communities;

              •	 identifies pre-disaster levels of community participation in ongoing development initiatives;

              •	 consults with social ministries and national machineries working on women's, gender and youth issues;

              •	 consults with international and local NGOs working with, and for, women;

              •	 prepares a section for the pre-disaster briefing paper based on available data;

              •	 prepares recommendations for the PDNA process to facilitate the identification of the specific and
                 differential needs of women, men, boys and girls;

              •	 participates in briefings to ensure that the realities of women, men, boy and girls are integrated;


57   |   GENDER
              •	 provides recommendations about methodological approaches appropriate for identifying the im-
                 pact of the disaster on, and coping strategies of, women, men, boys and girls;

              •	 provides context-specific information on transportation, sleeping arrangements, pit stops, etc. to
                 share with the assessment team assessment team;

              •	 advises the PDNA coordinator on the composition of assessment team to ensure that women
                 are members;

              •	 participates as a member of an assessment team;

              •	 provides relevant documents, checklists, etc. to assessment team;

              •	 liaises with female members of the assessment team to help facilitate their work and ensure that
                 their findings are reflected in outcome documents;

              •	 participates in the analysis, drafting and review of the PDNA and sectoral reports to ensure that:
                 (i) specific and differential needs of women, men, boys and girls are reflected; and (ii) proposed
                 recovery projects address those needs and reinforce spontaneous recovery efforts;

              •	 prepares summaries on the gendered dimensions of the post-disaster situation for various audiences;

              •	 substantively participates in the lessons learned process and makes recommendations if necessary.

     ANNEX 6: CASE STUDY: INFORMATION AND COORDINATION ISSUES IN THE
     2010 HAITI PDNA
     In early 2010, a magnitude 7.0 earthquake, affected Haiti’s capital and nearby towns, killing up to 230,000
     people. Damages and losses amounted to around US$8 billion, or 120 per cent of GDP. The post-disaster PDNA
     carried out by the Government of Haiti with multi-donor support included a cross-cutting themes section that
     briefly summarized some gender issues and recommended an allocation of US$28.1 million for targeted gender
     recovery initiatives out of the total recommended recovery and reconstruction allocation of US$11.5 billion over
     three years. The analysis was broad and limited, and the areas of gender focus included: recapitalization of wom-
     en and their full participation in the reconstruction process; safety for women and girls; women’s participation
     in areas of decision-making and in political life; strengthening the capacity of state and citizens’ institutions that
     promote women’s rights; equal opportunities for girls and boys in education; and the promotion of health ser-
     vices, especially reproductive health. No specific actions in these areas were identified.

     The formal PDNA process missed an opportunity to coordinate with women’s groups to incorporate local knowl-
     edge into the assessment. A coalition of 100 international and local women’s organizations and networks, the
     Haiti Gender Equality Collective, set up a parallel event to the March 2010 donors conference to highlight their
     view that the PDNA had only “peripherally addressed” gender considerations in most of the key thematic areas
     of recovery. They launched a shadow PDNA report with several recommendations to improve gender integration
     in Haiti’s recovery analysis and planning. For instance, it emphasized that over half of all Haitian households were
     headed by women, but that just over ten per cent of women in rural areas worked on their own farms. The re-
     port sought the recalibration of planning in, and support for, agriculture, livestock and fisheries development to
     account for the gender division of labour, particularly to reach women in the informal sector. This report made
     specific recommendations to improve the gender-sensitivity of PDNA and recovery planning, such as:


58   |   GENDER
              •	 Administer a gender needs and capacity assessment in all sectors, ensuring gender expertise
                 on all assessment, field missions, visits and country-specific meetings, both formal and informal.

              •	 Include gender experts in donor and non-governmental assessment missions, and ensure
                 they are paired with national partners to encourage mentorship and exchange.

              •	 Convene civil society dialogue on gender issues and help bridge the networking, programming
                 and capacity gaps between indigenous women’s organizations and international counterparts.

              •	 Require gender analysis and gender-responsive budgeting for all priority plans and
                 budgets, specifying stakeholders, indicators and benchmarks for achieving gender equality aims.

     Sources: World Bank, 2010; Haiti Gender Equality Collective, 2010, cited in Guidance Notes on Gender and Disaster Risk
     Management, The World Bank (2012).




59   |   GENDER
