    CROSS-CUTTING SECTOR




   ENVIRONMENT




PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION	2
n THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                 2
n PRE-DISASTER BASELINE AND SECTOR OVERVIEW	6
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS	9
n CALCULATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER	13
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                          14
n CROSS-SECTOR LINKAGES INCLUDING CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES	   14
 SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY	16
n
 REFERENCES	24
n
  NNEXES	25
nA
         INTRODUCTION
         The main objective of PDNA–Environment is to prepare a recovery strategy that guides the restoration of en-
         vironment and natural resources damaged due to a disaster. This should also enable environmentally friendly
         rebuilding in all sectors. The recovery plan also supports the restoration of environment and natural resources as
         a disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategy.



         ASSESSMENT PROCESS
         Environment affects all sectors of economic and social activity. Hence the strategy used in this guideline is to
         consider only those aspects of post-disaster effects and impacts not covered in other sub-sectors.

         Due to the cross-cutting nature of the environment, the Environment PDNA team (ENA) needs to work closely
         with other sector teams, and also possibly participate in (or learn from) key consultations. The coordination with
         other sector teams is also important to avoid repetition in calculating the effects and impacts.

         This guideline contributes to the methodology for post-disaster assessment by strengthening the estimation of
         needs for human development recovery; governance and institutional capacity; disaster risk reduction as it re-
         lates to the environment; and access issues associated with a post-disaster situation.

         The first action to be undertaken, after a decision has been made to conduct a PDNA for the environmental
         sector in case of a specific disaster in a country, is a scoping exercise. In the base case scenario, this should be
         done in the country after a preliminary evaluation of the available data on the disaster.

         The following information should be gathered during the scoping exercise:

         	   1.	 Type of disaster, intensity and geographical scope;

         	   2.	Population impacted by disaster, disaggregated by age and sex in each geographical territory
                 (like state or district);

         	   3.	 Key environmental segments impacted and typical services each provides;

         	   4.	 Key institutions (national, local) involved in environmental governance;

         	   5.	 Key stakeholders involved in the rescue and relief operations;

         	   6.	 Overall scope and timeline for the PDNA; and

         	   7.	 Possible sources of required data.

         In case of major disasters, it would be useful for the team leader to have made at least an initial reconnaissance
         trip of the site ahead of finalising the scope of work so that s/he might be able to advise members of the team
         about the overall situation. Visual aids such as photographs should be taken to familiarise people; these are also
         an excellent additional reference source and should, if possible, be taken with referenced metadata. Maps should
         be consulted and annotated as required.

2   |   ENVIRONMENT
         DATA COLLECTION IN THE FIELD
         	   The fieldwork should have four components:

         	   • Collecting information from the field;

         	   • Institutional capacity assessment;

         	    Stakeholder consultation, including a good representation of population subgroups such as youth,
             •
              men, women, ethnic groups; and

         	    Exchanges with other sectoral teams undertaking field work to triangulate information and
             •
              minimise duplication.

         Building on information obtained from the pre-disaster analysis (which is described in the next section) and with
         some knowledge already of the scale and extent of the disaster, an attempt should be made to map the situation
         to identify areas at risk (such as specific communities or vulnerable ecosystems) and begin to identify possible
         hazards in each. Possible steps to follow include:

         	   1.	Obtain or create a base map of the area using available information, satellite images, local
                 knowledge, etc.;

         	   2.	Identify where the impacts of the disaster have been most severe, also noting relevant changes
                 to infrastructure, housing, and so forth;

         	   3.	Pinpoint areas that may be at further risk (from secondary disaster-related impacts or those which might
                 be affected by unsustainable exploitation of natural resources);

         	      Identify which measure might be needed—and whom to consult—in order to help mitigate further
             4.	
                impact on the environment;

         	   5.	 Identify the key institutions and stakeholders who are impacted and/or need to be consulted; and

         	   6. Identify the typical services provided by the environment.

         DATA GATHERING
         Existing Data Sources: Data gathering is always a challenge. This is all the more true immediately after a disaster
         when people who have access to the data have other pressing commitments to attend to. The assessment teams
         should be aware of this fact and be strategic in their data gathering, trying to maximise data sharing between
         teams. Teams should also be prepared to work with the available less than ideal data and supplement data gaps
         with primary data gathering, remote sensing and expert judgment.

         The following information and the steps to collect primary data , which is primarilly the government's responsi-
         bility, are suggested:

         	      Prepare a plan, and guide for field studies of affected areas and, if possible, also of unaffected and/or
             1.	
                pristine areas;

         	      Establish a plan of personal interviews (see the following step), in coordination with relevant and ap-
             2.	
                pointed national contacts;

3   |   ENVIRONMENT
         	   3.	Meet with people in positions of responsibility, appointed technical specialists and other figures with
                 knowledge and responsibilities or information relevant to the case in question;

         	      Conduct field interviews with university researchers, officials, government spokespersons and commu-
             4.	
                nity leaders while appraising other on-site studies or existing assessments; and

         	      Meet with local community-based organisations (CBOs), women, men, indigenous communities where
             5.	
                applicable, who might local knowledge of impacted areas as well as the resulting impacts on
                people’s livelihoods.

         Based on the available information regarding the nature of disaster, and the primary data gathered, each special-
         ist as part of the ENA team may prepare a list of the relevant information desired for the detailed analysis of the
         effects and also for the identification of needs. Then the possible secondary sources of data can be identified.
         The following generic sources of information are to be searched:

         	      Published and confidential information from UN and other international agencies, including from other
             a.	
                assessments of the disaster;

         	   b.	 Information available with the agencies of the national governments;

         	   c.	 Information available with international and local NGOs;

         	   d.	 Information available in published literature in general;

         	   e.	 Consultation with officials of other UN agencies and national/regional governments;

         	   f.	Information collected (and surveys conducted) by other UN/national agencies in this specific context
                 after the disaster (It is likely that there are other post-disaster assessments in the area before the
                 ENA): and

         	   g.	Consultation with the affected population. (If possible, some parts of this consultation can be carried out
                 in the form of primary surveys.)

         Many available sources of information within national/regional governments of the disaster-affected country
         may be useful to ENA. These may include:

         	      Government ministries such as those for the environment or natural resources (if different), forestry,
             1.	
                water, livestock, agriculture, and so forth;

         	   2.	 National or regional disaster preparedness plans;

         	   3.	 Geographical, geomorphologic and climatic maps of the country/region;

         	   4.	 Community structures, including women’s groups, that may have a role in managing natural resources;

         	   5.	 State of the environment reports; and

         	   6.	 National level databases such as Census, National Health Surveys, etc.

         The degree of data which can be collected during a PDNA exercise depends on the geographical extent of the
         disaster-impacted area, the time available to undertake the PDNA and funding. Detailed primary data gathering


4   |   ENVIRONMENT
         may be difficult and one has to depend on a combination of approaches (some of which are mentioned below)
         to provide the team with the necessary data:

         	   1.	 Satellite image analyses to capture the big picture elements;

         	   2.	 Compiled data from government sources;

         	   3.	 Data collected by chamber of commerce, farmer bodies and other agencies;

         	   4.	 Data collected through field agents employed collectively for the PDNA process; and

         	   5.	 Data collected by other sectors, directly or from other sources.

         The PDNA team makes every effort to verify data collected on the most critical environmental issues and to
         secure additional data to fill data gaps. In addition to this, efforts must be made to sift information collected
         from satellite image and triangulate secondary sources. The checklist in Appendix II may be used as a tool for
         collecting primary data. However, please keep in mind that this is a generic checklist and it needs to be expanded
         and adapted based on the specific disaster situation.

         EXPECTED OUTPUT
         The needs assessment should lead to a detailed report on the effects and impact on the environment due to
         disaster, and to the sector’s recovery plan. It includes the damage and changes in economic flows ( or losses )
         wherever possible to estimate such values; and also the needs and costs of rebuilding the environment. A stan-
         dard outline for the PDNA sectoral report has been suggested and this should be complied with, subject to any
         specific country agreement made with the overall PDNA team.

         A combined PDNA document is produced at the end of the PDNA exercise, which will factor in the key recom-
         mendations and cost estimations made in the Environmental Sector report. However, the Environmental Sector
         report will have much more information that will be useful to national actors. It is therefore recommended that
         all efforts be made to publish the Environmental Sector PDNA document either as an annex or supplement to
         the main report.

         TEAM FOR PDNA-ENVIRONMENT
         Undertaking a full PDNA of an environmental sector issue needs a small team of environmental experts, under
         the coordination of a team leader. Members of such a team should have specialised domain knowledge based
         on the key environmental segments impacted, identified from the original scoping exercise. The team leader
         should have a clear understanding of the overall PDNA process and how the environmental issues dovetail
         with the exercise.

         An ideal PDNA team may have experts, especially on environmental economics, who provide technical support
         to the team. During the assessment itself, all team members should hold meetings at least daily to share infor-
         mation, identify any problems or gaps, and plan for the next day’s activities.




5   |   ENVIRONMENT
         PRE-DISASTER INFORMATION/SECTOR OVERVIEW
         Gathering as much reliable information as possible on the actual situation immediately before the disaster is an
         essential step for the ENA. Many different sources of information need to be consulted. Even then, however,
         many gaps must be expected, to be addressed in subsequent steps through specific and directed lines of enquiry.

         Key sources of pre-disaster baseline information are likely to include, but not be restricted to the following:

         	   1.	 Environmental profiles for the country/region;

         	   2.	 Satellite images and maps;

         	   3.	 Project reports from national and international environmental agencies;

         	   4.	 Local knowledge on natural resources' management;

         	   5.	 Previous environment-related assessments;

         	      Specific databases, for example, if a national park or marine reserve is within the affected area, specific
             6.	
                reports will likely be available;

         	   7.	 Wildlife and fisheries management plans;

         	   8.	 Housing and related development plans;

         	   9.	 Land tenure records; and

         	   10.	Population of men and women living in and around national natural resources.

         To guide the initial data gathering process, questions to consider include, but again are not restricted to:

         	   1.	Who were the main actors (government, non-governmental and communities [including women
                 and men]) responsible for managing natural resources before the disaster?

         	   2.	 What is the current situation regarding the status of these organisations and structures?

         	   3.	Who might be the most useful people to contact for further information regarding the
                 pre-disaster situation?

         	      What were some of the key environmental features in that region before the disaster? Examples
             4.	
                might include productive coastal fisheries, ecotourism, endemic species, a source of drinking
                water, and so forth.

         	   5.	 What was the land ownership system? Who had access to natural resources?

         	      Were there obvious links with or dependencies upon natural resources or critical ecosystem services,
             6.	
                such as fisheries or freshwater provisioning which might have been impacted by the disaster or
                further impacted after disasters due to overexploitation?

         	   7.	Are there sites of ecological interest or value in the immediate region? If so, what was their
                 pre-disaster status?

6   |   ENVIRONMENT
         Particular attention needs to be given to identifying the presence and pre-disaster status of protected areas and
         the presence of ecosystems that may provide particular services, such as water provisioning, spawning grounds
         for offshore fisheries or sites of exception biological diversity. Such sites include:

         	   1.	 National parks;

         	   2.	 Nature reserves and hunting reserves;

         	   3.	 UNESCO World Heritage Sites;

         	   4.	 Marine reserves;

         	   5.	 Ramsar sites (wetlands of international importance);

         	   6.	 Wildlife corridors; and

         	   7.	 Watersheds and other ecosystems providing vital services.

         Analysis of such information will also help plan for subsequent steps, e.g. by identifying who needs to be con-
         sulted, how the members of the ENA team might allocate individual responsibilities for certain tasks, how the
         field work will be conducted, and so forth. Additional information coming from the emergency phase may also
         prove helpful in piecing together an overview of the pre-disaster situation.

         The pre-disaster information should enable the team to describe the status of infrastructure and other assets
         (relevant for environment), environmental goods and services, governance mechanisms, and risks and vulnerabil-
         ities. These are briefly mentioned in the following sections.

         DESCRIPTION OF KEY ASSETS
         This may include pre-disaster status of the extent of relevant natural resources (e.g. forests) which existed before
         the disaster. A description of the extent (quantity) and quality of these natural assets can be part of the sector
         overview. Similarly, there could be certain man-made assets relevant for environment (like the environmental
         monitoring systems) and the nature of these assets before the disaster could also be part of sector overview.

         The economic uses to which the environment is put is a critical aspect of the description.

         DESCRIPTION OF THE PRODUCTION AND DELIVERY OF GOODS AND SERVICES, AND AC-
         CESS TO GOODS AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSETS AND SERVICES
         Disasters can impact environmental segments and access to environmental goods and services. Ecosystems
         provide a range of services to humanity and the conceptual framework of these services, as identified in ‘’The
         Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity’’, is presented in Figure 1: Ecosystem Services.




7   |   ENVIRONMENT
                                                  ECOSYSTEM SERVICES

                PROVISIONING SERVICES               REGULATING SERVICES                      CULTURAL SERVICES
                          Food                         Climate regulation                    Spiritual & religious
                       Fresh Water                     Disease regulation                        Recreation
                        Fuelwood                        Water regulation                         Ecotourism
                           Fibre                       Water purification                         Aesthetic
                      Biochemicals                         Pollination                          Inspirational
                                                                                                  Education
                                                                                               Sense of peace
                                                                                              Cultural heritage




                                                    SUPPORTING SERVICES
                                                     Ecosystem Functions

                  Nutrient Cycling    Evolution     Soil Formation       Spatial Structure     Primary Production




         (Reference: Baltimore Ecosystem Study, Urban Lexicon)

         Not all environmental systems offer every ecosystem service mentioned above. However, every damaged envi-
         ronmental segment needs to be assessed within the above framework to ensure that not just the provisioning
         services are factored in while assessing damage and loss.

         DESCRIPTION OF GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
         The state of environmental resources depends not only on the natural factors but also on the institutions and
         governance systems. These may include formal and informal factors, and those instituted by the communities
         and the states. A description of these and other formal governance structures for managing natural resources
         existing in the territory should also be part of the pre-disaster sector overview.

         RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES INCLUDING EXISTING PREPAREDNESS PLANS	
         The country (and the communities within it) may have already perceived certain risks associated with the poten-
         tial negative impact on environment and natural resources, and may have created plans for mitigating such risks.
         An understanding of such perceived risks and their level of preparedness could also be part of the pre-disaster
         sector overview.




8   |   ENVIRONMENT
         ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS
         Multiple linkages between environment and disasters are of interest while undertaking a PDNA after a disaster.
         These linkages are as follows:

         	   1.	 Disasters have environmental and economic effects, which in turn affect people;

         	   2.	 Recovery efforts after a disaster may also leave an environmental footprint;

         	   3.	 Environmental degradation increases disaster risk;

         	   4.	 Disasters disrupt access to environmental goods and services;

         	   5.	 Disasters increase strain on environmental governance; and

         	      Healthy ecosystems can play an important role in disaster risk reduction and hence could be part of
             6.	
                future strategies for DRR in the country.

         Some environmental effects may occur immediately after the disaster, like the washing away of forests due to
         landslides, or the land and water pollution caused by breaking down of sewage systems. These are called imme-
         diate effects. Effects that take some time to manifest after the disaster may be referred to as additional effects
         and may not be able to be captured as part of the assessment as the assessment has a specific start and end
         time. This could be eutrophication in a lake a few months after a flooding or forest fires a few months after a
         drought. It is not realistic to predict every possible environmental impact in a disaster situation due to the large
         permutations of disasters and ecosystems in the world. Some of the major disasters and their environmental
         effects are listed in the Annex. The following are the key elements to assess the disaster effects on environment:

         	      Environmental effects caused by the disaster and relief operations as well as potential environmental
             1.	
                pressures from recovery;

         	      Response-related activities or coping mechanisms resulting from the disaster that can impact the envi-
             2.	
                ronment or create new environmental risks;

         	      Factors which may have impacted the access of stakeholders to environmental resources, particularly
             3.	
                vulnerable groups such as women, indigenous people, and ethnic minorities with high dependence on
                natural resources for livelihoods;

         	   4.	 Impact of the disaster on institutional capacities for environmental governance;

         	      Underlying environmental drivers, such as environmental degradation that may precipitate or aggravate
             5.	
                a future disaster; and

         	   6.	 Opportunities to build back greener.

         These effects must be presented according to the country’s geographical divisions as presented in the
         census and by other key sociological characteristics where relevant (sex, age, ethnicity, religion, ability,
         disability of the given population). The effects can be expressed in quantitative or qualitative terms under the
         following headings.


9   |   ENVIRONMENT
         Introduction: general description of the disaster event, its geographical scope, population affected and evolution
         till date, etc.;

         Effects on natural assets–these include the full or partial destruction of natural or environmental assets such as
         forests, mangroves, or atmospheric quality. The description may include not only quantitative changes but also
         those related to quality; and

         Effects on access to environmental goods and services,

         The possible causes for the disruption of environmental services and access to these are:

         	      Damage to goods and services: Environmental goods or services may have been totally or partially
             1.	
                destroyed as a result of the disaster. For example, if forest has suffered a severe fire, women and men
                will no longer be able to access it and benefit from the multiple services offered by it. In some cases,
                secondary environmental goods and services might also be affected, such as fish processing and cottage
                industries usually done by women;

         	      Disruption to physical access: If a community had to relocate after a disaster, men and women will not
             2.	
                be able to access the environmental goods or services even if the environmental goods are unharmed;

         	      Economic barriers to access: Disasters reduce the purchasing power of men and women in a commu-
             3.	
                nity. For example, if the community had access to the waste management at a certain unit cost, after
                the disaster, the community may not have the resources at its disposal to pay for such services. So even
                though the environmental service is undamaged and there are no physical barriers to access, the service
                is no longer accessible to the community. In addition to reduction in purchasing power, disasters may
                also push into further poverty certain sub-groups such as forest and indigenous people who derive a
                larger part of their livelihoods from the natural resources.

         EFFECTS ON ENVIRONMENTAL GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES	
         Disasters can also affect institutions of environmental governance. This may be manifested in their ability to plan
         and implement an environmental recovery program. Some relevant examples in this context are as follows:

         	   1.	Damage to physical resources including infrastructure, vehicles, equipment, data gathering systems, data
                 records of the institutions, such as Ministry of Environment, National Parks Authority and Waste Man-
                 agement Department and other government institutions dealing with environment;

         	      Staff capacity at the institutions of environmental governance is depleted by: (a) death or injury of per-
             2.	
                sonnel, (b) their temporary absence because of the need to attend to personal issues relating to the
                disaster and/or (c) their re-deployment for addressing humanitarian issues;

         	   3.	Inability to enforce legislation: Disasters often cause economic hardship to individuals and nations. There-
                 fore, in post-disaster settings, there is often pressure on the environmental ministries (and other enforce-
                 ment agencies) not to enforce even the existing environmental provisions so that people can recover
                 their life faster.




10   |   ENVIRONMENT
         EFFECTS ON RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES	
         Disasters do not just damage the environment. Environmental degradation aggravates the effects of natural
         hazards. It is important to identify these environmental drivers of disaster risks. Table 1 provides some of the
         environmental drivers of disaster risk.

         Table 1. Environmental Drivers of Disasters
                      Environmental Driver                              Type of Disaster Caused or Exacerbated
             Deforestation                         Landslides, flash floods, droughts through desertification
             Coral reef damage                     Storm surge
             Conversion of wetlands                Floods
             Monoculture forestry                  Forest fires
             Mangrove damage                       Floods, storm surges, coastal erosion
             Damage to sea grass                   Beach erosion

         In addition to the conventional environmental drivers, climate change is expected to increase the frequency
         and severity of weather-related hazards such as hurricanes, floods and drought. Disasters and associated envi-
         ronmental damages can increase future risks. Forest fires may increase the risks of landslides; sandstorms may
         enhance the risk of damages associated with droughts; damages to mangroves due to coastal events may exac-
         erbate the risks of coastal erosion.

         CLASSIFYING THE DISASTER EFFECTS ON THE ENVIRONMENT
         The quality, intensity and extent of the effects of a natural phenomenon on the environment varies according to
         the force released, the sensitivity and quality of the medium receiving it, the medium’s capacity for recovery, the
         time it takes to recover and the partial or total loss of environmental assets or services. The environmental impact
         can be classified into zero impact, minimal or significant impact.

         These assessments are based on observations, professional judgment, or by hypothetical or actual experiments.
         One classification system for negative effect following ECLAC (2003) is given below:

         	          Zero effect. Insignificant or very slight, with swift environmental recovery or with minimal or very low
                (a)	
                    prevention or recovery costs.

         	          Insignificant or minimal effect. An outcome that does not affect the system's stability; recovery in the
                (b)	
                    short or medium term; problems, alterations, changes and damage are insignificant when the benefits
                    derived from the situation are taken into account.

         	          Moderate effect. Change is marked, but restricted to a relatively limited area; slight regional effect;
                (c)	
                    short-term recovery; moderate or acceptable problems; simple and cheap mitigation.

         	          Severe effect. Very marked regional or very extensive change; recovery in the short or medium term if
                (d)	
                    appropriate mitigation measures are implemented; a high level of discomfort and inconvenience, and
                    mitigation is costly.

         	          Very severe effect. Very extensive, heavy and harmful consequences in the region; possibility of partial
                (e)	
                    or slight recovery at a very high cost in the medium and long terms; fewer options for using resources in
                    the future; in the context of development, it signifies a permanent threat to resources, health or life.


11   |   ENVIRONMENT
         QUANTITATIVE ESTIMATE
         Once the environmental effects have been identified and classified into significant, severe, and so on, the next
         step is to quantify and assess them. This is the most difficult stage of the assessment task, mainly because of
         time constraints, and difficulty in getting quality information.

         The quantification process establishes the magnitude of the identified areas that have borne the brunt of the
         disaster: the area of burnt forest or of eroded soil, the length of beach damaged, the reduction in the volume
         of fishery catches, the reduced flow of water, the presence of pollutants in the water, the number of individual
         members of a species killed, and so on.

         Geospatial inputs, especially satellite imageries before and after the disaster, may be of great help at this stage.
         Reconnaissance surveys and field work after the disaster and comparison of the pictures that emerge from
         such surveys with the baseline information collected through the desk study can also be useful. Consultations
         with local government officials or the rescue team members may also provide useful information on the
         extent of damage.

         In many cases, quantification cannot be carried out. There may not be sufficient time available for disaster assess-
         ments to obtain quantitative information about the effect on specific species. It will only be possible to describe
         these effects qualitatively, even if they can be identified and sustained. For example, in the case of fauna, it is
         hardly ever possible to ascertain the number of affected individuals. In such a case it would only be possible to
         identify the environmental effect.

         As mentioned above, while undertaking PDNAs it is important to keep in mind that some of the consequences
         of the disaster may not be manifested immediately. For example, due to disruption of primary livelihoods after
         a disaster, rapid depletion of forest resources may occur as communities seek alternative coping livelihoods
         and energy sources.




12   |   ENVIRONMENT
         ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER
         This section gives guidance on how to estimate the value of damage and changes in economic flows, extracting
         from the section on effects those elements that have financial implications, either in damage of assets, as well
         as loss due to changes in financial flows as linked to service/production, governance and risks.

         ECONOMIC VALUATION
         Environmental goods are typically hard to establish economic values for. However, since all sectors involved
         in PDNA are expected to come up with monetary estimates, the environmental sector also has to undertake
         economic valuation of damages and changes in flows. Valuation of environmental damage and loss of en-
         vironmental services is a complex process and there are different valuation techniques. A broad outline is
         provided in Table 2.

         Table 2. Valuation Approaches of Typical Environmental/Ecosystem Services.
           Environmental/Ecosystem                                        Valuation Approach
                   Services
                                        Market Price        Effect on         Travel Cost      Hedonic Pricing   Contingent
                                                           Productivity                                           Valuation
          Provisioning                        X                 X
          Regulating                                            X                                    X
          Supporting                                            X
          Cultural                                                                X                  X               X

         It is important to mention here that when disasters affect ecosystems, not only are their provisioning services
         disrupted, but other ecosystem services are affected too. Economic valuation of ecosystem services is a growing
         area of research activity. It is not the objective of this document to present in detail the methodology for quan-
         tification of each of the ecosystem values as outlined in earlier sections. However, a range of methodologies
         available for quantification is presented here.

         In most situations, given the level of data available in a post-disaster setting, and the time and resources available
         to collect new data, it is not always easy to quantify the economic value of such disruption. In some situations
         it may be possible to use costing data that has been produced for a similar environmental/economic context.
         However, in order for the recovery recommendations to factor in the significance of non-quantified ecosystem
         services, it is important to articulate those services in the report.




13   |   ENVIRONMENT
         ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
         Issues of environmental conservation (or destruction) are closely linked to economic and human development.
         The lower levels of economic development in poorer or developing countries may have led to under-investments
         in protecting environment and natural resources before the disaster. These may have contributed to the severity
         of disaster impacts as a consequence of natural hazards. However, the disaster could drastically reduce the level
         of human development, and this may lead to a further decline in the willingness to protect the environment after
         the disaster. The environment could become a low-priority item, even if the deterioration of natural resources
         could negatively affect the rebuilding of livelihoods of people after the disaster. Hence the restoration of human
         development and normalisation of economic development after the disaster, mainly through the (Build Back
         Better) recovery strategies envisaged in other sector PDNAs, could be a prerequisite for the recovery of the en-
         vironment and natural resources.

         The impact analysis of the environmental issues should result in a clear presentation of the short , medium and/
         or long-term consequences of the event. The best and worst-case outcomes as a consequence of the disaster
         on the environment should also be considered. Such scenarios should be based on the context analysis or the
         pre-disaster situation, the effects of the event on the environment and the socio-economic costs to society .




         CROSS-SECTOR LINKAGES INCLUDING
         CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
         Due to the interweaving nature of the environmental sector, it is important that the ENA Team is fully engaged
         with other sectors during all stages of the PDNA process. A number of environmental issues may already be
         factored in by other sectors, so it is important that there is no duplication of data gathering efforts or costing
         of damages. In an ideal case, the role of the environmental experts in the PDNA team is to verify from other
         sectors if the relevant environmental issue has been factored in and prompt and support them to do so if they
         have not. However, it is more common that other sectors are too busy concentrating on their “core” issues and
         environment and other cross-cutting themes are not given any attention. So environmental experts should be
         prepared to undertake assessment of these issues themselves and provide damage, loss and recovery figures to
         other sectors. Such an approach, in practice, gives a better chance for environmental issues to be factored into
         the final report.

         Table 3 is an indicative list of issues most likely to be dealt with by other sectors.




14   |   ENVIRONMENT
         Table 3. Sectoral Integration of Environmental Issues

             Sl #                        Environmental Issue                                           Sectoral Overlaps
              1        Surface/groundwater pollution                                Water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
              2        Disaster waste management                                    Infrastructure/Early Recovery/Employment
              3        Healthcare waste management                                  Health
              4        Damage to mangroves/wetlands                                 Agriculture
              5        Damage to forests, soils                                     Agriculture and forestry
              6        Waste management centers                                     Waste management systems Infrastructure
              7        Sewage systems and sewage treatment plants                   Wastewater management Infrastructure
              8        Solid and liquid wastes from camps                           WASH/ camp coordination
              9        Damaged facilities of environmental sector                   Infrastructure
             10        Environmental pollution from damaged industrial facilities   Labour/Infrastructure
             11        World Heritage sites and national parks                      Culture

         Yet another cross-cutting issue is the environmental footprint of relief operations. There are a number of human-
         itarian and relief-related activities that are commonly undertaken during the early recovery phase which may,
         in turn, have an impact on the state of the environment. Setting up of camps for survivors produces significant
         sanitation issues and support for housing may increase the extraction of timber from forests in the locality. Spe-
         cific attention needs to be given to these impacts. Some other relief-related environmental impacts to consider
         during the assessment are listed below:

         	   a.	 Over-extraction of ground water aquifers as a coping strategy;

         	   b.	Unsustainable supply of shelter materials like burnt bricks (with firewood extracted from forests) or
                 excessive or ill-managed quarrying;

         	   c.	 Unsustainable use of timber for construction and fuel wood;

         	   d.	 Land degradation and soil erosion, due to a distress-driven cultivation strategy;

         	   e.	Selection of inappropriate sites for temporary shelter, which may increase the likely of landslides,
                 water stagnation, etc.;

         	   f.	 Solid waste disposal from the camps without proper treatment;

         	      Selection of inappropriate or energy-intensive systems such as a large number of small-scale diesel
             g.	
                generators for electricity; and

         	   h.	Impacts associated with reconstruction and repair to damaged infrastructure (e.g. deforestation,
                 quarrying, waste pollution) without due environmental controls applicable in normal times.




15   |   ENVIRONMENT
         THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY
         SECTOR RECOVERY VISION (RATIONALE FOR THE SECTOR)
         ‘Build back greener’ should be the main thrust of the vision of PDNA-Environment. Stakeholder consultations
         have to be an important part of this envisioning exercise. This is discussed in the following section.

         STAKEHOLDERS’ CONSULTATION
         Engaging with a broad range of people—from decision-makers in line ministries to affected people who have a
         direct dependency on certain natural resources—is a fundamental part of the ENA process. Some consultation
         will naturally occur during the site assessment work, but given the importance of making sure that peoples’ own
         voices and experiences are recorded, and their immediate and specific needs identified, special attention is given
         to this phase of work. Consultations are also an essential opportunity to ensure that all members of the affected
         society have an opportunity to contribute to the early recovery process, while at the same time ensuring that
         cross-cutting issues such as gender are properly addressed.

         The core team should hold initial consultations with leaders from the affected communities and the officials of
         local authorities to explain the purpose of the ENA, to record their views and opinions on the issues being dis-
         cussed, and to seek their approval and advice on how to proceed. Special attention should be given to ensure
         that women’s leaders/groups are also contacted at this stage.

         Additional meetings should be arranged with a broad representation of local stakeholders from within com-
         munities, NGOs active in the region, and others, at times and venues suitable to them. For this, the core team
         is likely to be split into smaller groups in order to be more time-efficient. Further meetings will also need to be
         arranged with local authorities and line ministries, as necessary and appropriate. The latter, for example, will be
         necessary in relation to considerations regarding future needs and options for early recovery, as it might relate
         to the environment and ecosystem services. It is possible that there are other assessments ongoing in the field
         concurrently with the PDNA and engagement of such assessment teams is also important.

         Women, men, boys and girls are differently affected by disasters. They may face different disasters risks and have
         different capacities and resources on which to draw to respond and cope. In general, women and girls are more
         vulnerable to disasters due to low education, limited access to resources and economic options, differences in
         mobility, and entrenched discrimination, among other factors. Compounding these factors is the dependence
         of many women on natural resources for their livelihoods. Women tend to do most of the agricultural work and
         provide energy (e.g. fuel wood) and water for their families. Disaster impact on natural resources such as agri-
         cultural land and clean water can create an extra burden on women and girls and generate secondary threats
         where women and girls may need to walk longer distances to access clean water or fetch fuel wood.

         Therefore disasters impacting directly on local livelihoods, and natural resources upon which women depend,
         can have a disastrous effect on women. It is imperative that while assessing factors such as the access to
         goods and services, the need for rebuilding livelihood systems, reducing the impact of future risks, and for
         restoring institutions that manage environment/natural resources, care should be taken explicitly consider the
         gender issues. Gender differences are also evident in the local use and management of natural resources and
         livelihood strategies. Often elderly women have critical local knowledge on managing community natural

16   |   ENVIRONMENT
         resources and after disasters. Capturing women’s voices during environmental PDNA may also reveal hidden
         livelihoods that are dependent and yet not directly linked to natural resources. These include fish processing
         and small cottage industries.

         In addition to gender-sensitive consultations, efforts should also be made to address the specific vulnerable
         and socially marginalised sub-groups of the population living in or around natural resources where appli-
         cable. These sub-groups include people with disabilities, religious minorities, class/caste/ethnic minorities,
         indigenous people etc. Due to discrimination, vulnerable sub-groups also face inequitable access, use and
         management of resources.

         Going along the lines of building back better, sustainable management of natural resources and resilience to
         disasters can only be achieved if all members of society are included and participate in the management of re-
         sources before and after disasters. In addition, addressing these social issues may also create opportunities and
         lay the foundation for the affected country or community to address gender and social inequalities in the access,
         use and management of natural resources.

         RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILD BACK BETTER
         Post-disaster geographical and political settings offer opportunities to build back greener. There are multiple
         opportunities to be kept in mind:

         	   a.	 Utilisation of greener building materials and energy sources for reconstruction;

         	   b.	 Changing to cleaner production technologies in damaged industries;

         	   c.	 Establishing better urban services, such as landfills and sewage collection and treatment systems; and

         	   d.	 Promoting ecosystem-based approaches to disaster risk reduction.

         Sustainable natural resource management can be promoted as a disaster risk reduction strategy. Healthy and
         diverse ecosystems are more resilient to hazards. For example, reforestation: forests provide shelterbelts and
         windbreaks, and protect against landslides, floods, and trees stabilise riverbanks and mitigate soil erosion. Wet-
         lands serve to store water, provide storm protection, flood mitigation, and erosion control, etc. Proactively using
         ecosystems as a disaster reduction measure through improved land use planning should also be considered.

         While post-disaster environmental settings will always have resource scarcity and competing priorities, it is also
         the time when government, donor and NGO attention are focused on the location. This should be leveraged to
         ensure a build back greener strategy. The PDNA process should facilitate this by highlighting the opportunities
         and costing them in at an early stage.

         Reconstruction needs in environment may be categorised as follows:

         REBUILDING OF NATURAL ASSETS
         Forests or coral reefs or mangroves damaged as part of the disaster may have to rebuilt, or atmospheric pollution
         brought down. The pre-disaster levels on each of these items should be known from the baseline data, and
         bringing back to that level could be the first objective. However, as noted, there could be many opportunities to
         build back greener and these should be explored.



17   |   ENVIRONMENT
         RESTORING THE ACCESS TO ENVIRONMENTAL GOODS AND SERVICES
         As noted earlier, environmental damages associated with disaster could lead to the disruption of access to
         environmental goods and services, and the recovery strategy should include measures to restore the access.
         Some examples of such goods/services are listed in Table 4. The fieldwork and consultations carried out as
         part of PDNA should see whether the disaster has affected the access to such goods and services. If so, there
         is a need for two responses: (a) costing (and provisioning) of the substitutes to the affected population until
         the recovery of the natural resource/environment; and (b) planning (and working towards) the recovery of
         natural resources/environment, keeping in mind the rebuilding of the access of women and men to such en-
         vironmental goods and services.

         Table 4. Restoring Access to Environmental/Natural Goods and Services

               Type of Disaster         Restoring Access to Environmental Goods          Restoring Access to Environmental Service
           Hurricane/Cyclone/Typhoon   • Access to fishing grounds/loss of fish stocks    Access to eco/natural tourism sites including
                                                                                         •
                                                                                          beaches
                                       • Access to fresh water
                    Tsunami            • Access to fresh water                           • Access to beaches
                                       • Access to fishing grounds


                  Earthquake           • Access to common property resources              Access to natural systems that provide
                                                                                         •
                                                                                          environmental services
                                                                                          Access to man-made systems that help
                                                                                         •
                                                                                          controlling environmental damage/pollution
                       Flood           • Access to fresh water                            Access to natural and man-made barriers that
                                                                                         •
                                                                                          offer protection from soil and water erosion
                Volcanic eruption       Access to forests and common property
                                       •                                                 Access to man-made system that regulates
                                                                                         •
                                        resources                                         environmental damage
                   Landslide            Access to forests and common property
                                       •
                                        resources
                    Drought            • Access to common property
                   Forest fires        • Access to forest and wildlife habitat




                  Sandstorms           • Access to common property
                   Forest fires         Loss of forests and common property
                                       •                                                • Regeneration of forests
                                        resources (CPR)
                  Sandstorms           • Loss of CPR                                     • Regeneration of CPR

         RESTORATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES THAT SUPPORT LIVELIHOOD SYSTEMS
         The damage to the environment/natural resources due to a disaster could have destroyed certain livelihood sys-
         tems, and their restoration cannot be done without rebuilding the concerned/environment base. For example,
         common properties or rural forests could be providing some inputs (like non-timber forest products) to sustain
         the livelihood of the people living nearby. If the farming depended on the natural manure collected from the
         common property resources (CPR), the restoration of farming needs to take into account the loss in this regard.
         There could be two issues here: restoration of farming as part of post-disaster rebuilding should take into ac-
         count the non-availability of enough vegetative matter (as manure) in nearby areas for the time being. Secondly,
         a complete/sustainable restoration of farming is possible only after rebuilding the lost CPR. This may require

18   |   ENVIRONMENT
         some more investments and time beyond which farming can be restored with provision or arrangements for
         man-made inputs (say in place of vegetative matter). Or the provision of arrangement for man-made inputs
         should be continued until the restoration of the CPR. A similar situation may arise with regard to many other
         livelihood systems. The loss of, or disturbance to, fishing grounds due to coastal disasters such as typhoons or
         tsunamis are other examples. Some of these livelihood issues and restoration needs are mentioned in Table 5.

         Linkages with other PDNA teams become critical during the analysis of the environmental goods and services
         disrupted by the disaster and the recovery-planning phase. For instance, the impact on the fish processing liveli-
         hoods of poor women (who may not necessarily need to access fishing grounds) and the link to the environmen-
         tal resources may be missed because the impact only becomes evident during a value chain analysis.

         Table 5. Restoration of the Environment/Natural Resources to Address Livelihoods

                 Type of Disaster                      Impact on Livelihoods                             Restoration Need
             Hurricane/Cyclone/Typhoon   Impact on fishing                                • Understanding the changes in fishing grounds
                                         Impact on tourism                                • Allowing natural rebuilding
                                                                                           Artificial rebuilding without creating further
                                                                                          •
                                                                                           environmental damage
                     Tsunami             Impact on recreation
                    Earthquake           Impact on all livelihoods that use CPR            Understand the contribution of CPR
                                                                                          •
                                         including forests                                 to livelihoods
                                         Secondary damage of resources, e.g.               Alternative arrangement until CPR
                                                                                          •
                                         disposal of disaster debris in river              is regenerated
                                                                                          • Strategies to regenerate CPR
                       Flood             Breaking of natural erosion barriers affecting   • Creation of man-made barriers
                                         farming/fishing operations                       • Possible regeneration of natural barriers


                 Volcanic eruption       Impact on all livelihoods that use common         Understand the contribution of
                                                                                          •
                                         property resources including forests              CPR to livelihoods
                                                                                           Alternative arrangement until CPR
                                                                                          •
                                                                                           is regenerated
                                                                                          • Strategies to regenerate CPR
                     Landslide           Impact on agricultural livelihoods, loss of
                                         natural resources
                     Drought             Overuse of CPR leading to its destruction        Rebuilding CPR using its original diversity
                                         Loss of species/crops suitable for
                                         a specific environment
                    Forest fires         Loss of forests and CPR                          Regeneration of forests
                    Sandstorms           Loss of CPR                                      Regeneration of CPR

         RESTORING GOVERNANCE MECHANISMS
         The relevant strategies in this regard may include:

         	       Restoring physical resources including infrastructure, vehicles, equipment, data gathering systems, data
              a.	
                 records of the institutions, such as Ministry of Environment, National Parks Authority and Waste Man-
                 agement Department and other government institutions dealing with environment;




19   |   ENVIRONMENT
         	    b.	 Rebuilding staff capacity at the institutions of environmental governance; and

         	    c.	 Rebuilding capability to enforce legislation.

         REDUCING ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
         As mentioned, disasters and associated environmental damages can increase future risks. These increased risks
         arising out of disasters have to be considered part of recovery planning. In certain cases, even if these risks can-
         not be averted, the potential damages associated with them can be reduced. If the destruction of mangroves
         has increased the risks of coastal erosion, regulations could be introduced or existing ones reinforced on the
         use of coastal areas for habitation, which may reduce the number of people likely to be affected in the event
         of any future disasters.

         On the other hand, one could use healthy ecosystems as defence against natural hazards. This can be done
         by enhancing an existing ecosystem, restoring a damaged one, or building in an ecosystem as part of the land
         use planning to defend against disaster risks. Investing in enhancing ecosystems for disaster risk reduction is a
         no-regret strategy while building a new ecosystem defence would need significant research into its suitability
         and alternatives. A few such cases are listed in Table 6.

         Table 6. Increased Risks Associated with Disasters and Strategies to be Considered in Recovery

                 Type of Disaster                  Impact on Livelihoods                Possible Strategies to Reduce Impact
             Hurricane/Cyclone/Typhoon   • Coastal erosion                         Coastal zone regulations
                     Tsunami
                    Earthquake           • Landslide                               Settlement and building regulations
                       Flood             • Epidemic, erosion                       Water/Drainage management planning
                 Volcanic eruption       • Forest fire; drought                    Settlement regulation; early warning systems
                     Landslide           • Soil erosion                            Erosion control practices; settlement regulation
                     Drought             • Forest fire; sandstorms                 Protection of forests and natural barriers
                     Epidemic            • Water pollution                         Effective enforcement of pollution control
                    Forest fires         • Landslides                              Reforestation


         THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN 	
         PRIORITISING AND SEQUENCING RECOVERY NEEDS
         The recovery program should consist of measures that help to restore people’s abilities to reach their full
         potential to lead productive, creative lives in accordance with their needs and interests. This assessment should
         then lead to the following prioritisation of the needs for environmental rebuilding based on the impacts and
         extent of losses:

         	    •	Plan for environmental rebuilding, including the estimation of the costs and details of implementation
                 and monitoring of the planned projects;

         	    •	A forward looking plan that aims to "Build Back Better," by integrating sustainable environmental prac-
                 tices and natural resource management within recovery programming and across the relevant relief and
                 recovery clusters. A strategic baseline data that could eventually feed into a monitoring and evaluation
                 system to track implementation of environmental recovery interventions;

20   |   ENVIRONMENT
         	   •	Finding opportunities to re-orient livelihoods along sustainable pathways using environmentally sound
                construction practices and/or alternative energy options, by identifying ecosystem restoration require-
                ments and by mainstreaming disaster risk reduction;

         	   •	Providing an understanding of the specific vulnerabilities that women and other sub-groups in
                the communities face, and identifying their capacities and needs to engage in the environmental
                recovery process.

         The results of the effects and impact of the events and needs arising from this assessment may be presented
         the stakeholders, and, through this process, a recovery strategy may be developed within a consultative pro-
         cess. Key stakeholders in the national and regional governments, the international community and local areas
         affected by the disaster should be consulted. Active support and participation from these stakeholders is critical
         for successful implementation of the recovery plan as national and local groups will be the ones implementing
         the recovery plan. These stakeholders can be consulted via individual interviews, small group discussions, joint
         seminars with civil society representatives (communities, women’s associations, private sector organisations,
         etc.), or national workshops.

         The recovery strategy for the environmental sector should strive to ‘build back greener’ together with enhancing
         the resilience of the natural/environmental systems. This implies not only the reconstruction of physical assets,
         but also restoration of systems, processes and functions.

         The recovery strategy for the environment sector follows the guiding principles, objectives and consultative
         process of the overall PDNA as outlined in Volume A. As such the sector recovery strategy will include the fol-
         lowing core components:

         	   a.	 Outline of recovery needs, based on results of the assessment;

         	   b.	 The agreed vision and guiding principles for the overall recovery process of the sector;

         	   c.	 Outline of results-based recovery plan for the environment; and

         	   d.	 Outline of implementation arrangements.

         COSTING	
         New projects or new programs have to be planned to minimise the actual or potential environmental threats.
         Cleaning up of polluted water bodies or additional measures that are taken to reduce further soil erosion, etc.,
         come under this category. There may be certain cases where the mitigating environmental impact can be much
         costlier than the benefits of such action. In such cases, there can be alternative arrangements to mitigate those
         losses. For example, if some agricultural land is already contaminated with some pollutants, and if decontamina-
         tion procedure to make it fully re-cultivable is costlier than the benefits of future cultivation, then the cultivators
         may be supported for alternative livelihood options.

         The economic assessment of damage and changes in flows may provide some insights into the needs for recov-
         ery and reconstruction and their costs. For each of the environmental effects identified, the need for remedial
         action has to be specified and the costs of these remedial actions have to be estimated. In estimating costs, du-
         plication has to be avoided. Though there are multiple environmental effects of each event, such as soil erosion
         or loss of wildlife habitat due to deforestation, the remedial action of ‘afforestation’ can address a number of
         such effects, albeit partially.
21   |   ENVIRONMENT
         The costing should also take into account the rebuilding of environment/natural resources so that people’s access
         to environmental goods and services and their livelihoods that have depended on these natural/environmental
         systems can be restored. This is to be carried out in cases where such restoration is cost-effective and also where
         such rebuilding of environment is required for ecological needs. The cost of rebuilding institutions for the sus-
         tainable management of the resources/environment, and the strategies and programs needed to reduce future
         risks also have to be estimated.

         All the net costs (listed in the last column of Table 7) can be added after considering the possibilities of dupli-
         cation. For example, the project to control coastal erosion could be beneficial for the restoration of coral reefs
         too, and in that case it should not be counted for the second time. A typical costing example for recovery after
         a hurricane is presented in Table 7.

         Table 7. Final Tabulation of Cost of Recovery

                        Effect                         Value of Change in                    Restoration Cost (B)              Net Costs
                                                        Economic Flows
          Destruction of vegetation cover      Value of short-term revenue lost          Restoration costs (B1)          A1+B1 or A1+A2,
                                               (until restoration) A1                                                    whichever is less
          Mudslides                                                                Restoration costs (B2)
                                               Value of long-term revenue lost (in Restoration costs (B3)                A3+B2
          Saltwater intrusion to freshwater
                                               the event of no restoration) A2                                           A4+ B3 or A4+A5,
          reservoirs                                                               Restoration costs (B4)
                                               Value of short-term losses (until                                         whichever is less
          Damage to offshore coral reefs and                                       Removal cost (B5)
                                               restoration) A3                                                           B4
          natural coastal defence mechanisms
                                             Value of short-term revenue losses          Cost for allowing the habitat
          Waste (some of which may be                                                                                    B5
                                             + higher operational costs (until           to regenerate (B6)
          hazardous) and debris accumulation                                                                             B6
                                             restoration) A4                             Implementation of erosion
          Impact on wildlife habitat                                                     control mechanisms (B7)         A6+B7
                                             Value of long-term loss of revenue
          Increased soil erosion             (in the event no restoration) A5            Restoration costs (B8)          A7+B8 or A7+A8,
          Soil contamination from saline       Value of short-term loss of income                                        whichever is less
          water                                (until long-term control) A6                                              A9
          Secondary impacts by temporarily     Value of short-term loss of income                                        A10 or A11, whichever
          displaced people                     (until restoration) A7                                                    is less
          Access to fishing grounds/loss of    Value of long-term costs associated                                       A12 or A13, whichever
          fish stocks                          with relocation(in the event no                                           is less
          Access to freshwater                 restoration) A8
                                               Additional costs to see that
                                               environmental impact of
                                               temporarily displaced people is
                                               minimal (A9)
                                               Cost of providing access (A10)
                                               or value of lost revenue to
                                               unavailability of access/stock until it
                                               is rebuilt naturally (A11)
                                               Cost of providing access (A12) or
                                               Cost of provision of freshwater until
                                               access is rebuilt naturally (A13)




22   |   ENVIRONMENT
                         Effect                  Value of Change in            Restoration Cost (B)             Net Costs
                                                  Economic Flows
          Rebuilding institutions                                          Costs of (re)building the      B9
                                                                           institution and its renewed    B10
          Norms/rules regulating access to
                                                                           enforcement (B9)
          fishing grounds                                                                                 B11
                                                                           Costs of (re)building the
          Norms regulating access to other
                                                                           institution and its renewed
          CPR
                                                                           enforcement (B10)
          Reduction in future risks
                                                                           Cost of making and enforcing
          Coastal zone regulations                                         coastal zone regulations
                                                                           (including the capacity
                                                                           building) (B11)


         IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS	
         IMPLEMENTATION RESPONSIBILITIES
         The recommendations of the environmental recovery need to be implemented by two sets of actors. Primarily,
         the recovery actions will happen in the main productive and social sectors, such as Forestry, Agriculture, Housing
         etc. There will also be some action, such as cleanup of contamination hotspots and restoration of environmental
         infrastructure, which will need to be undertaken by the environmental actors themselves. Both government and
         non-government actors will be involved.

         MONITORING OF RECOVERY
         Monitoring of the recovery of the environmental issues should be mainstreamed into the productive and social
         sectors. Depending on the nature of impact, direct measurements, in the field, as well as remotely, could be
         done to monitor environmental recovery.

         COORDINATION
         Regardless of which actor, government or private, national or local, is implementing recovery, it is important
         that the activities are coordinated. Once again there is no one-size-fits-all model for this. While the traditional
         approach is to leave this responsibility to the established national institutions, since the Indonesian tsunami the
         model of having a dedicated institution established to coordinate recovery has received increased appreciation.

         FINANCING RECOVERY
         Post-disaster situations open up a range of national and international funding options for recovery. Funding
         could be available both as loans or grants and also often as technical assistance. Private sector investments are
         yet another source of funding in post-crisis situations.

         KEY CHALLENGES
         While there is increased appreciation of the environmental impacts of disasters and the environmental im-
         perative of recovery, the reality is that no recovery is fully funded. In such a sub-optimal situation, non-urgent
         items get pushed back. For example, when there is not adequate funding for health sector recovery, a hospital
         rebuilding will get priority over refurbishing the incinerator. In the long run, of course under-investment in the
         environmental sector will lead to accumulation of disaster risk. The key challenge of the environmental sector
         is to advocate to the stakeholders the importance of longer-term perspectives while dealing with the desire for
         immediate recovery.


23   |   ENVIRONMENT
         This is also played out in the overriding of environmental controls during rapid phases of recovery and recon-
         struction. Conventional controls such as environmental impact assessments, and due processes associated with
         it, will be seen as a nuisance, hindrances to recovery and time-consuming. Often, such processes are overruled
         in favor of achieving rapid and visible recovery. Such short-term vision endangers the recovery itself.




         REFERENCES
         United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and Cluster Working Group for Early recovery,
         Environmental Needs Assessments in Post-Disaster Settings, March 2008, UNEP.

         European Commission on Latin American and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Handbook for estimating
         the Socioeconomic and Environmental Effects of Disasters, ECLAC and Inter-American Development
         Bank, 2003, Washington.




24   |   ENVIRONMENT
         ANNEXES
         ANNEX 1. SCOPING CHECKLIST
            Sl #                                  Country
             1         Nature of Disaster
             2         Name and Intensity if Known
             3         Disaster Date/Period
             4         Key Disaster Statistics
                       Number of people killed, by sex and age
                       Number of people injured, by sex and age
                       Number of people displaced, by sex and age
             5         Area Impacted
                       Major Cities
                       Provinces/States/Prefectures
                       Offshore locations
                       Offsite locations impacted
                       Neighboring countries impacted
             6         Key Environmental Issues
             6a        Emergency Issues
                       Reports of oil/chemical spills/fires
                       Impact on industrial facilities
                       Impact on chemical stores/ food warehouses/fuel depots
             6b        Impact on Natural Environment
                       Impact on forests, if yes, location(s)
                       Impact on rivers, if yes, location(s)
                       Impact on lakes, if yes, locations
                       Impact on coastlines, if yes, location(s)
                       Impact on mangroves/wetlands
                       Impact on mountains/hills, if yes, location(s)
                       Impact on national parks
             6c        Impact on Man-made Environment-Related
                       Infrastructure
                       Power stations
                       Sewage treatment plants
                       Waste management centers
                       Urban water supply systems




25   |   ENVIRONMENT
               Sl #                            Country
                7      Institutional Systems
                       Ministry in charge of environmental governance
                       Other ministries involved in Environmental Sector
                       Focal agency for emergency response
                       Focal agency for environmental emergency response
                       Major national NGOs in the environmental area
                       Major international NGOs in environmental area
                8      UN/WB Involvement
                       Was there an UNDAC mission deployed?
                       Was a cluster system rolled out?
                       Previous PDNA experience in country
                9      PDNA Related Information
                       Counterpart ministry of PDNA
                       Leading agency for PDNA
                       Duration of PDNA
                       Funding for PDNA


         ANNEX 2. FIELD CHECKLIST
         COVER SHEET

         	     Date of visit (dd/mm/yy)

         	     Team members                                                               	


         	     LOCATION (to be completed with interviewer’s observation)

         	     City                                   State                Area/Village

         	     Significance

         	     GPS Coordinates

         	     Access Constraints (if any)

         	     Reference of Photographs Taken



         	     PERSONS CONTACTED

         	     Name

         	Sex:				                              Age

             	 Affiliation


26   |   ENVIRONMENT
         	     Address

         	     Mobile Phone Number



         	     DATA RECEIVED

         	     Reports

         	     Maps

         	     Photographs

         	     Satellite Images



         	     DATA PROMISED

         	     Type of Data Promised

             	 Name of Person

         	     Affiliation

         	     Mobile Phone Number

         	     When is the data supposed to be received



         	     Remarks

         	

         	

         	




27   |   ENVIRONMENT
         SAMPLE TECHNICAL CHECKLIST (TO BE DEVELOPED BASED ON THE SPECIFIC CONTEXT)

                         ISSUE                                                            REMARKS
          Industrial hotspots                    e.g. Environmental pollution from a factory due to chemical spills during flooding
          Type of chemical released
          Quantity if known
          Death
          Injuries
          Surface area impacted
          Is the groundwater impacted
          Has the chemical leaked to
          neighbouring water bodies?
          Have neighbouring farms been
          impacted?
          Preventive measures taken
          Restoration plans ready?
          Estimated economic loss
          of materials (if known)
          Estimate production loss (if known)
          Clean-up costs (if known)


                         ISSUE                                                            REMARKS
          Natural resources                      e.g. Forest fires along hill-side
          Surface area impacted
          Death (sex and age)
          Injuries (sex and age)
          Extend of damage (in %)
          Have neighbouring farms
          been impacted?
          Major functions of the forest
          prior to the incident
          Logging/tourism/
          Non -timber products
          Did the community have access
          to the site?
          Is the access of community
          now restricted?
          Were there forestry/tourism-
          associated buildings/infrastructure?
          Preventive measures taken
          Restoration plans ready?
          Estimated loss of timber
          Estimated loss of infrastructure
          Annual income from productive
          services from the forest
          Annual income from recreational
          services from the forest
          Estimated cost of restoration
          (if known)


28   |   ENVIRONMENT
                           ISSUE                                                         REMARKS
          Man-made environmental                 Visit to the municipal waste management facility
          infrastructure
          Degree of impact (zero to severe)
          Death of staff (at site/off site) +
          sex and age
          Injuries (at site or off site) +
          sex and age
          Capacity of the facility
          (tons per day)
          Loss to infrastructure at site
          or off site (list)
          Is the facility operational?
          Is the facility working at
          full capacity, less or more?
          (Provide % figures)
          Has there been modification of
          operating procedures? (If yes, list)
          Is there an increase in cost of
          services passed on to the customer?
          (If yes, give % figures)
          Are there restrictions placed on
          the types of wastes/quantities that
          could be disposed of? (If yes, list)
          Estimated loss of infrastructure
          Loss/increase of revenue
          since disaster
          Key requirements for restoration/
          increasing capacity




29   |   ENVIRONMENT
                           ISSUE                                                             REMARKS
          Institutions for environmental              Visit to the Ministry of Environment
          governance
          Number of offices (total)
          Number of offices in the
          impacted area
          Total number of staff (total)
          Number of staff (in impacted area)
          Death of staff, if any (at site/off site)
          Injuries, if any (at site or off site)
          Infrastructure damage
          Buildings (# and %)
          Monitoring networks (# and %)
          Labouratories (# and %)
          Changes in environmental controls
          requested since the disaster
          Disruption to normal operation
          due to disaster
          Is there an environmental
          emergency department?
          Is the ministry involved in post-
          disaster response and recovery?
          If yes, number of staff deployed
          Emergency budget released
          Post-disaster needs of the ministry
          Infrastructure
          Building ((details, estimated cost)
          Labouratory (details, estimated cost)
          Monitoring network
          (details, estimated cost)
          Databases (details, estimated cost)
          Equipment
          For emergency response
          For supporting additional workload
          Human resources
          Staff redeployment (#s, cost)
          Temporary recruitment (#, cost)
          Overtime (#, cost)
          Additional training (details, cost)




30   |   ENVIRONMENT
         ANNEX 3. COMMON AND RECURRENT NATURAL DISASTERS AND SOME ENVIRON-
         MENT-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
            TYPE OF                    PRIMARY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT                                     SECONDARY IMPACT
            DISASTER
            Hurricane/     •L  oss of vegetation cover and damage to natural landscapes     Impact on wildlife habitat
                                                                                            •
             Cyclone/      •S  hort-term heavy rains and flooding of inland                 Increased soil erosion
                                                                                            •
             Typhoon       • Mudslides                                                      Soil contamination from saline water
                                                                                            •
                           •S  altwater intrusion to underground fresh water reservoirs     Changed marine environment and its
                                                                                            •
                           •D  amage to offshore coral reefs and natural coastal            impact on coral reefs
                              defence mechanisms                                             Secondary impacts by temporarily
                                                                                            •
                           •W  aste (some of which may be hazardous) and                    displaced people
                              debris accumulation
                           •L  oss of productive systems, e.g. agriculture
             Tsunami       •
                            Water pollution through sewage overflow                          Contamination of groundwater reservoirs
                                                                                            •
                           •
                            Saline incursion                                                 Coastal erosion and/or beneficial deposition
                                                                                            •
                           •
                            Loss of coastal forest/plantations                               of sediment on beaches/small islands
                           •
                            Destruction of coral reefs                                       Secondary impacts by temporarily
                                                                                            •
                           •
                            Marine pollution from backflow of wave surge                     displaced people
                           •
                            Soil contamination                                               Damaged infrastructure as a possible
                                                                                            •
                                                                                             secondary environmental threat. e.g.
                            Waste accumulation–additional waste disposal sites required
                           •
                                                                                             tailing dams
            Earthquake      Damage to natural landscapes and vegetation
                           •                                                                Secondary impacts by temporarily
                                                                                            •
                           •
                            Possible mass flooding if dam infrastructure is weakened         displaced people
                            or destroyed                                                     Damaged infrastructure as a possible
                                                                                            •
                           •
                            Waste accumulation – additional waste disposal sites required    secondary environmental threat, e.g.
                                                                                             leakage from fuel storage facilities
                                                                                             Damage to industrial facilities resulting
                                                                                            •
                                                                                             in a toxic release
               Flood       • Water pollution through sewage overflow                        •Secondary impacts by temporarily
                           • River bank damage from erosion                                   displaced people
                           • Chemical releases from factories                               •Excessive siltation affecting marine
                                                                                              biodiversity
                                                                                            • Contamination of ground water
             Volcanic      • Loss of wildlife following gas release                         • Forest fires as a result of molten lava
             Eruption      • Toxic chemicals from eruption                                  •Secondary impacts by temporarily displaced
                           • Lahars                                                           people
                           • Toxic ash                                                      •Secondary flooding should rivers or valleys
                                                                                              be blocked by lava flow
                                                                                            •Damaged infrastructure as a possible
                                                                                              secondary environmental threat, e.g.
                                                                                              leakage from fuel storage facilities
             Landslide      Damaged infrastructure as a possible secondary environmental
                           •                                                                Impacts associated with reconstruction
                                                                                            •
                            threat, e.g. leakage from fuel storage facilities                and repair to damaged infrastructure (e.g.
                           •
                            Secondary impacts by temporarily displaced people                deforestation, quarrying, waste pollution)
             Drought        Loss of surface vegetation
                           •                                                                Increased migration
                                                                                            •
                            Loss of species
                           •                                                                Loss of biodiversity
                                                                                            •
             Epidemic       Loss of species
                           •                                                                Loss of biodiversity
                                                                                            •
                            Forced human displacement
                           •
                            Introduction of new species
                           •
            Forest Fires    Loss of forest and wildlife habitat
                           •                                                                Loss of ecosystem services
                                                                                            •
                            Loss of biodiversity
                           •                                                                Soil erosion
                                                                                            •
                            Air pollution from smoke and haze
                           •                                                                Secondary encroachment for settlement
                                                                                            •
                                                                                             or agriculture
           Sand Storms      Soil erosion
                           •                                                               • Desertification
31   |   ENVIRONMENT
