Eliminating
Deforestation
from
the Cocoa
Supply Chain
Eliminating Deforestation from the Cocoa
Supply Chain

For: The World Bank Group

March 2017

Authors:
Alan Kroeger
Haseebullah Bakhtary
Franziska Haupt
Charlotte Streck

Climate Focus North America Inc.
1730 Rhode Island Ave. NW #601
Washington DC 20036




                                           2
Contents


           Eliminating Deforestation from the
           Cocoa Supply Chain
           1.      Objective                                            7

           2.      Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain                   9
           2.1     Deforestation Driven by Cocoa Production            11
           2.2     Certification Schemes in the Cocoa Sector           15
           2.2.1   Market Penetration                                  15
           2.2.2   Certification Processes                             17
           2.2.3   Deforestation-related Requirements                  17
           2.2.4   Limitations and Strengths                           20

           3.      Tracking Progress of Efforts to
                   Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain   22
           3.1     Methodology                                         22
           3.2     Findings                                            25
           3.2.1   Commitments                                         26
           3.2.2   Implementation                                      30
           3.2.3   Enabling Environment                                35
           3.2.4   Impact on Forests                                   46

           4.      Lessons from Other Commodities                      48
           4.1     Exports and Emerging Markets                        48
           4.2     Certification and Multi-stakeholder Processes       49
           4.3     Landscape and Jurisdictional Approaches
                   and Produce-and-Protect Initiatives                 53
           4.4     Tracing                                             55

           5.      A Vision of Zero-Deforestation Cocoa                57
           5.1     Principles                                          57
           5.2     Strategies                                          58




                                                                            3
Executive
Summary

This report examines the cocoa supply chain, its associated deforestation,
and the role and limitations of certification schemes to reduce deforestation.
The deforestation-related commitments from cocoa companies are analyzed
across the value chain by looking at commitment types, implementation, and
the enabling environment. These findings are compared with lessons from
palm oil since it has the most similarities to cocoa due to its large contingent
of smallholder producers and limitations that exacerbate deforestation.
Finally, a vision for zero-deforestation cocoa with key principles and
strategies is described. This work is meant to inform industry, governments,
and development partners to be effective actors in a zero-deforestation
cocoa future.

The trajectory of deforestation due to cocoa production has remained upward
primarily because of rising demand for chocolate, decreasing production
capacity from aging cocoa trees, lack of good agricultural practices and the
shrinking suitable land area due to climate change. These factors create
further incentive to convert forests to farmlands for cocoa, which threatens
remaining forested and protected areas.

While cocoa production is historically a product of Latin America, it has now
concentrated in West Africa where the deforestation from cocoa is most
pronounced. Global production relies almost entirely on 5 – 6 million
smallholders, and beyond the smallholder production level the cocoa value
chain is highly concentrated among several traders, grinders and chocolate
producers. While the deforestation occurs at the smallholder level, it is the
companies, governments, and NGOs that need to take action due to the
limited technical and economic capacity of smallholders to enact the
necessary reforms on their own.

Certification schemes have emerged to address environmental and socio-
economic issues related to cocoa, including biodiversity loss and forest
conversion. This report examines the main three schemes: UTZ (a
sustainable farming initiative), Rainforest Alliance/Sustainable Agriculture
Network (RA/SAN), and Fairtrade International. The deforestation-related
requirements for these certification bodies contain important nuances that
determine the effectiveness and level of forest protection required by each
standard. These standard-specific details for forest protection are discussed
at length in the report. The strongest standard in terms of forest protection is
the RA/SAN, as its forest definition extends to all natural forests protecting
primary and secondary forests.

Even if the certification schemes all had strong forest protection they still
contain limitations. Certification has limited impact on addressing the
livelihood issue as farmers remain in poverty, the premiums remain


                                                                                4
unrealistically low, and all three standards lack equivalent criteria for forest
protection which creates sourcing complications for companies that use
certified cocoa purchases as their strategy to reduce deforestation.

The continued deforestation for cocoa is not sustainable for the industry in a
changing climate, and companies have taken some of the first steps to
improve the social and environmental footprint of their operations. Despite
their limitations, some companies are utilizing certification schemes that seek
to promote responsible practices, while others are relying on their own
community programs, in combination with certification, to support climate-
smart practices of smallholder farmers.

A stock-take of supply chain efforts to address deforestation from the cocoa
sector was conducted through surveys and interviews. In total 19 companies
were evaluated based on their deforestation-related commitments. The
companies include small and large bean-to-bar companies, traders and
grinders, chocolate producers, consumer goods manufacturers, and retail.
The findings are presented for each section of the value chain as a percent
of annual global cocoa production affected by each policy or activity.

There are six trader/grinder companies included in this assessment, and
collectively they trade and process 89% of annual global cocoa production.
One key finding is that four out of six companies - sourcing 73% of global
production - have made deforestation-related commitments with one of them
(sourcing 24%) committed to 100% sustainable sourcing by 2020 based on
both company-adopted principles and certification. The five chocolate
producers evaluated source 39% of annual cocoa production, and they all
have made deforestation-related commitments for cocoa either explicitly or
committed to source 100% sustainably certified cocoa by 2020.

Overall, many companies are concerned about the viable future for cocoa in
West Africa requiring transformational change in land and forest
management and current cocoa production practices. Their motivation is also
tied to productivity and environmental degradation that threatens the security
of cocoa production with runaway climate change.

Companies’ plans for addressing deforestation in cocoa includes numerous
interventions and processes. The training of farmers around avoiding
deforestation will continue, and many frame this intervention around
productivity through intensification and cocoa tree rehabilitation or replanting.
Also, companies plan to increase forest trees-on-farm at scale, promote
agroforestry systems, and push for the preservation of remaining forests. The
most critical issues that companies identified in addressing deforestation in
cocoa production included: land tenure, agricultural intensification,
deforestation awareness in local populations, and revenue diversification.
These issues are also apparent in palm oil and its smallholder producers,
and the lessons that can be drawn from smallholder palm oil are addressed
in Chapter 4 along with export markets, landscape approaches and
traceability initiatives.

The result of the company commitment stock-take and comparative analysis
with palm oil is a vision for zero-deforestation cocoa. This vision is summed
up in several overarching principles and key strategies that serve as the
cornerstones for a deforestation-free cocoa sector. The first principle is the
protection of all remaining natural primary and secondary forest. Also, legality

                                                                                   5
and transparency could also be a minimum requirement for all sustainability
initiatives. Furthermore, the zero-deforestation goal could be integrated into
long-term public and private sector strategies, and sustainability programs
could operate at scale through jurisdictional or landscape approaches.

The key strategies for operationalizing zero-deforestation cocoa includes
public-private cooperation whereby collective transformation is more
efficiently achieved through increased strategic alignment. Sustainable
finance is also necessary and the collective efforts by financial institutions,
producer and consumer country governments, and supply chain companies
will be required to develop effective financial mechanisms that work for local
producers to restore or replant their cocoa farms to increase productivity
without clearing forests.

There needs to be an emphasis on cocoa farm restoration and regeneration.
Then by supporting sustainable intensification backed by strong safeguards
these programs could become beneficiaries of climate finance and contribute
emission reductions to Nationally Determined Contributions. In addition,
more impact may be possible if new research and data collection are aligned
with zero-deforestation goals.

Finally, the World Cocoa Foundation program CocoaAction could explicitly
address the issue of deforestation, and use its platform to create zero-
deforestation criteria alignment amongst the certification and company
programs. These principles and strategies can be used to draft a global
action agenda to end deforestation in cocoa, but action in priority countries in
West Africa should be fast-tracked now. The next step in developing an
action framework would be to specify what type of preventative and/or
mitigation activities are appropriate for each region to ensure a sustainable
future in cocoa landscapes.




                                                                              6
Objective




            Objective
1.
            Cocoa has received less attention as a driver of deforestation than palm
            oil, soy, beef, or wood products. However, an increasing sensitivity toward
            deforestation driven by cocoa, combined with an awareness of productivity
            and livelihood limitations of smallholder farming, has led to companies being
            increasingly active on sustainability issues. To address these sustainability
            issues, some companies have established their own cocoa programs —
            Mondelēz’s Cocoa Life Program or the Lindt & Sprüngli Farming Program —
            while others turned to certification or a hybrid combination of the two. Three
            major standards have emerged to fill that need: the UTZ sustainable farming
            initiative, Rainforest Alliance/Sustainable Agriculture Network (RA/SAN), and
            Fairtrade International.

            The World Cocoa Foundation (WCF) provides an umbrella for the
            various initiatives through CocoaAction. CocoaAction is a voluntary,
            industry-wide strategy that aligns the world’s leading cocoa and chocolate
            companies, origin governments, and key stakeholders on regional priority
            issues in cocoa sustainability. So far lacking a strategy on how to address
            deforestation in the cocoa supply chain, since mid-2016 WCF and
            CocoaAction have been working to develop that strategy. This report
            provides background on company commitments and formulates
            recommendations that may contribute to building this zero-deforestation
            strategy. It also provides the World Bank Group, origin governments and
            other development partners with principles that may help address
            deforestation from cocoa in collaboration with private sector actors in climate,
            forest and agricultural sustainability programs.


             Zero Deforestation: For the purposes of this report, the vision for deforestation-
             free cocoa means no forest areas are cleared or converted to produce cocoa.
             This will require the cocoa sector to agree on a forest definition for
             operationalizing their commitments. This could include adopting the high carbon
             stock methodology, defining carbon threshold cut-offs, and setting an industry-
             wide baseline for past deforestation.


            This report contains a stock-take of supply chain efforts to address
            deforestation from the cocoa sector. To do so, an assessment framework
            was developed to evaluate the status quo of supply chain efforts in the cocoa
            sector, including certification standards and company projects and programs.
            We complement this analysis by drawing data and information from surveys
            and interviews with cocoa companies, supply-chain experts and advisors.
            After reviewing the current projects and best practices for sustainable cocoa,
            we provide an analysis of lessons learned from other supply chains; other


                                                                                                  7
Objective



            commodities linked to deforestation — such as palm oil — share
            characteristics with cocoa. These similarities include smallholder production
            with productivity gaps, and shared concerns that sustainability requirements,
            without proper support, will infringe upon their ability to maintain or increase
            production. Identifying these cross-sectoral issues enables us to learn from
            and avoid these issues by pre-emptively addressing them in the guidance we
            develop for a deforestation-free cocoa sector.
            The analysis of cocoa supply chain efforts and lessons learned from
            other commodities allows for the development of recommendations
            and a first set of high-level principles that will serve as the foundation
            for defining sustainable and deforestation-free cocoa. These principles
            are universal and refer to the cocoa sector as a whole. We recognize that
            there is a large variance in cocoa production systems and deforestation-
            related challenges. It is therefore recommended to take the formulated
            principles as starting work for further work that would focus on regional
            standards and criteria.
            This report is structured as follows: based on a literature review and
            enhanced with expert interviews, Chapter 2 sets the context for the
            assignment, providing an overview of the cocoa supply chain and of the
            central issues that impair its sustainable development. It also summarizes the
            most recent information available on deforestation and hotspot countries.
            In addition, we provide an overview of existing certification schemes that
            include deforestation-related requirements. We compare their coverage,
            processes and requirements, and provide an assessment of their strengths
            and limitations with a focus on their ability to address deforestation. Chapter
            3 takes stock of company’s efforts to eliminate deforestation from their supply
            chain. In the first section, we introduce our methodology, based on an
            assessment framework for evaluating progress, and build on the previous
            work of the progress assessment of the New York Declaration on Forest.1
            In the second section, we present our findings. In Chapter 4 we discuss
            general lessons from efforts in other supply chains, with a focus on
            smallholder palm oil as the most comparable commodity. In Chapter 5 we
            translate our findings and the identified needs for a harmonized standard into
            initial recommendations and a first set of principles for sustainable,
            deforestation-free cocoa.




            1
                www.forestdeclaration.org


                                                                                          8
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                     Overview
2.                                   of the Cocoa
                                     Supply Chain

                                     Cocoa (Theobroma cacao) is a tropical tree cultivated and harvested for
                                     its beans, the raw material for cocoa liquor and butter, which are the
                                     main ingredients for chocolate.

                                     While cocoa production is historically a product of Latin America, it has
                                     now concentrated in Africa; where it supplies more than two-thirds of
                                     global cocoa, with the majority produced by Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana. In
                                     addition, Cameroon, Nigeria, and other countries in the Congo Basin are
                                     significant producers in Africa. In Asia, cocoa is primarily produced in
                                     Indonesia, the world’s third largest producer; in Latin America, Brazil is the
                                     fourth largest global producer. Given the market potential as well as
                                     productivity declines in some West African countries — a trend that is
                                     attributed to changing climate, soil degradation, prevalence of pests and
                                     diseases, aging plantations and political instability — Latin American
                                     producers are expected to play an increasingly important role, with Brazil and
                                     Ecuador among the top producers (see Table 1).


Table 1. International Cocoa
Organization 2015 – 16 production             ICCO 2015 – 16 FORECAST: COCOA PRODUCTION IN TONS2
forecast
                                         COUNTRY                                                                         TONS OF COCOA
                                         Côte d'Ivoire                                                                               1,570,000
                                         Ghana                                                                                         820,000
                                         Indonesia                                                                                     330,000
                                         Cameroon                                                                                      250,000
                                         Ecuador                                                                                       230,000
                                         Nigeria                                                                                       190,000
                                         Brazil                                                                                        135,000
                                         Papua New Guinea                                                                                36,000
                                         Other countries, Africa                                                                       112,000
                                         Other countries, Americas                                                                     274,000
                                         Other countries, Asia                                                                           42,000
                                         TOTAL                                                                                       3,989,000




                                     2
                                      ICCO, International Cocoa Organization (2016). Quarterly Bulletin of Cocoa Statistics, Vol. XLII, No. 3,
                                     Cocoa year 2015/16. https://www.icco.org/about-us/international-cocoa-agreements/cat_view/30-related-
                                     documents/46-statistics-production.html


                                                                                                                                                 9
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                     From the bean to the final chocolate product, the cocoa supply chain
                                     involves various steps and multiple actors from local smallholder to
                                     retailers (see Figure 1). The supply chain segments for companies
                                     examined in this report starts with trader/grinders who buy the beans and
                                     begin initial processing of cocoa liquor for exporting, and they may also be
                                     involved in processing cocoa liquor for cocoa powder or butter. The next
                                     company category in the supply chain are the chocolate producers that
                                     source from the trader/grinders and either process cocoa liquor for cocoa
                                     powder and butter or they source those processed ingredients to create
                                     mixes, fillings, and couverture. Then at the tail end are the manufacturers for
                                     consumer goods and then retailers for consumers. There are also those
                                     companies that occupy the complete supply chain from sourcing the cocoa
                                     beans all the way to the final manufacturing of chocolate products – these
                                     companies are referred to as bean-to-bar companies.

                                     The processing of cocoa beans takes place across the globe, with 40%
                                     of cocoa beans ground and processed in Europe and the remaining
                                     60% of the market is shared among Africa, Asia and the Americas .
                                     Europe and North America dominate consumption with more than 40% and
                                     20% respectively of cocoa products consumed in the two regions.
                                     Meanwhile, a growing middle class in emerging economies in Asia and
                                     elsewhere is leading to increased demand. 4 Since 1999, demand has been
                                     increasing at an average annual growth rate of 3%.


Figure 1. Cocoa supply chain.
Source: Cocoa Barometer (2012)3




                                     Beyond production of cocoa beans, the supply chain is highly
                                     concentrated, both vertically and horizontally. Global production relies
                                     almost entirely on 5 – 6 million smallholder farmers. Despite their essential
                                     role for the industry, smallholder producers remain largely unorganized and
                                     have little representation or clout in global markets for price-setting.
                                     In contrast, a small number of companies — eight traders and grinders, and
                                     six manufacturers — have a market share of 60 – 80% and 40% of the global
                                     market, respectively. These figures from 2013 are already out-of-date as


                                     3
                                      Cocoa Barometer (2012).
                                     http://www.cocoabarometer.org/Download_files/Cocoa%20Barometer%20Full%202012.pdf
                                     4
                                      World Cocoa Foundation (2014), ‘Cocoa Market Update’, at http://www.worldcocoafoundation.org/wp-
                                     content/uploads/Cocoa-Market-Update-as-of-4-1-2014.pdf .


                                                                                                                                         10
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                        more company acquisitions have taken place further concentrating the
                                        market among a small group for trader/grinders and chocolate producers.

                                        More than 90% of production comes from smallholder farms, with an
                                        average size of 2 – 3 hectares. Traditional smallholder systems, especially
                                        in West Africa, are rarely a profitable operation, due to limitations of scale,
                                        low yields, input costs and limited ability for investment to, for example,
                                        rehabilitate aging tree-based farms. Farmers struggle with diseased and
                                        aging trees, droughts, limited access to inputs, tenure insecurity, volatile
                                        prices and corruption. As a result, many farmers are poor, and younger
                                        generations tend to abandon cocoa farming. At the current profit share for
                                        farmers, estimated at 6% of the consumer price,5 economically it is neither a
                                        profitable business nor a sustainable livelihood model for smallholders to
                                        produce cocoa. According to the Cocoa Barometer — an information
                                        platform driven by nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) — even a
                                        doubling in yield and certification premiums would not lift most farmers out of
                                        extreme poverty. To a varying degree, farmers receive extension services
                                        from governments or participate in development projects supported by NGOs
                                        and downstream companies, and such support has improved the situation for
                                        some farmers and in limited locations.

                                        These efforts are meant to address a series of socioeconomic and
                                        environmental issues in a bid to sustain cocoa production. In-house
                                        company programs and government initiatives emphasize revitalizing the
                                        sector through investment to provide access to farm inputs, deploying
                                        agroforestry systems, and increasing farmer knowledge capacity. The low
                                        productivity and capacity is seen as a major threat to preservation of forests,
                                        and it is prioritized for investment and action by stakeholders.

                                        In Latin America, a rejuvenated cocoa sector enjoys better productivity
                                        and an increasing share in the cocoa market driven by high market demand,
                                        including for high-quality products, including fine flavor cocoa. Latin American
                                        producers also show an increasing trend toward high-tech, large-scale
                                        systems with significantly higher yields.




                                     2.1 Deforestation Driven by Cocoa Production
                                        The agriculture sector is a major driver of forest loss. Overall, four
                                        commodities — palm oil, soy, cattle and wood products — are responsible
                                        for 40% of deforestation (an average 3.8 million hectares (ha) per year). 6
                                        Compared to these “big four”, cocoa has a relatively sm all global
                                        deforestation footprint, but its impact is significant in certain deforestation and
                                        biodiversity hotspots, particularly the Upper Guinea Tropical Rainforest,
                                        South East Asian rainforests and Amazon forest. At the global scale,
                                        information on the cocoa sector’s role on forests is limited, rough estimates
                                        putting forest loss due to cocoa production between 2 to 3 million ha for
                                        1988-2008 period.7


                                        5
                                         Cocoa Barometer 2015. An annual update on the sector published and funded by the members of the
                                        Barometer Consortium; FNV Mondiaal, HIVOS, Solidaridad, and the VOICE Network (ABVV/Horval, Berne
                                        Declaration, FNV, Oxfam Novib, Oxfam Wereldwinkels, Stop The Traffik, and Südwind Institut).
                                        6
                                         Period: 2001-2011. Henders, S., Persson, M., & Kastner T. Trading forests: land-use change and carbon
                                        emissions embodied in production and exports of forest-risk commodities. Environmental Research Letters. 2015.
                                        Vol 10.
                                        7
                                         Climate Focus estimates based on European Commission. The impact of EU consumption on deforestation:
                                        Comprehensive analysis of the impact EU consumption on deforestation. 2013. Technical Report 063. And


                                                                                                                                              11
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                     Deforestation associated to the production of cocoa is highly
                                     concentrated in a few countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast
                                     Asia. For example, smallholders in the Guinean Rainforest region in Côte
                                     d’Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria and Cameroon increased their cultivated area by
                                     3.3% annually during 1988 – 2007, causing 2.3 million ha of forest loss.8
                                     During the same period, in Southeast Asia, Indonesia lost roughly 0.7 million
                                     ha of forest for cocoa production.9 Historically, deforestation from cocoa in
                                     these regions has been driven by a number of factors including absence of
                                     clear land and tree tenure regime, weak legal systems and government
                                     policy promoting production increases. This is further exacerbated by an
                                     absence of inputs, degraded soil and the desire of farmers to access freshly
                                     deforested soils for nutrients.

                                     An increased global demand for cocoa products and a decreasing
                                     productivity in cocoa sector in West Africa in recent years is driving
                                     growth in cocoa cultivation in Latin American countries and in the
                                     Congo Basin. There is very little information on deforestation from cocoa in
                                     recent past in Latin America. Although reports point to more sustainable
                                     cocoa farming practices with increased yields in these countries, reports of
                                     deforestation for industrial cocoa farming from Peru — where more than
                                     2,000 ha of intact forests was cleared for cocoa cultivation and which is
                                     expected to increase — give reason for concern.10 In addition, cocoa
                                     production in Democratic Republic of Congo and Cameroon has significantly
                                     increased putting pressure on untouched forests in the Congo Basin and as
                                     production is projected to grow, these forests will be further at risk.11

                                     Cocoa is grown mainly in regions with high-biodiversity and moist
                                     tropical forest, and has displaced forests (see Box 1). As such,
                                     deforestation is further exacerbated by productivity declines due to poor
                                     farming practices, which leads farmers to clear more forested areas to
                                     increase production areas without overall increase in production. This has led
                                     to in-country migration to forested areas where deforestation takes place for
                                     new cocoa. This is because planting cocoa in cleared forest land has short-
                                     term economic advantages over replanting in old farms. This ‘forest rent’ is
                                     due to the comparatively higher input cost of replantation and more fertile
                                     soils and less exposure to pests and disease in deforested land.12 This leads
                                     to at least temporary increased profitability, and then the farmer expands into
                                     new forests again.13




                                     Gockowski and Sonwa. Cocoa Intensification Scenarios and Their Predicted Impact on CO2 Emissions, Biodiversity
                                     Conservation and Rural Livelihoods in the Rainforest of West Africa. 2010. CIFOR
                                     8
                                      Gockowski and Sonwa. Cocoa Intensification Scenarios and Their Predicted Impact on CO2 Emissions, Biodiversity
                                     Conservation and Rural Livelihoods in the Rainforest of West Africa. 2010. CIFOR.
                                     9
                                      Climate Focus estimates based on European Commission. The impact of EU consumption on deforestation:
                                     Comprehensive analysis of the impact EU consumption on deforestation. 2013. Technical Report 063.
                                     10
                                          WRI (2015): http://www.wri.org/blog/2015/08/how-much-rainforest-chocolate-bar
                                     11
                                       De Beule H, Jassogne L, van Asten P. Cocoa: Driver of Deforestation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
                                     CCAFS Working Paper no. 65. CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security
                                     (CCAFS). Copenhagen, Denmark.
                                     12
                                       Ruf and Schroth (2003). Chocolate Forests and Monocultures: A Historical Review of Cocoa Growing and Its
                                     Conflicting Role in Tropical Deforestation and Forest Conservation. In Pp 107–134 in: Schroth, G., A. Gustavo, B.
                                     Fonseca, C.A. Harvey, C. Gascon, H.L. Vasconcelos and A-M.N. Izac (eds), 2004
                                     13
                                          Ould, D. (2004). The cocoa industry in West Africa: A history of exploitation. Anti-Slavery International.



                                                                                                                                                         12
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



Box 1. Deforestation hotspot countries

                                                  Côte d’Ivoire: Cocoa plantation areas are estimated to have expanded from
                                                  1.6 million ha in 1990 to 2.5 million ha in 2011 at an average rate of 69,093
                                                  ha p.a. For forests, this implies an estimated 60% to 97% of cocoa
                                                  plantations set up in forests range in different regions with a conservative
                                                  estimation of 60% for the whole country.14 A change in climate conditions
                                                  may render certain cocoa producing areas unsuitable for cocoa cultivation
                                                  which increases pressure on the remaining forests.15 Although data is
                                                  limited, conservative calculations predict that by 2030 an expansion in cocoa
                                                  plantation may imply a 530,640 ha pressure on the forests.16
                                                  Ghana: Agricultural expansion for food crops is the predominant cause of
                                                  deforestation responsible for about 80% of total deforestation. In addition,
                                                  covering an estimated 1.8 million ha of land, cocoa is the single most
                                                  important agricultural commodity driver of deforestation. In 1990 to 2008,
                                                  about 27% of total deforestation is estimated to have been driven by cocoa
                                                  cultivation.17 In one of the most productive cocoa producing regions in the
                                                  country, conversion of intact forest has increased from 2.8% per year from
                                                  1986 – 2000, to 6.1% from 2000 – 2011.18 Climate suitability for cocoa
                                                  cultivation in the Western regions of Ghana, the most important region for
                                                  cocoa production in the country, will decrease substantially due to changing
                                                  climate endangering other forested areas.19
                                                  Indonesia: This cocoa producer in Southeast Asia has one of the highest
                                                  deforestation rates in the world, and crop cultivation is one of the main
                                                  causes contributing 31% of total deforestation from 1990 – 2008. Cocoa
                                                  harvested in an estimated 1.7 million ha of land has caused 0.7 million ha
                                                  deforestation in this period, equivalent to 9% of total deforestation due to
                                                  crop cultivation.20 During the cocoa boom in Indonesia, the majority of cocoa
                                                  plantations were set up in thinned forests in Sulawesi where more 70% of
                                                  country’s total cocoa production takes place.21
                                                  Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC): Years of war and insurgency and
                                                  low prices led to abandonment of cocoa fields in most regions of the DRC.
                                                  However, in recent years, cocoa production has increased rapidly from 1,500
                                                  tons in 2011 to 5,000 tons in 2014.22 This has resulted in an expansion of
                                                  cocoa harvested area from 5,387 ha in 2011 to 26,102 ha in 2014.23
                                                  Deforestation from cocoa production has remained low as production has
                                                  taken place mainly in revitalized cocoa fields and in old agricultural lands.24
                                                  Nevertheless, given the increasing global demand for cocoa products and a
                                                  decrease in production in Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire, forests in the DRC will be
                                                  at an increased risk of deforestation. Cocoa production in the next eight
                                                  years could be responsible for loss of an estimated 17,625 to 39,550 ha of
                                                  forests within the DRC.25



                                         14
                                              Côte d’Ivoire Readiness Preparation Proposal 2013
                                         15
                                          Laderach et al (2013) at https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/51470/Climate%20suitability
                                         %20for%20Cocoa%20farming.pdf
                                         16
                                              Côte d’Ivoire Readiness Preparation Proposal 2013
                                         17
                                           European Commission. The impact of EU consumption on deforestation: Comprehensive analysis of the impact EU
                                         consumption on deforestation. 2013. Technical Report 063.
                                         18
                                              Ghana ER-PIN 2014
                                         19
                                          Laderach et al (2013) at https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/handle/10568/51470/Climate%20suitability
                                         %20for%20Cocoa%20farming.pdf
                                         20
                                           FAOSTAT and European Commission. The impact of EU consumption on deforestation: Comprehensive analysis of
                                         the impact EU consumption on deforestation. 2013. Technical Report 063.
                                         21
                                           Clough, Y., Faust, H. and Tscharntke, T. (2009), Cacao boom and bust: sustainability of agroforests and
                                         opportunities for biodiversity conservation. Conservation Letters, 2: 197–205. doi:10.1111/j.1755-263X.2009.00072.x
                                         22
                                              FAOSTAT at http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QC
                                         23
                                              Ibid.
                                         24
                                            De Beule H, Jassogne L, van Asten P. Cocoa: Driver of Deforestation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
                                         CCAFS Working Paper no. 65. CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security
                                         (CCAFS). Copenhagen, Denmark.
                                         25
                                            De Beule H, Jassogne L, van Asten P. Cocoa: Driver of Deforestation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
                                         CCAFS Working Paper no. 65. CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security
                                         (CCAFS). Copenhagen, Denmark.



                                                                                                                                                           13
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                     Cocoa trees were traditionally planted after selective clearing of
                                     forests with only some of the large trees conserved mainly because
                                     cutting them was difficult and expensive.26 Technical progress has
                                     resulted in abandonment of shade in favour of a full sun hybrid variety in
                                     large portions of production areas putting cocoa expansion in direct
                                     competition with standing forests. This full sun preference, especially in
                                     Ghana, is also due to short term higher yields from full sun variety which
                                     was promoted by government policies to increase production, and famers’
                                     fear of fungal diseases because of humidity and insects in shade trees. 27
                                     Furthermore, the initial exclusion of farmers from timber market in West
                                     Africa and their fear of timber companies destroying their plantations and
                                     local demand for timber drove removal of canopy trees.28 However, full sun
                                     systems increase susceptibility to drought stress and, considering the
                                     vulnerability of the cocoa crop to climate change, the full sun cropping
                                     system does not have long-term viability in a region that will be more
                                     stressed by climate change going forward. 29

                                     Lack of land tenure security incentivizes removal of shade trees and
                                     encroachment into forests. In West Africa, in particular in Ghana, the
                                     prevalent customary land tenure regime discourages farmers to invest in
                                     farms. Under customary land agreements common in cocoa sector in Ghana
                                     the farmer is responsible for maintaining the farm and the farm is divided
                                     when the trees mature with farmer holding perpetual right over his share on
                                     the condition that land remains in cocoa, or the harvest is shared between
                                     the landlord and the farmer who is just a sharecropper and landlord retaining
                                     the right over his land.30

                                     In addition, since cocoa is primarily an exported commodity,
                                     deforestation caused by cocoa production is an important issue for
                                     importing countries and consumers to consider concerning
                                     sustainability and embedded deforestation and emissions in products.
                                     An analysis for the EU shows that during 1990 – 2008, the EU27 (27
                                     member states of the EU) imported an estimated 0.6 million ha of
                                     deforestation embedded in cocoa production, equivalent to 8% of EU27’s
                                     imported deforestation.31 The other major consumer country, the United
                                     States, imported an average of 1.08 million tons of cocoa annually in 1999-
                                     2008, which if the same assumptions as the EU27 study are applied,
                                     amounts to 0.4 million ha of deforestation embedded in imports.32




                                     26
                                        Ruf and Schroth (2003). Chocolate Forests and Monocultures: A Historical Review of Cocoa Growing and Its
                                     Conflicting Role in Tropical Deforestation and Forest Conservation. In Pp 107–134 in: Schroth, G., A. Gustavo, B.
                                     Fonseca, C.A. Harvey, C. Gascon, H.L. Vasconcelos and A-M.N. Izac (eds), 2004
                                     27
                                        Obiri et al. (2007). Financial Analysis of Shaded Cocoa in Ghana. Agroforestry Systems 71: 139–49.
                                     28
                                       Ruf (2011). The Myth of Complex Cocoa Agroforests: the Case of Ghana. Hum Ecol Interdiscip J. 2011 Jun; 39(3):
                                     373 – 388.
                                     29
                                        Läderach et al. Predicting the Future Climatic Suitability for Cocoa Farming of the World´s
                                     leading Producer Countries, Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire. CGIAR.
                                     30
                                        Roth, M., Antwi, Y., & O’Sullivan, R. (2017). Land and Natural Resource Governance and Tenure for Enabling
                                     Sustainable Cocoa Cultivation in Ghana. Washington, DC: USAID Tenure and Global Climate Change Program.
                                     31
                                        European Commission, 2013
                                     32
                                       Climate Focus calculations based on FAO Statistics and USDA statistics, applying the same assumptions as
                                     European Commission 2013.



                                                                                                                                                         14
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                         2.2 Certification Schemes in the Cocoa Sector
                                        2.2.1 Market Penetration
                                             Several certification schemes have emerged to address a range of
                                             environmental and socioeconomic issues related to cocoa production,
                                             including biodiversity and forest conversion. The three major standards
                                             in the cocoa sector — UTZ, RA/SAN, and Fairtrade International — cover a
                                             sizable market share: 1.7 million tons (42%) of global cocoa produced by
                                             more than 920,000 farmers on an area of 2.8 million ha (28.1% of the global
                                             production area). These numbers are, however, overestimated since a larger
                                             amount of production (estimated at 33% or 50%33) is certified by two or more
                                             standards. A comparison of the market penetration of three standards is
                                             presented in Table 2 and the share of certified production specific countries
                                             in Figure 2.
Table 2. Comparison of major
sustainability standards in the cocoa                                                 UTZ                     RA/SAN                    FAIRTRADE
sector. Sources: Standard websites
                                              Farmers                                 466,000                 280,000                   180,000

                                              Share of global farmers                 9.3%                    5.6%                      3.6%

                                              Area                                    1,530,000 ha            850,000 ha                434,000 ha

                                              Share of global area                    15%                     8.5%                      4.3%


Figure 2. Global production of
conventional and certified cocoa.




Source: IISD 2014. The State of
Sustainability Review 2014. Standards
and the Green Economy. Chapter 7:
Cocoa Market




                                             Premiums for certified cocoa can be an incentive for pursuing
                                             certification. If, however, farmers can only sell a portion as certified,
                                             forgoing the premium, then even increased income from selling larger
                                             quantities of quality cocoa leaves a dissatisfaction about the effectiveness of
                                             certification.34 35 In addition, farmers focused on securing premiums may fail
                                             to consider the benefits accruing from higher yields and quality of their cocoa.
                                             However, if certification doesn’t garner a relatively higher price for cocoa for
                                             the farmer, and if the same quality and quantity benefits accrue from training
                                             programs absent certification then moving beyond certification is also a
                                             viable option for the cocoa sector.

                                             Participating in certification schemes provides farmers access to
                                             agricultural inputs (e.g., seeds, fertilizers, and equipment), and training
                                             to improve productivity and credit. This in turn helps them achieve a higher
                                             yield of better quality cocoa beans and, paired with a demand for high-quality

                                             33
                                                  Cocoa Barometer (2015)
                                             34
                                                  Cocoa Barometer (2015)
                                             35
                                                  KPMG, 2012.Cocoa Certification. Study on the costs, advantages and disadvantages of
                                             cocoa certification commissioned by The International Cocoa Organization (ICCO).
                                             KPMG, The Netherlands. 48p



                                                                                                                                                     15
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                     cocoa at a superior price in the market, the farmers’ access to market and
                                     income improves. However, certification is seen by some smallholders as too
                                     costly (e.g., labor, investment in the farm, and administrative costs).

                                     The uncertainty around premiums, profitability, and the other benefits
                                     of certification has not stopped the growth in membership for the
                                     standard bodies’ certification schemes. As of 2014, UTZ certified mainly
                                     smallholders, organized into groups and cooperatives, and between 2011
                                     and 2014 UTZ certified cocoa sales grew by 814%. The UTZ cocoa program
                                     has expanded through new certified group members that consist mostly of
                                     small farmers, but there are also a few large-scale plantations in Latin
                                     America, which are expected to expand their market share. 36 RA/SAN is
                                     active in 42 countries and accounts for the certification of 13.6% of the global
                                     cocoa production. About half of the active RA/SAN certificates are group
                                     certificates, covering multiple individual member farms under a “group
                                     administrator” that manages the certificate. The third major standard in the
                                     cocoa sector is Fairtrade International. In 2014, Fairtrade cocoa farmers
                                     produced 218,000 tons, but only 33% was sold as Fairtrade certified. 37 The
                                     farmers under the Fairtrade label are organized into 129 “small producer
                                     organizations” in 20 countries, and they follow a standard for “small producer
                                     organizations” that is administered by third party FLOCERT, a global
                                     certification and verification body.

                                     In addition, the European Committee for Standardization (CEN) is
                                     developing a series of new ISO/CEN standards for “sustainable and
                                     traceable cocoa beans”. 38 With these standards, CEN aims to create
                                     harmonized initiatives and procedures as well as a common understanding
                                     on sustainability requirements. Drafts that were under public review in the
                                     last few months will be considered for publication in 2017. 39

                                     Agricultural certification standards may ensure direct impact on
                                     reducing deforestation by setting cut-off dates for deforestation
                                     sufficiently far in the past and by accurately identifying production
                                     areas, forests, High Conservation Values (HCV), and other important
                                     ecosystems to prevent conversion during farm or plantation
                                     establishment. Some certification standards, like the Roundtable on
                                     Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), Roundtable on Sustainable Soy, RA/SAN, and
                                     UTZ, allow offsetting of past unsustainable practices by protecting or
                                     restoring an equivalent area of land originally deforested. Other agricultural
                                     certification standards, such as Naturland, seek to increase their impact by
                                     restoring degraded and deforested areas or by establishing minimum forest
                                     cover rules for certified areas. Similarly, some forest certification standards
                                     aim to enhance their forest-related impacts by working with governments in
                                     locating their plantations next to HCV or primary forests, to provide a buffer
                                     for these areas. The effectiveness of this approach is unknown.




                                     36
                                      Confectionary News (2016). http://www.confectionerynews.com/Commodities/Cocoa-s-future-lies-in-Latin-America-
                                     Report
                                     37
                                       Fairtrade International (2015) Monitoring and Impact Report.
                                     http://www.fairtrade.net/fileadmin/user_upload/content/2009/resources/2015-Monitoring_and_Impact_Report_web.pdf
                                      Reference CEN/TC 415, Sustainable and Traceable Cocoa; with the secretariat led by DS, ISO’s member for
                                     38

                                     Denmark, along with ISO technical committee ISO/TC 34/SC 18, Cocoa, which is jointly managed by ISO members for
                                     Côte d’Ivoire (CODINORM), Ghana (GSA) and the Netherlands (NEN).
                                     39
                                       News Article, ISO, 19 September 2016: Big step forward for the cocoa sector with new global standards in the
                                     pipeline http://www.iso.org/iso/news.htm?refid=Ref1936



                                                                                                                                                      16
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                        2.2.2 Certification Processes
                                             The certification process involves implementation of an internal control
                                             system by the farmer or cooperative and an official audit or verification
                                             by a third party. The hired auditor submits findings to the certification
                                             scheme. If the findings are negative, recommendations for improvement are
                                             given and a time for a second audit will be fixed. Regular audits are
                                             conducted to assess compliance.

                                             The cocoa cooperatives do not need to comply with all requirements
                                             from the beginning. Some requirements are necessary for the first year.
                                             The schemes have an adjustment period for the cooperatives to progress in
                                             meeting all requirements as part of continuous improvement. They also have
                                             different training requirements for the first, second and third year. Depending
                                             on the scheme, cooperatives or farmers are certified after final approval by a
                                             third-party auditor. The flow chart in Figure 3 represents the typical stages
                                             and requirement categories for major certification standards.

Figure 3. Flow chart of certification
schemes. Source: KPMG 2012




                                        2.2.3 Deforestation-related Requirements
                                             The three schemes evaluated set different standards for biodiversity
                                             conservation concerning forests and other natural ecosystems , and use
                                             HCVs explicitly or implicitly in their certification criteria for forest protection.

                                             In general, HCV are biological, ecological, social, or cultural values that
                                             are considered outstandingly significant or critically important at the
                                             national, regional, or global level. Under this concept, companies pledge
                                             to avoid all development in HCV areas, which does not include developments
                                             and deforestation outside of HCV areas. Table 3 briefly describes the
                                             deforestation-related requirements of the major standards.

Table 3. Comparison of Certification          UTZ                           RA/SAN                    FAIRTRADE
Criteria

                                              No deforestation of primary   No deforestation of       No partial or complete
                                              forests, but secondary forest natural forests and/or    destruction of any
                                              clearance is allowed if there HCV areas                 protected or HCV areas
                                              is compensatory reforestation




                                                                                                                               17
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                        The deforestation-related requirements for the three major certification
                                        bodies contain important nuances that determine the effectiveness and
                                        level of forest protection required by each standard. The strongest
                                        standard in terms of forest protection is the RA/SAN, as its forest definition
                                        extends to all natural forests protecting both primary and secondary forests.
                                        This standard also includes the High Carbon Stock (HCS) approach as an
                                        alternative method of avoiding deforestation for cocoa development, and
                                        while HCS is a relatively new approach it is a clear way of delineating high
                                        carbon forests to conserve and former forest areas for development. The
                                        other two standards, UTZ and Fairtrade, take an HCV approach which
                                        protects primary forests but leaves secondary forests open to development.
                                        Dependence on the HCV approach means that both UTZ and Fairtrade are
                                        not deforestation-free.

                                        The HCV approach protects valuable places, but it does not go far
                                        enough to protect what some would identify as degraded but valuable
                                        secondary forests. This is an especially important point in cocoa producing
                                        countries like Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire where 92% and 90%, respectively, of
                                        forests are naturally regenerated (secondary forests). These naturally
                                        regenerated forests may be disqualified from protection under the Standard
                                        Bodies’ forest definitions or narrow protections for primary forests which only
                                        cover 4% and 6% in Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire, respectively40.

                                        Each standard has its own relevant details for deforestation-related
                                        requirements. It is vital for companies that seek to use certification as an
                                        implementation tool for their deforestation-related commitments to
                                        understand whether each certification standard can deliver in terms of
                                        avoiding deforestation in their supply chain, or that they need to go beyond
                                        this for credible and measurable impact.

                                        UTZ defines codes of conduct for individual and multi-site farms, group, and
                                        multi-group certification. The code of conduct41 is a rulebook for certifying the
                                        growing and harvesting process for farmers and farmer groups. In the code
                                        for individual and multi-site certification there are four control points (pillars of
                                        sustainable agriculture), and one of them is “Environment” with the
                                        deforestation-related requirements. The control point (CP) provides the
                                        requirements and each component is assigned a “year” (out of four) that
                                        indicates when the CP must be met from the first year of certification.
                                        Furthermore, there is clarification for each CP that guides implementation
                                        and is mandatory guidance (see Box 2).

Box 2. UTZ Environment Control Points
                                              CP 113 mandates: No deforestation or degradation of primary forest occurs or
                                              has occurred since 2008.

                                              CP 114 mandates: No deforestation or degradation of secondary forest occurs
                                              unless:
                                              1. A legal land title and/or landowner permission is available
                                              2. Government permits are available (if required), and
                                              3. There is a report produced by an environmental expert (UTZ-certified)
                                                  confirming that the appropriate clearing techniques are used, and that
                                                  there is compensation with reforestation activities of at least equal
                                                  ecological value.




                                        40
                                             Global Forest Watch country profiles
                                        41
                                             https://www.utz.org/what-we-offer/certification/products-we-certify/cocoa/



                                                                                                                             18
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                       UTZ’s certification does not protect secondary forests. Any forest that
                                       has been logged at any point is open for development according to UTZ
                                       primary forest definition.42

                                       Rainforest Alliance/SAN. The Rainforest Alliance standard is based on the
                                       Sustainable Agriculture Network (of which it is a member) that certifies
                                       sustainable commodities. In cocoa, most SAN certification is based on group
                                       certification for smallholders. In the new 2017 SAN standards, it is Principle 2
                                       that deals with deforestation, and the section is entitled Biodiversity
                                       Conservation with four subsections of critical criteria. The three criteria
                                       relevant for deforestation are described in Box 3.

Box 3. Rainforest Alliance/San
Deforestation-Related Principles and         High Conservation Value (HCV) areas have not been destroyed from November
Forest Definition
                                             1, 2005 onward.

                                             Farms conserve all natural ecosystems and have not destroyed forest or
                                             other natural ecosystems in the five-year period prior to the date of initial
                                             application for SAN certification or after January 1, 2014, whichever date is
                                             earlier.

                                             SAN Forests definition: Forests include both humid forests (rainforest) and drier
                                             forests; lowland, montane, and cloud forests; and forests consisting of any
                                             combination of broadleaf, needle leaf, evergreen, and deciduous vegetation.
                                             Forests are defined as tree-covered areas that:

                                             1. Are not occupied by agriculture or other specific non-forest land uses; and,
                                             2. Consist primarily of native plant species; and,
                                             3. Contain a vegetation structure that generally resembles that of a natural
                                                 forest of the same age in the same area; OR
                                             Are classified as High Carbon Stock (HCS) forests according to the HCS
                                                 approach (www.highcarbonstock.org) or, in regions where HCS parameters
                                                 have not yet been defined, have been regenerating for at least 10 years
                                                 with minimal human disturbance.

                                             Production activities do not degrade any protected area.


                                       The biodiversity conservation principle within SAN also contains a section on
                                       continuous improvement that includes maintaining large native trees outside
                                       of natural ecosystems, restoring native vegetation cover to at least 10% of
                                       the farm, and restoring zones adjacent to aquatic ecosystems.

                                       Fairtrade International. The Fairtrade standard for small producer
                                       organizations includes environmental development within its production
                                       standard that elaborates on Fairtrade’s biodiversity requirements. These
                                       requirements are applicable to the whole farm where a Fairtrade crop is
                                       grown. The standard requires small producer members to avoid negative
                                       impacts on protected areas and areas with high conservation values within or
                                       outside the farm or production areas. The rule for avoiding negative impacts
                                       refers to either the partial or complete destruction of the protected area or
                                       loss of the high conservation value. The other areas that are used or
                                       converted to production for the Fairtrade crop must comply with relevant
                                       national legislation.




                                       42
                                            https://utzcertified.org/attachments/article/26584870/EN%20-%20UTZ%20Certification%20Protocol%204.0.pdf



                                                                                                                                                      19
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                2.2.4 Limitations and Strengths
                                     Limitations in addressing the livelihood issue: Overall, while many cocoa
                                     smallholders saw improvements through certification, productivity and
                                     incomes remain relatively low which means many don’t consider cocoa
                                     farming a viable livelihood going forward.43 Certification aimed at improving
                                     these farmers’ lives, income, crops and the environment may need to go
                                     beyond the cocoa fields and certification of cocoa. An example being the
                                     production of other subsistence and cash crops needed to enjoy sustainable
                                     and diversified livelihoods. The promotion of intercropping agroforestry
                                     systems as part of certification could benefit many cocoa farmers, but the
                                     type of agroforest, payback period, and what benefits should be prioritized
                                     are still subject to debate, environmental context, and ongoing research.44

                                     Increased productivity but low premiums: RA/SAN’s impact report shows
                                     that even without price premiums to compensate for costs of certification,
                                     some farmers still see increases in both productivity and profitability in most
                                     instances where these outcomes have been evaluated. However, the
                                     premiums are unrealistically low, usually around 10% of additional revenue,
                                     and that net benefit is reduced by the certification costs which harms
                                     profitability45. Furthermore, premiums are not always clear when negotiated,
                                     and there is little evidence of large certification price premiums accruing to
                                     RA/SAN-certified farms. There is also the issue of premium distribution within
                                     cooperative structures that does not always provide measurable benefits to
                                     the farmers, and farmers are vulnerable to shifts in demand that can reduce
                                     premiums or force them to sell certified products on the conventional market.
                                     However, if certification can provide gains in productivity on the current farm
                                     area that then regularly results in profits that surpass the costs of certification
                                     then low premiums will be less of a hindrance to the uptake of certification by
                                     more farmers. In addition, companies that want to move away from
                                     certification to their own programs can still produce these increases in
                                     productivity and quality with continued training in good agricultural practices
                                     and access to improved inputs and planting materials.

                                     Lack of comparability: A common industry-wide criterion for zero-
                                     deforestation cocoa would enable businesses committed to eliminating
                                     deforestation from their cocoa supply chain to better meet their goals. Many
                                     companies are looking to achieve their commitments by increasing their
                                     uptake of certified cocoa, but their decision is unnecessarily complicated by
                                     the three main standards that all have different and insufficient criteria for
                                     forest protection. Also, it is unknown how much of the certified cocoa supply
                                     is certified by more than one standard, which creates uncertainty for the
                                     availability of certified supply and a lack of transparency for consumers. A
                                     major limitation for the certification bodies is that they can’t provide
                                     companies with a claim for zero deforestation. Until the certification bodies
                                     can agree to universal and straightforward forest protection criteria the lack of
                                     comparability will remain a clear limitation on companies that want to be
                                     deforestation-free and source certified cocoa.



                                     43
                                          KPMG, 2012.Cocoa Certification. Study on the costs, advantages and disadvantages of
                                     cocoa certification commissioned by The International Cocoa Organization (ICCO).
                                     KPMG, The Netherlands. 48p
                                     44
                                       Ruf (2011). The Myth of Complex Agroforests: The Case of Ghana. Human Ecology June; 39(3): 373-388.
                                     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3109247/
                                     45
                                       KPMG, 2012.Cocoa Certification. Study on the costs, advantages and disadvantages of
                                     cocoa certification commissioned by The International Cocoa Organization (ICCO).
                                     KPMG, The Netherlands. 48p


                                                                                                                                             20
Overview of the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                     Lack of demand or certified product uptake: There is still a significant
                                     need to stimulate demand for certificate holders who are only able to sell a
                                     small part of their certified volume. Some farmers can’t af ford to wait to find a
                                     buyer for their certified product and will instead choose to sell their product
                                     without the premium. This is an area where traders can be more proactive at
                                     connecting certified producers and buyers with commitments to increase
                                     purchases of certified cocoa. UTZ specifically has recognized that growing
                                     company commitments and market interest has led to a continuous increase
                                     in the supply-demand ratio and in single certification. The increase in
                                     commitments has led to single-label contracts, and traders are now focusing
                                     on single certificate holders. This in turn puts more pressure on certification
                                     bodies to correct the comparability issue for forest criteria so that companies
                                     that prefer single-label contracts can choose any of the three major
                                     certification schemes and get the same forest protection criteria for their
                                     cocoa products. Alternatively, companies developing or involved in
                                     landscape approaches in cooperation with governments provide an
                                     alternative model that seeks to create zero-deforestation cocoa landscapes
                                     for sourcing.

                                     Limited capacity to meet biodiversity requirements: Certification criteria
                                     call for cocoa farms to retain biodiversity where it exists or partially restore
                                     tree cover, but this requires tree planting and/or ongoing management of the
                                     shade canopy, which can be difficult without proper direction on balancing
                                     biodiversity and production, and there is a lack of clear information on the
                                     optimum shade agroforestry system to provide both productivity and
                                     biodiversity benefits. Specifically, for RA/SAN certification there are
                                     challenges for on-farm compliance include meeting the criteria for riparian
                                     zone protection, shade cover, and overall ecosystem conservation.

                                     Unclear impact on reducing deforestation: there is still a deficit of
                                     evidence that certified cocoa reduces or prevents deforestation from
                                     occurring. While some certification schemes have strong requirements for
                                     avoiding deforestation, the farms that are certified are generally located in
                                     areas that have already been cleared in accordance with different baselines.
                                     Furthermore, farmers in low deforestation risk areas are more likely to
                                     become certified, and those that are deforesting or encroaching into
                                     protected areas are not allowed be certified in the first place but this does
                                     not prevent this deforestation activity. This dynamic is why some companies
                                     see certification as a tool to claim reductions in deforestation risk in their
                                     supply chains. This approach does not remove deforestation from the
                                     commodity overall.




                                                                                                                    21
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                            Tracking Progress of

3.                                          Efforts to Eliminate
                                            Deforestation in the
                                            Cocoa Supply Chain


                                    3.1 Methodology
                                            To assess progress of companies and other stakeholders in addressing
                                            deforestation in the cocoa supply chain, we developed an assessment
                                            framework that allows for the tracking and comparability of progress :
                                            from initial supply chain pledges to implementation of deforestation
                                            commitments by companies and support by other stakeholders, to overall
                                            impact on forests. The framework is based on the methodology developed by
                                            a multi-stakeholder coalition for the New York Declaration on Forests (NYDF)
                                            Progress Assessment, which was in 2016 and focused on efforts to eliminate
                                            deforestation from major agricultural commodities. 46

                                            Companies first adopt supply-chain commitments (Criterion 1), then
                                            implement those commitments through company policies, operational plans
                                            and monitoring and compliance systems (Criterion 2). They receive
                                            support from governments, financial institutions, NGOs and other
                                            stakeholders that creates an enabling environment to encourage and
                                            permit action (Criterion 3). Finally, the overall impact of supply-chain efforts
                                            on deforestation determines the eventual success of these efforts
                                            (Criterion 4). The first two criteria are proxies for assessing private sector
                                            progress by determining what steps the company has taken or the support
                                            that companies have received to eliminate deforestation in its supply chain.
                                            Criterion 3 measures support from financial institutions, public and civil
                                            society actors, while Criterion 4 seeks to address whether these efforts
                                            translate into measurable, reduced deforestation. Due to data limitations, we
                                            have not yet been able to assess progress toward Criterion 4. The
                                            Assessment Framework for tracking progress of deforestation-related
                                            commitments by cocoa sector companies is presented in Table 4.

                                            While some information is available on certification, there is limited up-
                                            to-date and detailed quantitative information on cocoa certification
                                            schemes. The certification body impact reports and NGO coalition reports,
                                            like the Cocoa Barometer, were used for a majority of the information on
                                            cocoa certification. Other information on commitments for Criterion 1 and 2
                                            were based on a recent survey conducted by the International Sustainability
                                            Unit of HRH The Prince of Wales (ISU), and the Sustainable Trade Initiative
                                            (IDH). Climate Focus also surveyed a select group of companies in the

                                            46
                                              See also Climate Focus. 2016. Progress on the New York Declaration on Forests: Eliminating Deforestation from the
                                            Production of Agricultural Commodities – Goal 2 Assessment Report. Prepared by Climate Focus in cooperation with
                                            the NYDF Assessment Coalition with support from the Climate and Land Use Alliance and the Tropical Forest Alliance
                                            2020. Available at: http://forestdeclaration.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/2016-Goal-2-Assessment-Report.pdf



                                                                                                                                                          22
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            cocoa sector based on consultations with WCF. The information gathered on
                                            19 companies was also complemented with reviews of public company
                                            materials, academic and grey literature, and interviews with another select
                                            group of companies.

Table 4. Assessment Framework for                                                                                    DATA
tracking progress in deforestation-free              CRITERIA            INDICATOR
cocoa supply chains                                                                                                  SOURCES
                                               1   Commitment of       Deforestation-related commitments             Company survey
                                                     companies         by companies                                   (IDH and Climate
                                                                         Companies broken down                       Focus)
                                                                           according to commitment type              Certification
                                                                           (certification, projects, and targets,     Impact Reports
                                                                           and operation-wide versus cocoa-           (RA/SAN, UTZ)
                                                                           specific), supply chain position,         Company
                                                                           timelines                                  sustainability
                                                                         Analysis of relevance for                   reports (for a
                                                                           deforestation hotspots and market          limited number of
                                                                           share (if data is available)               companies)
                                               2   Implementation      Adoption of deforestation policies            Company survey
                                                   of private          to implement commitments                       (IDH and Climate
                                                   sector                Adoption of company standards               Focus)
                                                   commitments           Adoption of actionable and time            Company
                                                                           bound policies/plans                       sustainability
                                                                         Adoption of procurement policies            reports (for a
                                                                           (e.g., linked to certification)            limited number of
                                                                         Defined KPIs and benchmarks                 companies)
                                                                           related to deforestation
                                                                         Adoption of policies to support
                                                                           farmers and intermediaries in
                                                                           meeting company standards
                                                                         Analysis of relevance for
                                                                           deforestation hotspots and market
                                                                           share (if data is available)
                                                                       Compliance with company policies              Company survey
                                                                         Certification of supply/production          (IDH and Climate
                                                                         Subsidiaries and/or suppliers’              Focus)
                                                                          compliance with deforestation              Company
                                                                          policy                                      sustainability
                                                                         Public disclose of information on           reports
                                                                          compliance and progress                    Cocoa
                                                                         Implementation of training for              Barometer 2015
                                                                          farmers, mapping of sourcing to
                                                                          farm level, promotion of land use
                                                                          planning, outgrower schemes
                                                                         Analysis of relevance for
                                                                          deforestation hotspots and market
                                                                          share (if data is available)
                                                                       Monitoring of compliance with                 Company survey
                                                                       company policies                               (IDH and Climate
                                                                         Monitoring and traceability system          Focus)
                                                                          in place
                                                                         Traceability to specific points of
                                                                          origin
                                                                         Monitoring of supplier compliance
                                                                         Monitoring deforestation and with
                                                                          satellite imagery




                                                                                                                                  23
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                                                                                                 DATA
                                                     CRITERIA            INDICATOR
                                                                                                                 SOURCES
                                                                         Analysis of relevance for
                                                                          deforestation hotspots and market
                                                                          share (if data is available)
                                               3    Support by         Deforestation-related commitments         Reducing
                                                    non-supply         and actions by cocoa-producing             Emissions from
                                                    chain actors       countries (qualitative):                   Deforestation
                                                    (enabling            Government programs with                and Forest
                                                    environment)          commitments, plans or concrete          Degradation
                                                                          partnerships (incl. public-private)     (REDD+)
                                                                         Projects for sustainable                program
                                                                          smallholder cocoa production            documents
                                                                          supported by public sector and          (FCPF, Forest
                                                                          civil society                           Investment
                                                                         Analysis of relevance for               Program (FIP),
                                                                          deforestation hotspots and market       BioCarbon Fund)
                                                                          share (if data is available)           Company survey
                                                                                                                  (IDH and Climate
                                                                                                                  Focus)
                                                                       Enabling environment and barriers         Company survey
                                                                       perceived by companies                     (IDH and Climate
                                                                       (qualitative)                              Focus)
                                                                         Governance and regulatory              Lessons from
                                                                          environment                             NYDF Report
                                                                         Policy incentives
                                                                         Market access, price and
                                                                          consumer demand
                                                                         Technology and traceability
                                                                          systems
                                                                         Certification systems and
                                                                          processes
                                                                         Deforestation-related                   Expert interviews
                                                                         commitments and actions by              Literature review
                                                                         cocoa-importing countries
                                                                         (qualitative)
                                                                         Deforestation-related                   Lessons from
                                                                         commitments and actions by               NYDF Report
                                                                         financial institutions

                                                4    Overall             Reduction of deforestation              Interviews with
                                                     impact of           associated with cocoa: Cocoa-            companies and
                                                     deforestation       specific data is not yet available.      review of review
                                                                         We will provide an overview and          of new platforms
                                                                         state of the data and tools that         from Ghana
                                                                         could fill this gap in the future,       Cocoa Platform
                                                                         including Trase and Global Forest        and World
                                                                         Watch (GFW).                             Resources
                                                                                                                  Institute
                                                                                                                  (WRI)/GFW




                                                                                                                              24
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                       3.2 Findings
                                            In total 19 companies were evaluated based on their deforestation-
                                            related commitments. We analyzed whether any commitments included
                                            commitments to zero deforestation or the preservation of high conservation
                                            value and high carbon stock forests. We also looked at implementation
                                            whether through cocoa certification or internal company standards and
                                            programs and whether they included programs to support smallholder.

                                            Of the 19 companies, 12 (63%) have made deforestation-related
                                            commitments that are either cocoa-specific or include cocoa in their
                                            operation-wide commitment. The 19 companies include small and large
                                            bean-to-bar chocolate companies, traders and grinders, chocolate producers,
                                            consumer goods manufacturers, and retail. Due to the nature of the cocoa
                                            supply chain and the companies involved in this study there is an overlap in
                                            the flow of cocoa that is covered by more than one company’s commitment
                                            and at different stages of the value chain. This is why we present our findings
                                            per section of the value chain and as a percent of annual global cocoa
                                            production affected by each policy or activity as it flows between value chain
                                            segments. Therefore, the percent of global cocoa production covered by
                                            commitments is higher than 100%. For example, there are six trader/grinder
                                            companies included in this assessment, and collectively they trade and
                                            process 89% of annual global cocoa production (based on 2016 forecasted
                                            production). Then, while some of the trader/grinders have commitments, all
                                            five of the chocolate producers assessed (who source 39% of annual cocoa
                                            from trader/grinders) have commitments. Therefore, just as in other
                                            commodities that flow through multiple actors with their own commitments,
                                            cocoa is no different except its trade is concentrated in even fewer upstream
                                            companies. This is why our information is displayed via share of global
                                            production and the nature and number of these deforestation-related
                                            commitments is broken down by supply chain segments (see Graph 1).

Graph 1. Percent of annual global
cocoa production per supply chain                       Percent of annual global cocoa production
segment represented in this analysis
(Source: Climate Focus)                                     utilized by supply chain segments
                                                                 represented in this analysis
                                              100.0%                                           88.9%
                                               80.0%

                                               60.0%
                                                                                                              39.1%
                                               40.0%

                                               20.0%                                5.3%
                                                              1.1%
                                                 0.0%
                                                         Consumer Good        Bean-to-Bar   Trader/Grinder   Chocolate
                                                         Manufacturer &                                      Producer
                                                             Retail




                                                                                                                         25
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                     3.2.1 Commitments
                                            Companies across the cocoa supply chain are making deforestation-
                                            related commitments for a multitude of reasons including declining
                                            productivity, environmental degradation and forest encroachment, and
                                            strategic and operational concerns about the security of a long-term cocoa
                                            supply. Below are the details of the 19 companies that shared information
                                            on their commitments, and this includes bean-to-bar companies, chocolate
                                            producers, trader/grinders, and three companies in consumer goods
                                            and retail.

Graph 2. Percent of global cocoa
production that is impacted by different
commitment types per supply chain                                                        4.7%
segment (Source: Climate Focus)                    Smallholder Support Program        0.3%
                                                                                                 16.3%
                                                                                                            35.1%

                                                                                        3.6%
                                                             Company Standard         0.9%
                                                                                                 16.3%
                                                                                                            35.1%

                                                                                      0.1%
                                                      Certification Commitment        0.3%
                                                                                                               39.1%
                                                                                                                             62.3%

                                                                                        4.7%
                                              Deforestation-Related Commitment
                                                                                                               39.1%
                                                                                                                                     73.6%

                                                                                 0%     10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80%

                                                      Bean-to-Bar      CGM & Retail            Chocolate Producers     Trader/Grinder


                                            In total, six trader/grinder cocoa companies that were assessed source
                                            89% of annual global cocoa production. Overall, four companies — sourcing
                                            73% of global production — have made deforestation-related commitments
                                            with one of them (sourcing 24%) committed to 100% sustainable sourcing by
                                            2020 based on company-adopted principles and certification. Overall, three
                                            of the companies with commitments use certification, and they source 62% of
                                            annual cocoa production. One trader/grinder (sourcing 23%) is committed to
                                            zero deforestation, and two companies, together procuring 35% of global
                                            cocoa, are using an internal standard or program focused on smallholder
                                            support to fulfill their deforestation-related commitment.

                                            Out of the five bean-to-bar companies evaluated, three of them sourcing
                                            4.7% of annual global cocoa production have made deforestation-related
                                            commitments. Of the remaining two companies, one is developing a cocoa
                                            deforestation commitment while the other does not have deforestation on its
                                            agenda. Of the three companies with commitments, one is using certification
                                            to fulfill its commitment while the other two are using internal standards and
                                            smallholder support programs, respectively.

                                            The five chocolate producers evaluated source 39% of annual cocoa
                                            production, and all of them have made deforestation-related commitments for
                                            cocoa either explicitly or have committed to source 100% sustainably
                                            certified cocoa by 2020. All five companies are using certification as at least
                                            part of fulfilling their commitment. One company — sourcing 10% of annual
                                            cocoa production — is committed to zero deforestation, and another


                                                                                                                                        26
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            company (also sourcing 10%) is committed to the preservation of high
                                            conservation value and high carbon stock forests. Furthermore, two
                                            companies (16% annual production) are using internal standards and are
                                            focused on delivering smallholder support.

                                            The remaining three companies are consumer goods manufacturers and
                                            retailers together source less than 1% of annual global cocoa production.
                                            None of them have made deforestation-related commitments for cocoa, and
                                            two of them have their own internal sustainably standards that utilize
                                            certification and investments in smallholder support programs.

                                            Company motivation for deforestation-related commitments

                                            Cocoa has been identified as a major driver of deforestation in West
                                            Africa which has led to degradation of soils, water insecurity, shifts in rainfall,
                                            and crop failures due to droughts and loss of soil fertility and biodiversity. The
                                            compounding effect of deforestation leading to low productivity creates a
                                            need for more expansion into forests to fill productivity gaps. This
                                            phenomenon is further compounded by farmers’ limited access to agronomic
                                            resources. These issues create a threat to cocoa farmers and companies
                                            that rely on a sustainable supply of cocoa.

                                            Deforestation-related commitments in the cocoa supply chain are
                                            closely linked to declining productivity in current cocoa operations. The
                                            concern for declining cocoa productivity and the likely continued incursion
                                            into forests and protected areas is the main reason why many companies are
                                            making commitments to combat deforestation by improving productivity.
                                            Without resolving these issues companies are concerned about being
                                            exposed to several risks including illegally produced cocoa entering their
                                            supply chain, the degradation of ecosystem services that support the long-
                                            term viability of cocoa production regions, and the fact that continued
                                            deforestation only fuels climate change that will have a deleterious and likely
                                            irreversible effect on cocoa productivity.

                                            Companies are also committing to provide better access to agricultural
                                            inputs to help address the cocoa productivity gaps and inefficient land
                                            use that puts pressure on forests. Their primary motivation is a desire
                                            to efficiently source high-quality cocoa. This desire is paired with the
                                            motivation to address productivity by safeguarding and increasing ecosystem
                                            services from trees and forests across the landscape thereby securing a
                                            steady supply of cocoa. Also, because these services are provided across a
                                            larger landscape some companies are committing to a landscape
                                            governance approach for implementing their commitments and are looking to
                                            spur on better landscape governance overall to combat deforestation and
                                            evolve into a policy framework beyond their own operations.

                                            Company efforts to combat forest degradation from cocoa production
                                            include specific concerns about encroachment on protected forests
                                            and high biodiversity areas that are important to preserve for conservation
                                            values, and they provide valuable ecosystem services. Companies are also
                                            considering their reputations and the strategic value that comes from
                                            committing to take part in protecting the remaining high conservation value
                                            forests in heavily deforested countries.




                                                                                                                           27
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            The cocoa sector has strategic reasons and concerns that motivate
                                            involvement in deforestation-related commitments. There are companies
                                            with track records of working in deforestation issues across other
                                            commodities and now recognize that excluding cocoa from those efforts is no
                                            longer viable. Others have been involved in cocoa certification schemes for
                                            reasons that do not explicitly address deforestation, but are now including
                                            forest exclusion criteria as a reason for continuing or increasing their uptake
                                            of certified cocoa. Also, companies that rely on certification or want to
                                            increase their supply of certified cocoa know that farmers encroaching into
                                            protected areas or otherwise breaking forest protection laws in other areas
                                            will be excluded from certification programs.

                                            All the major cocoa sourcing and producing companies are heavily
                                            dependent and thereby invested in the cocoa agricultural systems in
                                            West Africa where the majority is produced. It is in their long-term
                                            financial interest to secure the integrity and sustainability of this concentrated
                                            industry. It is posited that clearing forests to plant cocoa is not an
                                            economically wise decision as is threatening the continued productivity of
                                            these tree crops by disrupting the climate and the many ecosystem services
                                            the crop relies on.

                                            Other companies find motivation by fulfilling their own corporate social
                                            responsibility principles either because they want to move into the
                                            niche market for high value chocolate products or because they have
                                            received direct pressure from NGO campaigns. Some see a
                                            deforestation-related commitment as a pre-emptive strategy to avoid NGO
                                            campaigns, and others are responding to consumer preference for
                                            sustainable products or wish to enter what they determine to be a niche
                                            market for sustainable chocolate products.

                                            Overall, many companies are concerned about the viable future for
                                            cocoa in West Africa requiring transformational change in land and
                                            forest management and current cocoa production practices. Their
                                            motivation is also tied to productivity and environmental degradation that
                                            threatens the security of cocoa production from runaway climate change.
                                            Climate was one of the driving factors for the cocoa frontier shift in 20th
                                            century with farmers moving from dry to wet areas of West African countries.
                                            This shift replaced forest with farm land further drying the climate in what is
                                            now recognized as a positive feedback cycle. The concern by companies,
                                            NGOs and development partners is that the present and future climate will
                                            continue to push cocoa farmers into wetter forest frontiers in the Congo Basin
                                            and the last forest reserves in West Africa. Analysis supports this showing that
                                            climate, drought and the perceived availability of forest land for planting are
                                            the main drivers for shifting cocoa production into forest frontiers.47

                                            The sheer size of the problem means all supply chain actors need to be
                                            involved and that is why many of these companies feel responsible to do
                                            their part.




                                            47
                                              Ruf et al. (2015). Climate change, cocoa migrations and deforestation in West Africa: What does the past tell us
                                            about the future? Sustainability Science, Vol 10, Issue 1, pp 101-111. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11625-
                                            014-0282-4



                                                                                                                                                                28
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Reasons some companies are not adopting targets

                                            Companies that have not made a deforestation-related commitment or
                                            targets for cocoa exist across a spectrum from those in the process of
                                            defining a company policy to those who do not have deforestation on
                                            their policy agenda. There are companies waiting for their clients to make
                                            deforestation a priority while still recognizing internally that addressing
                                            deforestation is important. Also, some in this situation would rather
                                            incorporate deforestation avoidance protocols into their general operations
                                            than have specific targets. Instead, these cocoa trading companies would
                                            rather work to satisfy their clients’ targets. These same companies also don’t
                                            see a need for making commitments or adopting targets and instead wish to
                                            pursue a general operational policy that forest clearance in cocoa
                                            landscapes is to be avoided.

                                            There are companies that are still in the process of developing
                                            policy commitments and targets either because they are new to
                                            direct sourcing of cocoa or because they are assessing their options in
                                            a landscape of converging programs and policies. Then there are those
                                            companies that do not have deforestation on their policy agenda, or
                                            some companies that are still unclear about where and what actions they
                                            could take.

                                            Future plans to address deforestation from cocoa production

                                            When companies describe their future plans for addressing
                                            deforestation in cocoa they speak about a number of interventions and
                                            processes they will be pursuing. The training of farmers around avoiding
                                            deforestation will continue, and many will frame this intervention around
                                            productivity through intensification and cocoa tree rehabilitation or replanting.
                                            Companies plan to increase forest trees on farm at scale, promote
                                            agroforestry systems, and push for the preservation of remaining forests.

Box 4. Case Study: Touton Climate
Smart Cocoa                                      As part of Ghana Cocoa Forest REDD+ Program, which aims at producing
                                                 deforestation-free and sustainable cocoa within the High Forest Zones, the
                                                 Forestry Commission of Ghana and Touton SA partnered for the period 2016-
                                                 2021 for successful implementation of Climate Smart Cocoa Project.48 Through
                                                 this initiative, Touton SA is developing a Landscape Project in Western and
                                                 Brong Ahafo regions covering a total area of 744,489 ha, out of which 218,400
                                                 ha is gazetted forests.49

                                                 The objective of the project is to improve livelihoods through yield increase and
                                                 additional income sources, reduce greenhouse gas emissions driven by
                                                 unsustainable agricultural practices, enhance carbon stocks through integration
                                                 of desirable shade trees in cocoa farming systems, demonstrate importance of
                                                 community land-use planning in cocoa Smart Agriculture, promote biodiversity
                                                 and ecological integrity through awareness creation for environmental
                                                 stewardship in target communities and develop a financially sustainable
                                                 incentive mechanism for cocoa-forest landscape governance.

                                                 Touton SA on its part works on the ground to demonstrate the importance of
                                                 community land use planning in cocoa smart agriculture; promote biodiversity

                                            48
                                              Forestry Commission of Ghana (2016). Forestry Commission and Touton Sign MOU.
                                            http://fcghana.org/news.php?news=94
                                            49
                                              Touton (2016). Touton Climate Smart Cocoa Press Release.
                                            http://www.fcghana.org/userfiles/files/Publications/Touton%20Press%20Release%20-
                                            %20Climate%20Smart%20Cocoa.pdf



                                                                                                                                     29
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                               and ecological integrity through awareness creation on environmental
                                               stewardship in agreed communities; improve livelihoods through yield increase
                                               while enhancing carbon stocks; and develop a financially sustainable incentive
                                               mechanism for cocoa-landscape governance with the aim of co-developing a
                                               cocoa landscape standard.


                                            Companies are also engaging in deforestation risk assessments and
                                            mapping, facilitated by NGO partners. The purpose is to help inform
                                            plans and appropriate mitigation actions for both programmatic and
                                            procurement actions and policy influencing in-country. The plan for
                                            these risk assessments is to better measure progress and impact of
                                            deforestation reduction activities and provide transparent progress reports to
                                            the public. Moreover, many companies are in the process of mapping all of
                                            the farmers they source from. Some companies plan to use this information
                                            for internal monitoring of deforestation, and others indicated willingness to
                                            share data with governments in ways that would help with enforcement of
                                            forest protection laws.

                                            Companies will continue to promote certification as a means to verify
                                            the sustainability of their cocoa product. In addition, companies plan to
                                            intensify contact with cocoa authorities and other government bodies to
                                            continue raising deforestation in discussions on cocoa production. The aim of
                                            this increased engagement is to increase public-private cooperation on
                                            deforestation in cocoa production. Some companies are looking to involve
                                            the national government with their company standards to facilitate the
                                            creation and recognition of a landscape standard that goes beyond
                                            certification and will lead to verified emissions reductions. As part of these
                                            efforts plans exist to develop a platform to implement landscape monitoring
                                            and emissions accounting to demonstrate impact of company actions

                                            There are also plans to establish a group of partners to engage farmers,
                                            their communities and leaders, and develop integrated solutions
                                            through a landscape approach to confront deforestation, climate
                                            change, and declining yields. This includes introducing extension service
                                            hubs in deforestation risk areas that will professionalize farmers, grant
                                            access to inputs, and help rehabilitate cocoa farms leading to more
                                            intensification and productivity. In addition, extension services can help
                                            connect farmers to banks, show them how to achieve economic and crop
                                            diversification, and serve as connection points for stakeholders to create and
                                            implement a landscape approach and action plan.




                                  3.2.2 Implementation
                                            Companies involved in this analysis are implementing their
                                            deforestation-related commitments via certification, internal standards,
                                            and/or smallholder support programs. Also, some are using procurement
                                            policies with their suppliers to implement these policies throughout their
                                            supply chain. A small subset of companies are more advanced in
                                            implementation, and they have been combining farm level mapping with
                                            deforestation risk hotspots as part of their monitoring. Companies that
                                            disclosed information on compliance also included updates on whether their
                                            subsidiaries and/or suppliers are in compliance with their deforestation-
                                            related policies, whether or not they disclose information on progress toward


                                                                                                                                30
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            full compliance, and how they’re implementing policies with farmer training,
                                            mapping, and land use planning. Companies also indicated their progress on
                                            monitoring. This includes whether their systems cover suppliers and
                                            subsidiaries, the frequency of monitoring, what limitations they have
                                            observed, and if their monitoring detects deforestation.

                                            Across supply chain segments 13 companies that procure, produce,
                                            or sell cocoa products equivalent to 100% of annual global cocoa
                                            production provided information on how they implement their
                                            deforestation-related commitments. Of the five trader/grinders
                                            assessed, representing 65% of global cocoa production, two companies
                                            (34% annual cocoa production) define procurement and sourcing criteria
                                            for their suppliers.

                                            Two of the five trader/grinders representing 39% of cocoa production
                                            reported compliance information including that 22-30%of their supply was
                                            certified as they work toward 100%. One company did not know the percent
                                            compliance of all their suppliers, and the other is the sole actor in its supply
                                            chain. In addition, three of the trader/grinders sourcing 43% global production
                                            provided monitoring information. Two companies sourcing 27.7% global
                                            cocoa only monitor compliance in one or a few specific countries. The other
                                            company sourcing 15% global cocoa has monitoring across its entire cocoa
                                            supply regardless of geography. The major limitation identified for monitoring
                                            was the scope of work for covering all the farms. While the smaller company
                                            at 4.5% global cocoa did not monitor for deforestation, the other two larger
                                            companies are utilizing deforestation baseline assessments and GPS
                                            polygon farm mapping for their monitoring.

                                            All five trader/grinder companies conduct farmer training and are
                                            deploying mapping down to farm level. While all companies are mapping
                                            to farm level they are at various stages of implementation, and some
                                            companies are only mapping to farm level in certain origin countries or
                                            through specific sustainability programs. All but one of the trader/grinders is
                                            also promoting effective land use planning with local and/or national
                                            authorities to enable successful implementation of their deforestation-
                                            related commitments.

Graph 3. Percent of global cocoa
production that is impacted by different
implementation activities per supply                                                         4.7%
                                              Promoting effective land use planning              11.3%
chain segment (Source: Climate Focus)
                                                                                                                               54.3%

                                                                                             3.9%
                                                    Mapping sourcing to farm level                              31.1%
                                                                                                                                       65.1%

                                                                                             4.7%
                                                                   Training farmers                             31.1%
                                                                                                                                       65.1%

                                                                                             4.7%
                                                  Sourcing criteria to your suppliers                 19.8%
                                                                                                                 34.5%

                                                                                        0%   10%    20%   30%     40%    50%   60%     70%

                                                                Bean-to-Bar         Chocolate Producer        Trader/Grinder



                                                                                                                                             31
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Information from three chocolate producers that source 30% of annual
                                            global cocoa production shows that they are all implementing their
                                            commitments via farmer training, and they are all in the process of
                                            mapping their sourcing down to the farm level. However, only one company
                                            (sourcing 11% of global cocoa) is promoting land-use planning, and two of
                                            the companies (collectively sourcing 20% of global cocoa) are using sourcing
                                            criteria for their suppliers to implement their commitments. Those involved in
                                            promoting land-use planning are working in community landscapes in an
                                            inclusive process whereby communities are deciding where to keep or
                                            expand cocoa production and where to reforest. The company is helping the
                                            community engage with the Forestry Commission on reforestation plans,
                                            selecting the right on-farm trees and agroforestry systems, Companies
                                            promoting land-use planning can also be involved at a more macro-
                                            landscape level engaging with subnational governments on sustainable
                                            development captured in land-use planning decisions that would safeguard
                                            remaining forests.

                                            The five chocolate producers surveyed that utilize 39% of global cocoa
                                            provided little information on compliance. One company sourcing 10% of
                                            global cocoa and is committed to 100% certification reported that 35% of its
                                            cocoa is certified which reflects the level of compliance from its suppliers.
                                            The company is committed to publicly disclosing information on its progress
                                            going forward. This one company also provided monitoring information where
                                            it relies on certification for monitoring, which means 65% of its supply is not
                                            necessarily being monitored for sustainability compliance, and it also relies
                                            on certification criteria for deforestation monitoring.

                                            Of five bean-to-bar companies whose annual cocoa bean sourcing
                                            ranges from 0.1% to just under 4% of annual global cocoa production,
                                            the largest company is using all of the implementation tools described
                                            including supplier sourcing criteria, farmer training, mapping to farm
                                            level, and promoting effective land use planning with local and national
                                            governments. All but one of the smaller bean-to-bar companies use
                                            sourcing criteria and farmer training as part of their deforestation-related
                                            commitment implementation. Two of the smaller companies sourcing just
                                            over 1% of annual global cocoa production are also promoting land-use
                                            planning and two of them are also mapping to farm level.

                                            The bean-to-bar companies assessed here are relatively small in terms
                                            of global cocoa production. One company sourcing 0.1% global cocoa
                                            reported that 99% of its supply is certified and 80% of its
                                            subsidiaries/suppliers are in full compliance with is deforestation-related
                                            policies. Another company sourcing 1% global cocoa reported that 95% of its
                                            subsidiaries and suppliers are fully compliant. Meanwhile, the larger bean-to-
                                            bar company in the group sourcing 3.6% global cocoa reported that 33% of
                                            its subsidiaries and suppliers are in compliance with their policies.

                                            Three of the bean-to-bar companies have a monitoring system that
                                            covers all of their suppliers and for some in multiple countries. All three
                                            conduct annual monitoring, and find the major limitation to be a lack of
                                            human resources and the commitment from their suppliers. Only one of
                                            them, the larger company sourcing 3.6% global cocoa, has a monitoring
                                            system to detect deforestation where they use GPS polygons of their farmers
                                            and combine that with the mapping efforts in the REDD+ pilot areas they
                                            operate within.


                                                                                                                       32
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            The three consumer goods and retail companies did not have any
                                            commitments and therefore no information to share on implementation
                                            in terms of compliance or monitoring. One consumer goods company that
                                            sources 0.3% of global cocoa is committed to responsible sourcing and is
                                            using a customized program with a trader/grinder to source cocoa that meets
                                            their customers’ narrow interests and also satisfy their CSR principles.

                                            Companies use certification schemes or their own tools to trace
                                            cocoa in the supply chain. However, these cover only a small number of
                                            the producers and creates complexity and uncertainty for smallholders
                                            given the bureaucracy around multitude schemes and standards. Issues
                                            that make tracing and monitoring challenging are particular to each of the
                                            exporting countries.

                                            In Côte d’Ivoire, the cocoa sector is managed by the Conseil du Café-
                                            Cacao (CCC), and most cocoa procurement takes place through the
                                            unorganized sector which involves many intermediaries. There are
                                            cooperatives who are involved in certification schemes and sustainability
                                            programs of companies but they form a small part cocoa market. There is
                                            also a lack of stability in the supply chain as farmers and cooperatives
                                            undertake transactions based on best offer at the time. This makes
                                            traceability and transparency difficult. Some of the CCC’s goals include
                                            developing a sustainable cocoa economy through better organization of
                                            producers and improved productivity, setting up a guaranteed minimum
                                            price, and strengthening governance and transparency. 50

                                            In Ghana on the other hand the Ghana Cocoa Marketing Board
                                            (COCOBOD) has a multi-faceted role in the cocoa sector. It controls
                                            many parts of the supply chain; sets the prices, controls the quality, tests
                                            and distributes inputs, does research and provides extension, is involved
                                            in buying and processing part of the cocoa, and they are the sole exporter
                                            of cocoa. The quality of cocoa and information of farmers are recorded by
                                            licensed buyers at the farm gate and records are kept at all levels of
                                            supply chain.

                                            Barriers to implementation and company suggestions to
                                            overcome them

                                            The most important issues that companies identified in addressing
                                            deforestation in cocoa production overall, their own operational landscape,
                                            and within their own company’s approach include: land tenure, agricultural
                                            intensification, deforestation awareness in local populations, and
                                            revenue diversification. Only a few companies highlighted research and
                                            development on climate smart cocoa, buffer zones, and payment for
                                            ecosystem services as key issues. A few companies flagged governments
                                            and their governance capacity and regulatory frameworks as an important
                                            issue for addressing deforestation in cocoa overall. Others also mentioned
                                            smallholders lack of ability to comply with sustainability policies, a lack of
                                            market access, and limited technology and traceability systems for cocoa-
                                            driven deforestation.

                                            For companies with commitments that include tree-on-farm and
                                            agroforestry systems there is a lack of knowledge to inform

                                            50
                                              Conseil du Café-Cacao (2011). Status and objectives of the Coffee-Cocoa Council.
                                            http://www.conseilcafecacao.ci/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=112&Itemid=186



                                                                                                                                         33
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            practitioners on the optimum mix of trees on farm to assist both value
                                            creation and ecosystem services. One specific knowledge barrier for trees
                                            is knowing how to improve soil fertility. In addition, there is a knowledge gap
                                            on optimum agroforestry systems for deployment in company and NGO
                                            programs. Sustainable practitioners need to know which species and tree
                                            density will yield the best results for their landscape, and the availability
                                            status for these plant materials. The general misunderstandings extend to
                                            the difference between high-diversity agroforestry and intensified/high
                                            productivity agroforestry, and the cocoa community needs to better define
                                            the purpose of different agroforestry systems and what is best for dual or
                                            single purposes. There is also concern that some agroforestry systems could
                                            spread disease and pests, but more research is necessary. Also, within
                                            some companies there is a lack of non-cocoa tree knowledge and a lack of
                                            ability to market those benefits to farmers or others who could harvest those
                                            trees or their non-timber forest products. The agroforestry products also
                                            have to have proper market linkages, and their absence is another barrier to
                                            implementing these practices.

                                            Beyond companies, there is a knowledge barrier with farmers who still
                                            see full sun plantations as more efficient than agroforestry systems.
                                            Part of this is linked to a need for higher technical knowledge among farmers
                                            who do not see benefits due to poor implementation. Likewise, there needs
                                            to be more investment in proper agroforestry implementation, but the way
                                            agroforestry is being spread across the landscape generates costs for
                                            industry, occupies larger land surfaces than necessary (land sparing versus
                                            land sharing) and they are yet to determine the proper value to this action.

                                            There exist important data gaps to fill for companies to better
                                            implement and monitor their policies and programs. Companies
                                            mentioned the need for updated forest maps from the government and clear
                                            communication on what maps are to be officially used for companies to
                                            transpose their own GPS farm maps onto for traceability and monitoring, and
                                            for company auditors to use for verification in the field. Companies need this
                                            information and improved satellite imagery for landscape level deforestation
                                            monitoring to assess risk and policy effectiveness. Access to universally
                                            agreed maps is also necessary for identifying and avoiding sourcing from
                                            farmers that have encroached into gazette forests. Also, companies with
                                            climate commitments need accurate maps to assess carbon stock and land
                                            use changes that impact their emissions accounting and reporting. These
                                            forest and tree cover maps are also important gaps to fill for communities
                                            and certification programs to use for tree counting and monitoring for
                                            compliance with environmental criteria.

Box 5. Case Study: Mondelēz & Cocoa
Life. Production and protection through        Cocoa Life, a Mondelēz International effort, is active in six countries and has
community-based initiatives                    reached over 76,000 farmers in nearly 800 communities. In Ghana, Cocoa Life
                                               is working with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
                                               Environmental Sustainability and Policy (ESP) project for Cocoa Production in
                                               Ghana, the Ghana Cocoa Board (COCOBOD), and cocoa traders to address
                                               deforestation and improve sustainable cocoa production.

                                               The deforestation has altered the micro-climates in Ghana’s equatorial
                                               environment that were once ideal for cocoa production, and now it is difficult to
                                               grow profitable cocoa in these degraded areas which in turn leaves
                                               smallholders with few options except to expand into the forest. It is this
                                               unsustainable dynamic that Cocoa Life is working to address with the help of


                                                                                                                                   34
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                                 ESP. Cocoa life and its partners are working to create the national enabling
                                                 environment necessary for their smallholders to be successful and sustainable
                                                 by ensuring that the national REDD+ policies are based off and thereby
                                                 beneficial for farm-level needs and realities.

                                                 To input community-based knowledge into national-level policy like REDD+,
                                                 Cocoa Life and the UNDP are piloting an approach called Community Resource
                                                 Management Areas (CREMAs) in 36 communities in Ghana’s North cocoa
                                                 region. CREMAs are a tool for natural resource management and planning that
                                                 provides communities with resources for community initiatives and helps them
                                                 protect forest and wildlife within the CREMA. One community initiative is the
                                                 reintroduction of native shade trees to cocoa farms that serve as both habitats
                                                 for wildlife and also to restore the cocoa trees’ preferred microclimate that was
                                                 previously lost to deforestation. The UNDP is also assisting farmers that replant
                                                 trees by helping them register ownership of the trees with the Forestry
                                                 Commission. This initiative has successfully distributed 787,000 seedlings to
                                                 9,600 farmers, and the tree planting efforts have a 95% success rate.51 52

                                                 At the same time as trees are being restored to the cocoa farmers’ landscape to
                                                 restore productivity and forest habitat, Cocoa Life and COCOBOD are also
                                                 training smallholders on more sustainable farming practices through the Cocoa
                                                 Extension and Advisory Services program. This is accomplished through the
                                                 work of Community Extension Agents that train farmers in sustainable
                                                 agricultural practices and provide them with access to quality seedlings, fertilizer
                                                 and pesticides. Farmers in this program now boast 55% higher production per
                                                 hectare than the national average.



                                  3.2.3 Enabling Environment
                                            The support of governments, financial institutions, and other
                                            stakeholders is a critical part of shifting toward deforestation-free
                                            sustainable commodities. Criterion 3 assesses current support for
                                            deforestation-related commitments and the areas of improvement to better
                                            enable sustainable cocoa production. The policy frameworks and sustainable
                                            cocoa initiatives in producer countries are described, and barriers to progress
                                            identified by the private sector are also considered based on surveys and
                                            interviews with companies. There is also a compilation of sustainable cocoa
                                            initiatives to consider herein, and this includes those where there is current
                                            company involvement and serves as a list of initiatives for companies to
                                            consider for future involvement.

                                            It is important to consider what potential partner companies have
                                            identified and how public and private partners could provide support for
                                            deforestation-related commitments. This includes a description of where
                                            companies would like to see more public-private collaboration. A sustainable
                                            cocoa sector can also be supported by importing countries, and their potential
                                            role and actions are considered in this section. In addition, the financial
                                            institutions that invest in soft commodities have a role to play considering their
                                            investments can and do contribute to deforestation. Their role and potential
                                            corrective actions are also important to consider in the context of sustainable
                                            cocoa investments.



                                            51
                                              Mondelez (2015). At the Paris Climate Summit: Mondelez International Announces Plans to Combat Deforestation.
                                            https://www.cocoalife.org/progress/at-the-paris-climate-summit-mondelez-international-announces-plans-to-combat-
                                            deforestation
                                            52
                                              Mondelez (2015). The Call for Well-being, 2015 Progress Report.
                                            http://www.mondelezinternational.com/~/media/mondelezcorporate/uploads/downloads/cfwbprogressreport.pdf



                                                                                                                                                         35
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Deforestation-related commitments and initiatives by cocoa-
                                            producing countries

                                            Côte d’Ivoire

                                            Policy framework

                                            In 2011 the government of Côte d’Ivoire became a partner country of the
                                            UN-REDD Programme and committed to address deforestation in the
                                            country. The commitment was later embodied in a Presidential Decree in
                                            2012. This political commitment is also manifested in the country’s
                                            endorsement of the NYDF and the Ivorian President’s commitment to produce
                                            “zero-deforestation cocoa” as of 2017 and to reverse the rate of deforestation
                                            in the UN Climate Summit in 2014. Côte d’Ivoire’s Intended Nationally
                                            Determined Contribution (INDC) includes reduction of greenhouse gas
                                            emissions from deforestation and forest degradation but it does not
                                            specifically mention deforestation from cocoa.

                                            The political commitment is translated into national and sectoral
                                            policies, strategies and programs. The National REDD+ Strategy initiated
                                            by the Ivorian government, with the support of the Forest Carbon Partnership
                                            Facility (FCPF) and UN-REDD, aims among others at promoting zero-
                                            deforestation agriculture, sustainable management of forests and protected
                                            areas and restoration and reforestation of degraded areas. 53 REDD+ issues
                                            have also been integrated in other government policies including the National
                                            Agriculture Investment Plan, the Forest Law Enforcement, Governance &
                                            Trade process and the 2014 Forestry Code.

                                            Furthermore, the cocoa sector approach includes the Public Private
                                            Partnership Platform (PPPP) that established by the Conseil Café Cacao
                                            (CCC) as a consultation framework with the private sector to address
                                            sustainability issues in the coffee and cocoa sector. The PPPP is meant
                                            to facilitate dialogue between the Government, industry, civil society and
                                            development partners. The platform also has a critical role in securing finance
                                            for the sector, and some of the key issues to be addressed include farmer
                                            training, certification, pest control, and access to planting material and inputs.

                                            Côte d’Ivoire’s Forest Investment Plan focuses on reviving the degraded
                                            forest areas in Center and Southwest regions both exploited mainly for
                                            cocoa production. The thematic areas of intervention include support to
                                            zero-deforestation agriculture by increasing productivity for small farmers and
                                            local communities through inter alia improving access to improved seeds and
                                            planting materials, organic fertilizer and integrated pest management, crop
                                            diversification and agroforestry approaches, agroforestry advisory services,
                                            including co-planting techniques, and environment-friendly and intensified
                                            growing practices.54

                                            Sustainable cocoa initiatives

                                            Although development of Côte d’Ivoire’s cocoa sector has been market
                                            driven, in the recent years the government plays a key role with the
                                            CCC regulating the sector. CCC is mandated to transform cocoa into a
                                            more productive and sustainable sector. It has established and leads PPPP

                                            53
                                                Côte d’Ivoire Forest Investment Plan Final Report May 2016 at https://www-
                                            cif.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/default/files/meeting-
                                            documents/fip_16_5_investment_plan_for_Côte_divoire_final.pdf
                                            54
                                                 Côte d’Ivoire Forest Investment Plan Final Report May 2016



                                                                                                                             36
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            as a national multi-stakeholder platform for dialogue with the private sector
                                            and civil society.55 However, participation of national industry in PPPP is low
                                            and it is viewed as a political governmental initiative not driven by economic
                                            incentives.56 There are also international platforms in cocoa sector that
                                            involve stakeholders from Côte d’Ivoire, for example, CocoaAction, WCF,
                                            and International Cocoa Organization.

                                            There is more dialogue and increased public-private partnership and support
                                            in cocoa sector but the land tenure is complex and law enforcement is weak
                                            given post-conflict political situation the country is in.




                                            55
                                              Le Conseil du Café-Cacao (2016). Communication of Coffee-Cocoa Board. At
                                            http://www.conseilcafecacao.ci/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=77:coffee-cocoa-board
                                            56
                                                 Aidenvironment, NewForesight and IIED (2015). Case Study Report: Cocoa in Côte d’Ivoire.



                                                                                                                                            37
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            See Table 5 for some of the main public and private initiatives to make the
                                            cocoa sector more sustainable.

Table 5. Public-private initiatives to       INITIATIVE         ACTORS                BRIEF DESCRIPTION
make sector more sustainable
                                             The                GRASP/United          The project aims to unite and protect forest
                                             Transboundary      Nations               fragments by promoting agroforestry for
                                             Tai-Sapo           Environment           cocoa plantations as well as Payments for
                                             Corridor           Programme             Environmental Services to encourage
                                             Project            (UNEP) and the        conservation and reforestation activities
                                                                Wild Chimpanzee       among local population.
                                                                Foundation (WCF)
                                                                then
                                                                taken up by GIZ
                                                                (German
                                                                development
                                                                agency) and KfW
                                                                (German
                                                                development bank)
                                                                as a complement
                                                                to the GRASP-
                                                                WCF initiative


                                             Greening the   RA, Global                It aims to change production practices in
                                             Cocoa Industry Environment               cocoa-producing countries and
                                                            Facility and UNEP         management procedures in cocoa and
                                                                                      chocolate companies to give the industry a
                                                                                      more active role in biodiversity
                                                                                      conservation while also helping increase
                                                                                      incomes for small producers to ensure the
                                                                                      sustainable development of the cocoa
                                                                                      industry.
                                             Quantity,          Coffee and Cocoa      For the period 2014 – 2023, it aims to
                                             Quality,           Council               secure the revenue of all players in coffee
                                             Growth" (2QC)                            and cocoa sectors and contribute, in
                                                                                      particular, to promote the socioeconomic
                                                                                      well-being of producers by improving farm
                                                                                      productivity through sustainable
                                                                                      intensification of the production system in
                                                                                      compliance with social and environmental
                                                                                      standards.
                                             The African        Cocoa industry        ACI 2 is the second phase of the African Cocoa
                                             Cocoa Initiative   members, USAID and    Initiative which focused on public-private modals
                                             (ACI) Phase 2      key government        to improve sustainable cocoa production. ACI 2
                                                                institutions in       aims at increasing production and use of quality
                                                                Cameroon, Côte        cocoa planting materials, pesticides and
                                                                d’Ivoire, Ghana and   fertilizers with focus on use of new techniques
                                                                Nigeria               and technology and supporting regulatory
                                                                                      bodies, and increasing the provision of financial
                                                                                      services in support of cocoa value chain.




                                                                                                                                      38
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Ghana

                                            Policy framework

                                            The government of Ghana has committed to address deforestation in
                                            the country. Ghana began developing a national REDD+ strategy in 2008
                                            with the World Bank Group’s FCPF to commence REDD+ readiness
                                            implementation under which National REDD+ Strategy and supporting
                                            mechanisms have been developed and the national policy framework has
                                            been revised to align it with REDD+ objectives. The process has benefited
                                            from partnership with numerous actors from international donors, civil
                                            society, private sector and local communities. The National REDD+ Strategy
                                            aims among others to reduce emission from deforestation, preserve forests
                                            and transform major agricultural commodities (includes cocoa) into climate
                                            smart production system and improving land-use in cocoa growing areas and
                                            mitigating cocoa expansion is considered a key intervention. 57

                                            The Forestry Commission of Ghana in cooperation with the FCPF,
                                            developed the Cocoa Forest REDD+ Program to tackle deforestation in
                                            the cocoa sector. The Program seeks to significantly reduce emissions due
                                            to cocoa farming and other key drivers across humid forest zones in
                                            collaboration with private sector, civil society and local communities within a
                                            results-based planning and implementation framework. Private sector actors
                                            including Olam, Touton, Solidaridad West Africa, Rainforest Alliance,
                                            International Union for Conservation of Nature-Netherlands, the Ghana
                                            Cocoa Platform, and the Nature Conservation Research Center have shown
                                            support and commitment in implementing the Program.58 Ghana’s Emissions
                                            Reduction Program Idea Note is accepted in the pipeline of the FCPF
                                            Carbon Fund.

                                            Cocoa as a driver of deforestation is addressed in Ghana’s Forest
                                            Investment Plan as well. The overall goal of FIP is to address the
                                            underlying drivers of deforestation with focus on improving forest
                                            management practices to reduce forest degradation in select humid forest
                                            zones. Promoting sustainable climate smart cocoa and agricultural farming is
                                            among main areas of intervention.59

                                            Sustainable cocoa initiatives

                                            The initiatives to improve sustainability in cocoa sector so far have
                                            focused on alignment of the sector, improving public sector
                                            governance, organizing the production base, increasing productivity
                                            and strengthening of demand. Although, the supply-chain is strongly
                                            shaped by COCOBOD, efforts from other stakeholders from private sector
                                            and civil society play an important role in transforming the sector. COCOBOD
                                            is the government-led marketing board for cocoa under Ministry of Finance
                                            which manages the cocoa sector.




                                            57
                                              Ghana National REDD+ Strategy 2015 at
                                            https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2016/Sep/Ghana%27s%20National%20REDD%2B%20Strategy
                                            %20Dec%202015.pdf
                                            58
                                              Ghana ER-PIN, 2014 at https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2014/February/Ghana%20ER-
                                            PIN%20CF9.pdf
                                            59
                                              Ghana Forest Investment Plan (2012). At
                                            http://www.fcghana.org/assets/file/Programmes/Forest_Investment_Plan_fip/Ghana%20Draft%20FIP%203-
                                            5%20_31_august2012.pdf



                                                                                                                                                        39
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Many projects and programs have come about via the private sector
                                            and civil society actors with the expressed purpose of advancing
                                            sustainable cocoa. However, in the absence of a high-level coordinated
                                            approach, they have resulted in scattered initiatives that are unlikely to
                                            achieve impact at scale and provide incentives to farmers/producers for
                                            transformational change. Although a platform for sector dialogue and
                                            coordination exists, not all key stakeholders participate in this platform. 60

                                            Ghana Cocoa Platform was established as a platform for public-private
                                            dialogue and partnership and cooperation among all stakeholders with
                                            the objective of boosting sustainable production of cocoa in Ghana. It is
                                            supported by UNDP and chaired by COCOBOD with participation from
                                            farmers and farmer groups, public and private sector actors. Similarly,
                                            CocoaAction — a voluntary and non-competitive industry driven initiative by
                                            WCF — aims to boost productivity and community development in Ghana
                                            and Côte d’Ivoire.

                                            In addition to improving livelihood of farmers and promoting
                                            sustainability, certain projects address deforestation from cocoa
                                            production. In Table 6 is a summary of several such ongoing projects.
Table 6. Ghana examples addressing
deforestation from cocoa production              PROJECT                  ACTORS                                   BRIEF DESCRIPTION
                                                 Full Sun to              German Federal Ministry                  A more balanced approach to
                                                 Shaded Cocoa             of Environment, Nature                   cocoa production and forest
                                                 Agro-forestry            Conservation, Building                   protection, while supporting
                                                 Systems                  and Nuclear Safety and                   cocoa businesses to
                                                                          SNV (Netherlands                         implement transparent
                                                                          Development                              deforestation-free supply
                                                                          Organization)                            chains in Ghana.
                                                 Mainstreaming            Research Program on                      The project assesses the
                                                 Climate-smart            Climate Change,                          climate change exposure of
                                                 Agricultural             Agriculture and Food                     cocoa systems in Ghana by
                                                 practices in             Security (CCAFS),                        using a transect approach to
                                                 cocoa                    International Centre for                 identify sites with high,
                                                 production in            Tropical Agriculture and                 medium, and low climate
                                                 Ghana                    the International Institute              change impacts. Key actors
                                                                          of Tropical Agriculture,                 from the Ghanaian cocoa
                                                                          Rainforest Alliance, Root                sector are involved in
                                                                          Capital and the                          developing locally relevant
                                                                          Sustainable Food Lab                     adaptation strategies, such as
                                                                                                                   the adoption of climate-smart
                                                                                                                   agriculture, through
                                                                                                                   participation in multi-
                                                                                                                   stakeholder platforms.


                                                 Climate Cocoa            Olam and the Rainforest                  It is aimed to break the link
                                                 Partnership for          Alliance                                 between cocoa production
                                                 REDD+                                                             and deforestation and build
                                                 Preparation                                                       cocoa production areas mixed
                                                                                                                   with forest lands to become
                                                                                                                   more resilient to moisture and
                                                                                                                   temperature changes due to
                                                                                                                   climate change.


                                            60
                                              Aidenvironment, NewForesight and IIED (2015). Cocoa Study Report. http://sectortransformation.com/wp-
                                            content/uploads/2015/03/cocoaghana.pdf




                                                                                                                                                      40
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Democratic Republic of Congo

                                            Policy framework

                                            The existing policy framework of the DRC does not include any cocoa
                                            specific policy or strategy. Deforestation due to cocoa cultivation is
                                            addressed more broadly by policies addressing deforestation from
                                            agricultural expansion. DRC’s REDD+ program aims at avoiding forest lost
                                            from slash and burn agriculture by restoring abandoned cocoa plantations. 61
                                            DRC’s National REDD+ Strategy, which illustrates a vision for green
                                            economy, aims to stabilize forest cover on two-thirds of the country’s land
                                            area by 2030 and maintain it thereafter.62

                                            Sustainable forest management and expansion of forested area is
                                            advocated under Forest Code 2002. Furthermore, reducing deforestation
                                            and green growth are high-level political commitments reflected in the
                                            national Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 2011 – 2015 of the
                                            DRC. The government has also prioritized incorporating these commitments
                                            in country’s National Development Plan which is presently being developed.63
                                            They are also reflected in sectoral and cross-sectoral policies and strategies
                                            including land tenure reforms, land use planning and REDD+ standards in
                                            hydrocarbon and mining sectors which are integrated in the National REDD+
                                            Investment Plan 2015 – 2020.

                                            Sustainable cocoa initiatives

                                            Consistent conflict and political instability has profoundly affected the
                                            agriculture sector in the DRC. There is not sufficient data on specific
                                            government initiative in cocoa sector. However, slow and steady steps have
                                            been taken toward revitalizing the sector including initiatives to improve
                                            coffee and cocoa production largely replaced by subsistence farming during
                                            the years of conflict.

                                            Small scale and geographically focused interventions by private sector
                                            and civil society organizations are slowly growing. In Table 7 is a project
                                            with specific mandate to address deforestation in cocoa sector.

Table 7. DRC Project mandated to
                                                  PROJECT                ACTORS                      BRIEF DESCRIPTION
address deforestation
                                                  DRC Cocoa              The Lorna Young             The project aims to establish
                                                  Partnership            Foundation, Original        a holistic model for
                                                                         Beans, funded by U.K.       reforestation activities and
                                                                         Department for              cocoa expansion in mid and
                                                                         International Development   northern parts of Virunga,
                                                                                                     adopting a REDD-like
                                                                                                     approach that uses GIS
                                                                                                     mapping-informed replanting,
                                                                                                     farmer enrolment programs,
                                                                                                     nursery infrastructure and
                                                                                                     technical support and
                                                                                                     extension outreach to some
                                                                                                     10,000 smallholder farmers
                                                                                                     using radio/SMS platforms.


                                            61
                                                 DRC Revised ERPD 2016
                                            62
                                                 DRC Revised ERPD 2016
                                            63
                                                 DRC Revised ERPD 2016



                                                                                                                                41
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Private Sector: Barriers and suggestions for overcoming them

                                            In cocoa producing countries companies have expressed a need for a
                                            national strategy for forest protection. Such a strategy would provide an
                                            important reference point for companies in the formulation and
                                            implementation of their own policies. This can take the form of a national
                                            REDD+ strategy, green growth development plan, or similar that is a clear
                                            point of engagement and cooperation for the private sector.

                                            In some major cocoa-producing countries companies note a lack of
                                            commitment from relevant government administrations to support
                                            sustainable agricultural intensification. If a commitment was made, then
                                            the expectation is that resources would follow to help maintain or increase
                                            production levels on a reduced area. Despite the various efforts to address
                                            deforestation, companies still note the lack of a national strategy for forest
                                            protection from the government that companies could then cooperate toward
                                            and use as a guide for their own policies.

                                            Some companies perceive that origin country governments still lack a
                                            strong policy platform that acknowledges the link between cocoa and
                                            deforestation. According to private sector actors one obstacle to clear
                                            national commitments is the fact that not all parties and vested interests in
                                            cocoa-producing countries are fully cognizant of the link between
                                            deforestation and cocoa production. To enable action an agreement on the
                                            scale of the problem and transparent information on the land-use impact of
                                            the cocoa sector is needed. In countries where there is still no national
                                            strategy for forest protection then there is no platform for companies to
                                            engage with and help achieve the forest protection end goals. Part of
                                            devising this strategy also requires a general and agreed upon knowledge on
                                            the current drivers of deforestation within cocoa production.

                                            Many companies are concerned about the lack of a clear policy for
                                            dealing with the management of cocoa farms and communities
                                            illegally established in protected forests. They do not know how to
                                            proceed or engage with these farmers, and do not think that resolving this
                                            issue is their role. They need the appropriate government bodies to
                                            determine how to resolve this issue, and then this enables companies to
                                            find their points of engagement for facilitating the solution. This process
                                            needs to consider both how to restore the disturbed forest areas and how to
                                            assist those cocoa farmers affected to keep them in the cocoa industry.
                                            Multiple companies expressed support for a relocation plan for those
                                            farmers operating in protected forests, but stressed that it was not their role
                                            to provide the solution.

                                            Another barrier for investment is a lack of land and tree tenure in
                                            certain cocoa origin countries. Companies do not want to commit to and
                                            invest in agroforestry systems if the farmer is not granted ownership and
                                            future benefits from land improvements. National and subnational
                                            governments need to come together with local leaders, farmers and
                                            companies to resolve tenure issues that will promote long-term stewardship
                                            of shade trees on cocoa farms.

                                            Some companies are waiting for economic incentives that would help
                                            addressing deforestation from cocoa production. To enable commitment
                                            and investment in transformational change across cocoa production there


                                                                                                                         42
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            needs to be agreement on where and what type of investment and activities
                                            could take place and what types of payments (carbon/REDD/environmental
                                            services/certification/tree replanting commitments/unique origin) can be
                                            expected. There is a need to align current and expected climate impact
                                            science with the appropriate place-specific actions and strategies before
                                            companies and governments can move forward. There needs to be a
                                            concerted effort to transform actionable research conclusions into
                                            sustainable landscape strategies that inform sustainable governance bodies.

                                            Initiatives on cocoa and deforestation, company involvement and
                                            partners

                                            There is no shortage of initiatives that seek to address the issue of
                                            cocoa and deforestation. There are multi-stakeholder policy and research
                                            initiatives organized by NGOs, multi-lateral bodies, research bodies, and
                                            government ministries. In Table 8 are some examples, divided by country,
                                            that cocoa companies are either involved in or feel are important for future
                                            involvement.

Table 8. Initiatives on cocoa and
deforestation: country and company
                                                          INITIATIVES ON COCOA AND DEFORESTATION
                                                           BY COUNTRY AND COMPANY INVOLVEMENT


                                                                                COTE D'IVOIRE
                                                                                                                COMPANY
                                             PROJECT                    PARTNERS
                                                                                                              INVOLVEMENT
                                             Initiative for             IDH, partners from Private Sector         Yes
                                             Sustainable                (Cargill, OLAM; MARS; Barry
                                             Landscapes (ISLA)          Callebaut, Cemoi, Ecom, Althelia,
                                                                        Moringa, Livelihood Fund, Mondelez,
                                                                        SIAT, STBC), Government (Ministries
                                                                        of Planning, Environment, Water and
                                                                        Forests and Agriculture and
                                                                        SODEFOR, OIPR, REDD+ Agency and
                                                                        CCC) and others (WB, ICRAF,
                                                                        Ecotierra, TFT, CNRA, UFEM-CI,
                                                                        Solidaridad, AFD, GIZ and UTZ)
                                             Climate Smart Cocoa        WCF & USAID                               Yes
                                             Program
                                             Green Commodities          UNDP                                      No
                                             Program
                                             Deforestation research     Association ETC Terra                     No
                                             projects
                                             Parc Tai                   REDD+ initiatives                         Yes
                                             Forêt de la Mè             REDD+ initiatives                         No
                                             Bianouan                   Cacao Ami des Forêt                       Yes




                                                                                                                        43
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain




                                                                                     GHANA
                                                                                                               COMPANY
                                             PROJECT                   PARTNERS
                                                                                                             INVOLVEMENT
                                             Ghana Cocoa Forest        Forestry Commission (FC) and Ghana          Yes
                                             REDD++ Program            Cocoa Board (COCOBOD)
                                             Shaded Cocoa              SNV                                         Yes
                                             Agroforestry System
                                             Forest Investment         Ministry of Lands and Natural               Yes
                                             Program (FIP)             Resources, Forest Commission and
                                                                       COCOBOD
                                             Climate Smart Cocoa       WCF & USAID                                 Yes
                                             Program



                                                                                    CAMEROON
                                                                                                               COMPANY
                                             PROJECT                    PARTNERS
                                                                                                             INVOLVEMENT
                                             Partnership 4 Forests      U.K. Department for International          No
                                             (P4F)                      Development



                                                                  GLOBAL OR MULTIPLE COUNTRIES
                                                                                                               COMPANY
                                             PROJECT                    PARTNER
                                                                                                             INVOLVEMENT
                                                                        World Economic Forum & UNEP                Yes
                                                                        Finance
                                             Climate Smart Cocoa        World Cocoa Foundation & USAID             Yes
                                             P4F                        Palladium                                  Yes
                                             CCAFS                      CGIAR                                      No
                                             FCPF                       World Bank Group                           Yes
                                             BioCarbon Fund             World Bank Group                           Yes
                                             Initiative for
                                             Sustainable Forest
                                             Landscapes


                                            Deforestation-related commitments and actions by cocoa-
                                            importing countries

                                            There is a lack of information on deforestation-related commitments
                                            from cocoa-importing countries. Therefore, this section lists both the
                                            rationale and possible actions that cocoa-importing countries could take with
                                            regards to deforestation embedded in imported forest-risk commodities,
                                            including cocoa.

                                            While producer countries need to enhance forest protection policies
                                            and strengthen forest governance, cocoa-importing countries need to
                                            further explore options for putting in place regulatory incentives to
                                            reduce deforestation embedded in imported cocoa products. Policy and
                                            legal action from importing countries could include the elimination of illegality
                                            from imports, adoption of procurement standards, promotion of transparency
                                            and disclosure requirements, and leveraging and mainstreaming existing
                                            commitments and actions by leading companies.

                                                                                                                          44
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Importing governments and downstream supply-chain companies
                                            created demand for agricultural commodities and indirectly contribute
                                            to deforestation. By insisting on legality and sustainability in their import and
                                            procurement decisions, importers can help drive change in producing
                                            countries. Also, by taking measures to ensure that their markets are free
                                            from illegal production, this incentivizes producer country governments to
                                            enforce their laws, and it implies importing governments to hold their
                                            importers and manufacturers accountable by requiring them to be able to
                                            determine the legality of their imports.

                                            Cocoa-importing countries could consider establishing monitoring and
                                            disclosure requirements because without reliable information it will be
                                            impossible to identify and showcase companies that are progressing
                                            and those lagging. Putting in place such requirements has a powerful
                                            impact on building awareness and capacity among companies. Consumer
                                            countries need to develop requirements and provide affordable solutions for
                                            compliance in collaboration with industry, research organizations, and NGO
                                            as applicable.

                                            As has been described in previous sections certification is a widely-
                                            used tool for those committed to sourcing sustainable cocoa, and
                                            importing countries could adopt sustainability standards for public
                                            procurement based on certification. The Netherlands made a commitment
                                            in 2010 to source 100% sustainable cocoa by 2025. This was done through a
                                            Letter of Intent signed as a joint effort of the private sector, civil society and
                                            the government.64

                                            Public procurement requirements could lead to stronger demand-side
                                            action for the entire market. An example of importing countries promoting
                                            cooperation on sustainable supply chains was evident in 2015 when
                                            Denmark, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, and the United Kingdom
                                            highlighted sustainable palm oil production and encouraged joint action by
                                            the public and private sector in the Amsterdam Declaration on Palm Oil. This
                                            declaration could be expanded to cocoa, which is also exposed to the
                                            European market.

                                            Deforestation-related commitments and actions by financial institutions

                                            Investment decisions of financial institutions can be important drivers
                                            of deforestation and environmental degradation . More importantly, these
                                            institutions also hold the potential to support a shift toward sustainable supply
                                            chains. The elimination of deforestation from supply chains will require the
                                            integration and leveraging of multiple funding sources including rural credit to
                                            farmers, incentives from governments and development partners, and
                                            financial instruments supporting private sector actors along the supply chain.
                                            The smallholder makeup of the global cocoa sector means that an emphasis
                                            on rural credit access and building collateral for farmers is a priority action for
                                            financial institutions in collaboration with those trying to remove barriers to
                                            credit access. Also, the growing prevalence of company-owned sustainable
                                            supply chain programs means that resources spent developing financial
                                            instruments supporting these efforts would not be misplaced.



                                            64
                                              http://www.suedwind-institut.de/fileadmin/fuerSuedwind/Publikationen/2011/Kakaotagung_3_Marcel_Vernooij_-
                                            __Presentation__Sustainable_cocoa_and_The_Netherlands.pdf



                                                                                                                                                          45
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            Despite increasing NGO pressure, financial institutions continue to lag
                                            behind other sectors in adopting policies to eliminate deforestation
                                            from their portfolios. Since 2014, Forest 500 has assessed the
                                            commitments of 150 financial institutions to address deforestation in their
                                            lending and investment activities, and has since found that nearly one-third of
                                            investors had no commitment to tackle deforestation in any of their
                                            activities.65 An initial screening by UNEP and partners in 2015 found that
                                            very few of the 30 surveyed financial organizations monitor compliance with
                                            deforestation-related policies and that only 13% had developed financial
                                            products or services supporting sustainable land use investments.
                                            Furthermore, to enable financial institutions to self-assess their exposure to
                                            deforestation, UNEP and the Natural Capital Declaration have developed the
                                            Soft Commodities Forest-Risk Assessment Tool.66

                                            Overall, public banks have a particularly important role in steering rural
                                            development. Their ability to pair access to credit with public policy priorities
                                            addresses one of the challenges identified by supply-chain companies,
                                            namely the prohibitive costs for small-scale commodity producers to
                                            becoming certified. An estimated 80% of available smallholder finance
                                            comes from public policy banks (state and agricultural development banks).
                                            However, credit also matters for larger operations, and public institutions
                                            have significant influence to steer behavior via public credit programs.




                                  3.2.4 Impact on Forests
                                            The fourth assessment criterion assesses the effectiveness of
                                            companies’ and other stakeholders’ efforts and whether they translate
                                            into measurable reduction in forest loss. An understanding of
                                            effectiveness of efforts is essential to improve the approaches and systems
                                            that companies use, as well as the support that they receive from
                                            governments and other stakeholders. At the same time, it is crucial to target
                                            efforts to those places where forests are at risk. This is a key question for
                                            cocoa where, in some of the traditional producer countries, much of the
                                            suitable areas have already been cleared.

                                            To measure impact, deforestation in specific places needs be traced
                                            over time and the supply chain. To systematically assess the impact of
                                            deforestation pledges, it is necessary to link places of production and actors
                                            along the supply chain to deforestation impacts. Current data and tools
                                            cannot yet establish links between action and deforestation precisely or at
                                            scale. The challenge is even more pronounced in tracing deforestation from
                                            cocoa production as cocoa trees show up as forest in satellite images. Two
                                            new tools — Global Forest Watch (GFW) Commodities and Transparency for
                                            Sustainable Economies (Trase) — establish complementary platforms to
                                            monitor commercial agriculture’s overall deforestation impacts over time.

                                            The WRI launched its GFW platform, which uses satellite technology,
                                            open data, and crowd sourcing to map and monitor forest use and

                                            65
                                                 Global Canopy Programme: Forest 500 (http://forest500.org/)
                                            66
                                                 Climate Focus. 2016. Progress on the New York Declaration on Forests: Eliminating Deforestation from
                                            the Production of Agricultural Commodities – Goal 2 Assessment Report. Prepared by Climate Focus in
                                            cooperation with the NYDF Assessment Coalition with support from the Climate and Land Use Alliance
                                            and the Tropical Forest Alliance 2020.



                                                                                                                                                        46
Tracking Progress of Efforts to Eliminate Deforestation in the Cocoa Supply Chain



                                            change globally. It includes a GWF-Commodities, which allows for analysis
                                            of links between deforestation and specific regions or producer companies. It
                                            is built as a dynamic online forest monitoring and alert system that breaks
                                            down satellite data into mosaics and overlays it with open-sourced
                                            commodity data, such as maps that show where governments have allocated
                                            land to specific concessions or companies for agricultural development and
                                            maps of commodity production areas released by companies. 67

                                            Trase is an interactive supply-chain transparency platform that is being
                                            developed by a consortium convened by the Stockholm Environment
                                            Institute and the Global Canopy Programme. Trase is able to link supply-
                                            chain actors to the municipalities of production and their deforestation track
                                            records, combining data on individual shipments of commodities between
                                            ports and traders or other sources such as sectoral reports and national
                                            customs databases. Once actors are linked to places, Trase can link actors
                                            to impacts by overlaying the supply-chain information with maps of
                                            deforestation provided by third parties.68

Box 6. Case Study: Cargill Sustainable
Cocoa Initiatives
                                                   In addressing sustainability and deforestation in cocoa supply chain, Cargill has
                                                   projects in CIV, Ghana and Brazil. In a partnership with The Nature
                                                   Conservancy in Brazil, Cargill is planting trees in cleared forest areas and
                                                   growing 1,000 ha of cocoa using the forest canopy as shade protection. In CIV
                                                   and Ghana, Cargill works with 90,000 cocoa farmers in an effort to advance
                                                   sustainable cocoa farming including teaching new farming techniques for better
                                                   crop protection and use of fertilizer and supporting nurseries new more resilient
                                                   seedlings and young cocoa trees are grown and supplied to farmers.

                                                   Cargill has also partnered with WRI to develop a landscape approach to
                                                   evaluating deforestation risks in supply chains. The partnership combines
                                                   WRI’s world maps and analytical tools including satellite technology and
                                                   Cargill’s supply chain insights. A cross-commodity methodology was developed
                                                   for three supply chains (soybeans in Brazil and Paraguay, palm and cocoa
                                                   beans globally) to assess forest loss in priority sourcing areas establishing
                                                   2014 as a baseline against which Cargill will be able to measure progress
                                                   toward 2020 and 2030 no-deforestation goal.

                                                   Analysis of data from assessments was based around 1,918 separate
                                                   infrastructure points that Cargill owns, manages, or buys from, and include soy
                                                   silos, palm oil processing mills, and cocoa collection points across 14 countries.
                                                   For each point, an estimated sourcing radius (e.g., 30 km, 50 km, or variable)
                                                   was used to approximate the “draw area” from which that point may collect, and
                                                   the area within each radius was analyzed for tree cover loss including any
                                                   within overlapping protected areas. Results indicate that these areas
                                                   experienced 1.7 million hectares (about 1.4 percent) of tree cover loss in 2014.
                                                   Of that loss, 47,000 hectares were in protected areas.




                                            67
                                                 World Resources Institute, Global Forest Watch: http://www.globalforestwatch.org/
                                            68
                                                 Stockholm Environment Institute and Global Canopy Programme, Trase: https://trase.earth/



                                                                                                                                            47
Lessons from Other Commodities




                                    Lessons from
4.                                  Other
                                    Commodities

                                    The number of corporate commitments to reduce the deforestation of
                                    agricultural commodity supply chains continues to grow. Looking at
                                    agricultural commodities in general, more than 400 companies have made
                                    over 700 pledges to reduce their impacts on forests and the rights of forest
                                    communities. The NYDF 2016 progress assessment has analyzed progress
                                    in implementing existing commitments.69 Further analysis has been
                                    supported by the Tropical Forest Alliance 2020.70 In the following we will
                                    discuss how lessons from the “big four” can help cocoa actors to implement
                                    supply chain commitments.




                                 4.1 Exports and Emerging Markets
                                    Cocoa is almost exclusively an export commodity which is an
                                    important contributor to the GDP of West-African export countries. Only
                                    a very small percentage of cocoa is processed and consumed in producer
                                    countries. This makes the cocoa supply chain sensitive to market demands
                                    of importing countries, even more so than in the case of soy or palm.

                                    The majority of the world’s cocoa products are imported by the EU
                                    and the US, and these markets have growing sensitivities to
                                    sustainable products. Chocolate companies are responding to these
                                    sensitivities with their livelihoods and deforestation-related commitments.
                                    However, emerging economies in Asia are expected to become cocoa
                                    importers in the next several years.71 This trend is important because the
                                    consumer market in Asia has been slower to respond to sustainability
                                    concerns with other commodities.

                                    For comparison, less than half of the world’s palm oil flows to
                                    European and American markets, with most palm oil going to countries
                                    like China, India and Pakistan. The palm oil industry has struggled with this
                                    bifurcated market because of market leakage and lacking incentives for
                                    producers to adopt sustainable practices.

                                    Generally, incentives through premium payment for sustainable
                                    products are lacking. Here cocoa has a clear advantage through the


                                    69
                                         www.forestdeclaration.org
                                    70
                                         2017 Annual Report of TFA2020, forthcoming.
                                    71
                                         Reuters (2015)



                                                                                                                  48
Lessons from Other Commodities



                                    existence of a market-segment that is ready to pay for a premium product.
                                    Such markets are missing in palm oil, timber or soy. Still large segments of
                                    the market are not ready to pay for sustainability. The increasing relevance of
                                    emerging economies in importing cocoa where consumers are not willing to
                                    pay the premium price will put efforts under even more financial pressure.
                                    But even today, this is evident on a smaller scale in existing importing
                                    markets where consumer goods companies source only a small amount of
                                    certified cocoa products for their organic and premium cocoa products, and
                                    while they source cocoa products that supports livelihoods but do not
                                    address or avoid deforestation.

                                    Sustainable intensification will be key. In all agricultural commodities that
                                    drive deforestation, the growth in demand will have to be satisfied by more
                                    and better products from less land. While this is true for palm oil and beef
                                    (less so for soy where the yield gap is already very small), it is even more
                                    true for cocoa. Due to the unique characteristics of the cocoa industry and its
                                    vulnerability to climate change and deforestation, most companies committed
                                    to sustainable cocoa production have strong strategic operational reasons
                                    that concern the long-term viability of cocoa productivity that make a move
                                    toward sustainability and intensification/land sparing necessary.




                                 4.2 Certification and Multi-stakeholder Processes
                                    Certification standards govern an increasing global market share in
                                    certain commodities, including coffee (40%), cocoa (22%), and palm oil
                                    (22%). Since 2008, standards defined by the RSPO, SAN, and UTZ
                                    experienced a significant growth in compliant areas, increasing 30-fold, 9-
                                    fold, and 6.5-fold respectively. For many companies, certification is the
                                    preferred strategy to implement sustainability commitments. Analysis of
                                    deforestation-related commitments confirms that the majority of companies
                                    opt to limit procurement to certified products rather than defining their own
                                    company product standards.

                                    Certification schemes exert greater influence over production when a
                                    large proportion is consumed in environmentally sensitive markets, as
                                    is the case for EU and U.S. chocolate markets. Supply-chain efforts are
                                    generally more advanced in commodities with widely recognized certification
                                    standards and integrated supply chains, which provide easy and accessible
                                    options toward sustainability. Progress toward increasing certified production
                                    and sourcing has worked well for wood products and palm oil, but less so for
                                    soy and beef.

                                    While certification standards in the agriculture sector are a central
                                    component of private sector commitments to reduce deforestation and
                                    forest degradation, there is little empirical evidence regarding their
                                    large-scale and long-term impacts on forests. 72 A major limitation of
                                    certification schemes is their lack of influence over the bottom of the market.
                                    Without a functioning regulatory framework, other actors may continue to
                                    clear and degrade forests in these areas.




                                    72
                                         Steering Committee of the State-of-Knowledge Assessment of Standards and Certification, 2012.



                                                                                                                                         49
Lessons from Other Commodities



                                       If one of the “big four” agricultural drivers of deforestation can be
                                       compared with cocoa, it is palm oil: a highly exported tree crop that is
                                       largely produced by smallholder farmers (40% in the case of palm oil).
                                       Like in cocoa, the inclusion of smallholders in sustainability programs for
                                       palm oil is an ongoing challenge. In both cases, incentives to stimulate
                                       smallholder transition to more sustainable practices are either insufficient or
                                       inexistent. The elimination of illegality in the context of weak governance is
                                       another shared problem for both commodities.

                                       The inclusion of smallholders in RSPO allows us to draw some lessons
                                       for smallholder certification in the cocoa sector. According to RSPO
                                       there are over 2.2 million palm oil smallholders producing 30% of the world’s
                                       palm oil on 40% of the land used for palm oil cultivation.73 Under RSPO,
                                       there are about 166,000 smallholders covering 500,000 ha and producing
                                       1.73 million tons certified sustainable palm oil (CSPO) annually. The total
                                       RSPO certified area is about 2.93 million ha (17% smallholders), and
                                       altogether produce 11.45 million tons of CSPO annually (~15%
                                       smallholders), which is 17% of global palm oil production. Box 7 summarizes
                                       RSPO certification components that are relevant for cocoa.

Box 7. RPSO Certification Components
Relevant for Cocoa
                                               RSPO members agree every five years, most recently in 2013, to the
                                               principles and criteria (P&C) that are applied to their certified plantation and
                                               smallholder operations. RSPO is committed to the conservation of primary
                                               forests and HCV areas, and its members seek to achieve this through the
                                               round-table’s consensus-based P&C 5.2 and 7.3, which form the
                                               deforestation-related component of the global guidelines for producing palm
                                               oil sustainably.

                                               P&C 5.2 deals with the HCV approach for existing and new plantings,
                                               and it states:

                                                      The status of rare, threatened or endangered species and other High
                                                    Conservation Value habitats, if any, that exist in the plantation or that
                                                    could be affected by plantation or mill management, shall be identified
                                                    and operations managed to best ensure that they are maintained
                                                    and/or enhanced.

                                               To adhere to P&C 5.2 RSPO members go through an established HCV
                                               process. The process74 begins with identifying the presence of the six
                                               different types of HCVs by working with a licensed HCV assessor. Once the
                                               HCV area(s) are identified the assessor and grower determine how to
                                               manage the HCV areas to either maintain or enhance the identified HCVs.
                                               Finally, a monitoring regime is established that will determine if HCV
                                               management is effective or if adjustments need to be made. Then ongoing
                                               monitoring seeks to continually improve the understanding of the HCV status
                                               and trends that will inform the HCV management plan for the oil palm
                                               operation and are made public via HCV reports.75 It is important to note that
                                               an HCV standard is not deforestation-free as it allows deforestation of
                                               secondary forests. If followed correctly, the HCV standard rules out all
                                               development of primary forest areas, and it requires a management plan for
                                               other sensitive areas and/or species present.



                                       73
                                         RSPO (2016). Oil palm smallholders: a primer. http://www.rspo.org/smallholders/news/oil-palm-smallholders-a-
                                       primer
                                       74
                                        https://www.hcvnetwork.org/resources/folder.2006-09-29.6584228415/HCV%20good%20practice%20-
                                       %20guidance%20for%20practitioners.pdf
                                       75
                                            http://www.rspo.org/about/who-we-are/working-groups/biodiversity-high-conservation-values



                                                                                                                                                        50
Lessons from Other Commodities




                                         The other increasingly important P&C is 7.3 and this is the New Planting
                                         Procedure (NPP). This procedure76 protects primary forest (defined as
                                         never logged) from new or expanded palm oil development. The following
                                         are the criteria:

                                              New plantings since November 2005 have not replaced primary forest
                                          or any area required to maintain or enhance one or more High Conservation
                                          Values (HCVs).

                                              New plantings shall be planned and managed to best ensure the HCVs
                                          identified are maintained and/or enhanced (see Criterion 5.2).

                                             A comprehensive HCV assessment, including stakeholder
                                         consultation, shall be conducted prior to any conversion or new planting. This
                                         shall include a land use change analysis to determine changes to the
                                         vegetation since November 2005. This analysis shall be used, with proxies,
                                         to indicate changes to HCV status.

                                         The NPP process starts with an HCV assessment that identifies primary
                                         forest and HCV areas in the proposed development area. Then an
                                         implementation plan is prepared that describes actions adhering to the HCV
                                         assessment findings. The completed process and plan are then posted for
                                         public comment for 30 days. If no comments are received then land
                                         preparation and planting can begin, and if comments are received then the
                                         company or grower has to address them until a satisfactory resolution is
                                         reached and the plan can be certified. If a resolution cannot be reached, then
                                         the matter goes through the RSPO grievance process.77

                                         There is an ongoing debate and review for how to best include smallholders
                                         in RSPO principles. The most recent example of debate relates to the New
                                         Plantings Procedure (NPP), which aims to ensure that new oil palm plantings
                                         will not negatively impact primary forest, HCV areas, high carbon stocks
                                         (HCS) forests, fragile and marginal soils (peat), or local people’s lands.
                                         However, smallholder members have asserted that complying with the NPP
                                         (established. in 2010) is too burdensome and restricts their options for
                                         expansion. The RSPO members have asked RSPO to compose a
                                         smallholder strategy for NPP compliance.



                                 The palm oil experience shows that there needs to be a strategy and
                                 plan in place for how smallholders can comply with a deforestation-
                                 related standard taking into consideration limits on mobility, land
                                 claims, and availability of non-forested and agriculturally suitable land.
                                 The RSPO initially failed to consider these issues and only since submitting
                                 a formal resolution in 2015 are the smallholder issues being expeditiously
                                 dealt with.78

                                 Deforestation-related activities could be coordinated with government
                                 action to avoid conflict between private standards and legal
                                 requirements. Cocoa could either seek to complement relevant national
                                 laws or generate government buy-in for the zero-deforestation approach so
                                 that farmers can have certainty about the legality of their development plans.
                                 The process for recognizing HCV in national legislation has recently begun in

                                 76
                                   http://www.rspo.org/files/project/NPWG/RSPO%20Detailed%20Process%20Flow%20for%20New%20
                                 Plantings%20Procedures.pdf
                                 77
                                   http://www.rspo.org/files/project/NPWG/RSPO%20Detailed%20Process%20Flow%20for%20New%20
                                 Plantings%20Procedures.pdf
                                 78
                                      http://www.rspo.org/files/pdf/RT3/Proceedings/Session 5 Gary Paoli paper.pdf



                                                                                                                            51
Lessons from Other Commodities



                                 Indonesia and could be a lesson for cocoa-producing countries like Ghana
                                 and Côte d’Ivoire that they too can start assessing how they can enable a
                                 more harmonious legislative framework that promotes deforestation-free
                                 cocoa production going forward.79

                                 There is evidence that RSPO certification has done little to reduce or
                                 avoid deforestation since most of its certified plantations are on land
                                 deforested prior to certification baselines defined by RSPO . It is
                                 therefore important that any new cocoa deforestation-free efforts to
                                 adequately deal with the conservation of secondary forests and to prioritize
                                 certifying new cocoa operations and not just those with old plantings and
                                 historical deforestation that would be grandfathered in by strategically
                                 placed deforestation baselines. One option would be to supplement or
                                 replace HCV with the HCS approach and set clear country-specific carbon
                                 thresholds that would protect secondary and young regenerating forests
                                 from cocoa development.

                                 In addition, while palm oil has RSPO as the primary palm oil standard,
                                 the three main cocoa standards are not aligned on deforestation
                                 criteria. UTZ allows secondary forest clearance if there is compensatory
                                 reforestation and excludes development of primary forests, Fairtrade
                                 disallows development of HCV areas (implicitly primary forests), and RA/SAN
                                 doesn’t allow any deforestation of natural forest or HCV areas. This
                                 misalignment is not adequate for an industry which is concentrated among a
                                 small number of companies looking to reduce deforestation meanwhile not
                                 having a certification that covers enough of the market to meet all of their
                                 deforestation commitment sourcing needs.

                                 Regarding HCV and RSPO, there are several challenges that include a
                                 lack of qualified HCV assessors, a lack of RSPO approved certification
                                 bodies in certain geographies (e.g., Latin America), and finding suitable
                                 methods for conducting biodiversity assessments. Therefore, a zero-
                                 deforestation cocoa strategy that will rely on third party assessors will need
                                 to ensure that there is an adequate level of local and national capacity for
                                 training and hiring assessors for either HCV or HCS, especially if the
                                 standard is to be carried out at farm level.

                                 The creation of company-community partnerships provides an
                                 opportunity for joint management of HCV areas. There is a high degree of
                                 public scrutiny and skepticism that industry is able to conduct credible HCV
                                 assessments and commit to HCV management. The challenge remains to
                                 demonstrate effective HCV interpretation and implementation in either
                                 plantation or in agroforestry settings like cocoa. Through transparent
                                 processes and cooperation with communities, companies could show that
                                 they are consistently achieving conservation results and within an agreed
                                 upon set of metrics. Also, the development of capacity-building programs to
                                 strengthen HCV management and monitoring is an opportunity to help the
                                 private sector meet their goals and involve communities in their achievement.

                                 Lessons from RSPO show that it would be far better to conduct a
                                 regional HCV/HCS assessment that follows a landscape or
                                 jurisdictional approach. The sustainable cocoa strategy could avoid
                                 HCS/HCS areas altogether by identifying all HCV and HCS areas in cocoa-

                                 79
                                   http://www.inpop.id/en/news/read/12-02-2016-key-ministries-to-refine-high-conservation-value-guidelines-for-legal-
                                 recognition-in-indonesia



                                                                                                                                                  52
Lessons from Other Commodities



                                    producing regions as the first step rather than managing them within
                                    proposed development areas. The challenge is to determine who will finance
                                    these regional assessments, and even if conducted, this approach does not
                                    stop other non-certified farmers or companies from developing those
                                    HCV/HCS areas unless HCV/HCS becomes part of national law and cross-
                                    sectoral land use planning.80




                                 4.3 Landscape and Jurisdictional Approaches and
                                     Produce-and-Protect Initiatives
                                    Many governments, including the major cocoa producer countries are
                                    in the process of setting up jurisdictional programs in the context of
                                    REDD+. In recent years, other complementary approaches have emerged,
                                    such as initiatives for jurisdictional commodity certification, governance
                                    models (e.g., in Mexico), green-growth compacts (e.g., in East Kalimantan),
                                    and produce-protect initiatives for preferential sourcing.

                                    Mainstreaming zero-deforestation production and avoidance of leakage
                                    will only be achieved if implementation is done through landscape and
                                    jurisdictional level planning and cooperation. Successful reduction of
                                    deforestation requires landscape level interventions that combine private
                                    sector action along agricultural supply chains with public sector planning and
                                    efforts to integrate smallholders.

                                    Initiatives at jurisdictional scale provide a tool across supply chains to
                                    consolidate various sustainability efforts, create a platform for public-
                                    private partnerships, and allow monitoring and supply chain
                                    management at scale. Cooperation at the jurisdictional level enables
                                    embedding of private sector commodity commitments within government
                                    programs at the jurisdictional scale that strengthen governance and land
                                    planning activities. Such programs can be linked with results-based
                                    payments for REDD+ and jurisdictional approaches to certification. 81 Most of
                                    these initiatives are still at a planning or early stage. Nevertheless, they could
                                    provide interesting opportunities for promote sustainable smallholder
                                    production of cocoa at scale, by establishing a platform for dialogue and
                                    collaboration among business, government and community stakeholders. 82

                                    Jurisdictional approaches can be linked to public or private finance. To
                                    incentivize and compensate producer countries to make the necessary policy
                                    reforms, donor and consumer countries could provide results-based and
                                    other finance. Consumer countries could utilize climate finance as part of
                                    bilateral mitigation partnerships to give impetus to reforms in forest
                                    governance and climate smart agriculture to produce mitigation outcomes.

                                    Public and private finance could be blended in the context of ‘produce
                                    & protect agreements’. Under these agreements, communities,
                                    government, and companies agree to conserve forests in exchange for loan




                                    80
                                         http://www.rspo.org/files/pdf/RT3/Proceedings/Session%205%20Gary%20Paoli%20paper.pdf
                                    81
                                         WWF (2016)
                                    82
                                         Climate Focus 2016. NYDF Goal 2 report



                                                                                                                                53
Lessons from Other Commodities



                                 finance and technical assistance to increase agricultural productivity.
                                 Examples include:

                                               Unilever and Marks and Spencer’s produce-and-protect
                                                initiative for preferential sourcing from places with comprehensive
                                                climate and forest policies, announced at the Climate Summit in
                                                Paris in 2015. Unilever is piloting the approach for palm oil in the
                                                district of Kotawaringin Barat, Central Kalimantan, Indonesia. The
                                                company has entered a three-year Memorandum of Understanding
                                                with the provincial government of Central Kalimantan, the district
                                                government of Kotawaringin Barat, and Yayasan Penelitian Inovasi
                                                Bumi to support a jurisdictional approach for sourcing sustainable
                                                palm oil at village level. The partnership aims to: (1) achieve ISPO
                                                and RSPO smallholder certification for one village, (2) map
                                                smallholders and help them to obtain land certifications, business
                                                licenses and environmental permits in three villages, and (3) create a
                                                baseline assessment for a farmer organization in several villages.
                                                While the project takes place on a small scale, stating as one of its
                                                goals to be “the first certified sustainable village”, it shows potential
                                                for scale and systemic change due to its close partnership with the
                                                government at village, district and provincial level. 83

                                               The International Commodities/Jurisdiction Approach that seeks
                                                to provide an international platform to link jurisdictional programs
                                                with companies committed to reducing deforestation. To qualify for
                                                preferential sourcing, countries or subnational governments need to
                                                fulfill global standards for jurisdictional REDD+ programs as well as a
                                                set of defined criteria established by the companies. The initiative’s
                                                website84 aims at providing updated information assessing the
                                                jurisdictions performance against the criteria. An expert assessment
                                                concluded that programs that sign Emission Reductions Payment
                                                Agreements with the FCPF Carbon Fund or are validated under the
                                                Verified Carbon Standard Jurisdictional and Nested REDD
                                                framework are sufficiently consistent with the criteria established by
                                                the companies.

                                               IDH’s Production-Protection-Inclusion Fund (working title). IDH
                                                partners with tropical forest countries, donor countries, private sector
                                                and civil society organizations to work on deforestation-free
                                                jurisdictions and responsibly produced commodities including palm
                                                oil, pulp and paper, beef, soy and cocoa. Within this partnership IDH
                                                is incorporating a global Fund that aims to combine political,
                                                commercial and financial efforts to promote smallholder productivity
                                                and protect forests, peatlands and biodiversity. The Fund —
                                                launched in January 2017 — has received seed funding from
                                                Norway, but is intended to draw investment from other bilateral and
                                                multilateral donors and investors and the private sector. The Fund,
                                                the working title of which is Production-Protection-Inclusion Fund, is
                                                designed to link production and protection activities through
                                                financing, engage smallholders, use jurisdictional eligibility criteria to
                                                invest only in jurisdiction with proven deforestation commitments and


                                 83
                                    https://www.unilever.com/news/news-and-features/2017/We-are-driving-a-new-approach-to-sustainable-palm-
                                 oil.html
                                 84
                                      https://commoditiesjurisdictions.wordpress.com/criteria-and-assessment-process/



                                                                                                                                              54
Lessons from Other Commodities



                                                include flexible, long term and below market pricing to leverage
                                                commercial investments.85 86 87




                                 4.4 Tracing
                                    There are several initiatives by companies and NGOs in cocoa producer
                                    countries to improve transparency and traceability in cocoa supply
                                    chain. These include farm data management systems that allow farmers to
                                    store their information online which is accessible in real time creating a point
                                    of contact and a transparency and traceability platform. Variations of these
                                    initiatives are growing as a result of increasing demand by consumers.

                                    In regards to deforestation, however, the efforts are minimal. Efforts are
                                    concentrated on improving production and inculcating better agricultural
                                    practices to avoid future deforestation and forest degradation. Monitoring and
                                    measuring deforestation is challenging given the nature of the sector and
                                    supply chain actors.

                                    Assessing deforestation for any commodity supply chain is always
                                    challenging. The reasons are many and vary across commodities.
                                    Generally, companies find it difficult to develop company-wide monitoring
                                    framework given the peculiarity of each supply chain which also makes
                                    defining a company-wide baseline and covering all commodities or a
                                    complete supply chain challenging. There is also a perceived lack of
                                    willingness and little incentive for suppliers for compliance.

                                    For the big four commodities, many companies have traceability
                                    systems in place, but few can trace the origin of their products. Some
                                    find working with NGOs and think tanks useful to measure their progress
                                    while some participate in roundtables and certification schemes. Most
                                    companies express a need for a “global and unified traceability system and
                                    database”. It is, however, difficult to develop such systems both in terms of
                                    its technicality and an agreement among supply chain actors as well as an
                                    internal agreement within the company. Such a system also requires
                                    advanced technology and good data for each specific commodity to monitor
                                    and measure deforestation footprint. At present satellite imagery and data
                                    collection from local sources are the general practice which is found
                                    expensive especially where smallholders are concerned.

                                    The partnership between Cargill and WRI is a good example which
                                    combines WRI’s world maps and analytical tools including satellite
                                    technology and Cargill’s supply chain information and insights. A cross-
                                    commodity methodology is developed for three supply chains to assess
                                    forest loss in priority sourcing areas in soybeans in Brazil and Paraguay,
                                    palm and cocoa beans globally establishing 2014 as a baseline against

                                    85
                                       IDH Fund. https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/news/fund-to-protect-5-million-ha-tropical-forests-and-trigger-16-
                                    billion-usd-private-investments-launched-in-davos/
                                    86
                                       Climate Focus 2016. NYDF Goal 2 report; Government of the Kingdom of Norway. Liberia launches public-private
                                    cooperation to improve livelihoods and protect forests. [Online] 2016. https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/liberia-
                                    launches-public-private-cooperation-to-improve-liveli- hoods-and-protect-forests/id2480813/; IDH. Landscapes, Liberia.
                                    [Online] https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/landscapes/liberia/; IDH. Personal communication with IDH - the
                                    sustainable trade initiative. October 2016.; Government of the Kingdom of Norway. Liberia and Norway launch
                                    climate and forest partnership. [Online] 2014. https:// www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/Liberia-and-Norway-launch-
                                    climate-and-forest-partnership/id2001145/
                                    87
                                      IDH (2017). A Tropical Forest and Agriculture focused fund. The Fund Brochure. At
                                    https://www.idhsustainabletrade.com/uploaded/2017/01/A-Tropical-Forest-and-Agriculture-focused-fund.pdf



                                                                                                                                                      55
Lessons from Other Commodities



                                 which Cargill will be able to measure progress toward 2020 and 2030 no-
                                 deforestation goal.

                                 Some companies have developed commodity-specific monitoring
                                 framework. The Asia Pulp and Paper Group (APP), for instance, developed
                                 the Supplier Evaluation and Risk Assessment framework. Under its
                                 deforestation-free commitments, APP has committed to support the
                                 protection and restoration of degraded forest landscapes in Indonesia. APP
                                 implements an assessment of each of its suppliers, starting with an
                                 Association Procedure launched in 2014 after consultation with NGOs. The
                                 Association Procedure defines a mandatory framework for suppliers
                                 assessing compliance, systems to detect violations, and mechanisms to deal
                                 with grievances. APP also developed the Responsible Fiber Procurement
                                 and Purchasing Policy to ensure that suppliers adhere to responsible forest
                                 management. To improve its forest monitoring ability, APP is working to
                                 identify higher resolution and near-real-time remote sensing systems to
                                 detect forest cover change.




                                                                                                           56
A Vision of Zero-Deforestation Cocoa




                                          A Vision of Zero-
5.                                        Deforestation
                                          Cocoa

                                          Any deforestation-related strategy of the cocoa sector should combine
                                          criteria that concretely address cocoa as a driver of deforestation,
                                          sustainable intensification, and smallholder support. It is essential that
                                          the production is decoupled from deforestation while addressing poverty at
                                          the smallholder level. Jointly these solutions formulate the cornerstones of a
                                          vision for deforestation-free cocoa. In the following we describe several
                                          overarching principles and key strategies that could formulate the
                                          cornerstones for a vision of deforestation-free production in the cocoa sector.



                                       5.1 Principles

                                                 Protection of natural primary and secondary forest. Companies
                                                  that commit not to source cocoa associated with the deforestation of
                                                  natural forest can strengthen their brand and future prospects.
                                                  Beyond commitment, companies can work to assure that their
                                                  operations and supply chains (meaning their farmers and suppliers)
                                                  use practices that do not have negative effects on protected areas
                                                  and areas with high conservation values.



                                                 Legality. For producers and consumers, the elimination of illegality
                                                  within the cocoa supply chain is a priority in all unilateral and
                                                  cooperative, private and public, approaches. Legality is a basic
                                                  requirement for all sustainability initiatives and standards. Legality
                                                  concerns extend beyond breaches of forest law, and include the
                                                  need to ensure human rights laws are followed while enforcing forest
                                                  law. While the main responsibility for improving governance, and
                                                  enforcing laws rests with producer countries, driving legality is a
                                                  multi-sectoral effort. Consumer countries can consider legality
                                                  standards for imported commodities; private supply-chain actors can
                                                  demand proof of legality from their suppliers; and NGOs can
                                                  highlight incidents of illegality and hold governments as well as
                                                  private sector actors accountable across their territories and supply
                                                  chains.

                                                 Transparency. Transparency is the result of openness and
                                                  communication. It builds systemic trust and creates the basis for
                                                  accountability around supply chain efforts. It is facilitated by


                                                                                                                      57
A Vision of Zero-Deforestation Cocoa



                                                  disclosure, exchange, consolidation, and sharing of information, as
                                                  well as generation of new relevant data. Companies, policy makers,
                                                  and advocacy groups will only be able to take measures and target
                                                  appropriate actors if more is known about who is driving
                                                  deforestation and where. Transparency is essential to inform
                                                  governments about where and when deforestation takes place, and
                                                  private actors about the deforestation impact of their suppliers. It is
                                                  also invaluable for supply-chain actors and civil society to evaluate
                                                  the ambition of company commitments. Transparency across supply-
                                                  chains creates trust and facilitates cooperation between
                                                  governments and companies. Transparency is also a concern for
                                                  some operators/governments, and the incentives are not always
                                                  right. This needs a common strategy.

                                                 Integration into long-term strategies. Stakeholders require clear
                                                  and reliable signals from the public and private sector as a basis for
                                                  decision-making. Therefore, declarations and commitments need to
                                                  be cemented in respective long-term strategies. For the public sector
                                                  this means anchoring policies in long-term development strategies
                                                  and legal frameworks. For the private sector, efforts that are
                                                  supported at the highest level will have the greatest success. These
                                                  efforts can form an integral part of the operating mandates,
                                                  performance mandates, and incentive structures of respective
                                                  departments. Long-term strategies are important for the cocoa
                                                  industry as a whole when considering the long-term impacts of
                                                  climate change on future cocoa production areas.

                                                 Operation at scale. Jurisdictional or landscapes approaches
                                                  present opportunities to address sustainability through a combination
                                                  of private supply-chain efforts and public efforts of land-planning and
                                                  smallholder support that go well beyond project-based efforts.
                                                  Larger-scale programs allow the management of leakage and the
                                                  establishment of incentives across a landscape. Such incentives can
                                                  be linked with results-based payments for REDD+ and jurisdictional
                                                  approaches to certification.



                                       5.2 Strategies

                                          These principles can be operationalized through a number of key strategies:

                                          Public-private cooperation. Public-private cooperation and alignment
                                          provides an important foundation for the collective transformation of supply
                                          chains. Challenges are overcome and opportunities are exploited more
                                          effectively through a common understanding of needs and priorities, as well
                                          as a stronger alliance between stakeholders. This cooperation can be
                                          organized via a non-competitive platform where all cocoa sector companies
                                          convene to share information, best practices for achieving zero-deforestation
                                          cocoa and create collective strategies.

                                          Government ministries, research agencies, and state corporations need to be
                                          engaged to create collective strategies that the private sector can both co-
                                          design and use as their guide for implementing sustainable cocoa programs
                                          in the cocoa sector.

                                                                                                                      58
A Vision of Zero-Deforestation Cocoa




                                       In cooperation with governments, companies could develop forest policy
                                       safeguards that are applicable in current and future cocoa production regions
                                       and that define where cocoa development can occur depending on the type
                                       of forest cover present. This includes also identifying farms inside protected
                                       forests and providing a path to legality.

                                       Research needs to be conducted to find agreement on what types of forest
                                       cover scenarios could be used for cocoa development while supporting zero-
                                       deforestation commitments. To enable companies to achieve zero-
                                       deforestation cocoa, governments must commit to zero-deforestation cocoa
                                       and take the necessary immediate and long-term actions. These may include
                                       updating forest cover and classification maps, enforcing forest laws, and a
                                       moratorium on further expansion of cocoa farms.

                                       There also needs to be engagement with these actors on how payment for
                                       ecosystem services could be set up for farmers that increase tree-on-farm
                                       systems or help grow forest trees in deforested areas. Other incentives also
                                       need to be created for cocoa intensification efforts, and especially for those
                                       farmers doing so near forest areas instead of encroaching.

                                       The government ministries, their research arms, and forestry companies can
                                       also be engaged collectively by the cocoa sector to help produce more and
                                       better seedlings, develop sustainable and productive agroforestry systems
                                       and assist in their wide-scale implementation.

                                       The public and private sectors have complementary roles to play:

                                              Producer countries can strengthen compliance and law enforcement.
                                               A general push toward stronger legal systems facilitates efforts in the
                                               land and forest sectors. The stronger a national governance system
                                               is, the easier it will be to implement and enforce a particular law.
                                               There is a need for the governments in cocoa production countries to
                                               clarify land tenure, tree tenure and land-use and agricultural
                                               planning.
                                              The cocoa industry can support farmers through training and
                                               premiums for sustainable zero-deforestation cocoa either through
                                               their own programs or as part of certification.
                                              Chocolate manufacturers and end-users can be engaged more to
                                               help create a market for climate-smart and zero-deforestation cocoa
                                               to enable large-scale investments in producer countries.
                                              Cocoa importing countries can help create the incentives to drive
                                               increased sustainable cocoa production through financial support
                                               and regulations that eliminates illegality from imports.
                                              NGOs can be engaged with evidence-based lobbying, capacity-
                                               building programs and efforts to investigate livelihood alternatives or
                                               supplements for cocoa farmers.

                                       Sustainable finance. There is a need for public and private financial support
                                       to reinforce the cocoa industry's sustainability initiatives. To harness the
                                       power of finance for sustainably intensified production, collective efforts by
                                       financial institutions, producer and consumer country governments, and
                                       supply chain companies will be required to develop effective financial
                                       mechanisms that work for local producers that want to restore or replant their
                                       cocoa farms or shift to a cocoa agroforestry system. This can be achieved

                                                                                                                   59
A Vision of Zero-Deforestation Cocoa



                                       through targeted support by consumer country governments in: (i) the design
                                       and implementation for jurisdictional approaches, (ii) development and
                                       financial commitments to innovative mechanisms that redirect finance to
                                       sustainable production (including results-based finance, credit guarantees for
                                       sustainably produced commodities, and conditional up-front financing
                                       rewarding countries that adopt and implement policy measures and
                                       enforcement), and (iii) support for traceability and transparency systems that
                                       provide the very foundation for compliance and enforcement.

                                       Emphasis on cocoa farm restoration and regeneration. The ageing
                                       cocoa farms in West Africa are one of the reasons for low productivity, and
                                       there remains a need to create solutions to finance this regeneration. The
                                       restoration of existing under-performing cocoa farms is one strategy for
                                       decreasing deforestation from cocoa expansion, but farmers still require
                                       incentives to undertake this replanting to compensate for the years before
                                       cocoa production will return with the new trees. These incentives may come
                                       from the private sector as they consider investments in long-term crop
                                       security, from government to meet production goals, from development
                                       partners that have climate financing for reducing deforestation, or more likely
                                       some combination of all three.

                                       Support sustainable intensification backed by strong safeguards. There
                                       are both economic and conservation benefits to closing the productivity gap
                                       for smallholders and underperforming cocoa farms. The prospect of
                                       increasing yields will motivate farmers to participate in sustainability
                                       schemes. Sustainable intensification also helps to align climate and
                                       development goals. Sustainable intensification and other sustainability
                                       programs could become beneficiaries of climate finance where governments
                                       include such programs into their climate strategies. They can become a tool
                                       to achieve targets set out in Nationally Determined Contributions as part of
                                       the Paris Agreement. Governments could use the landscape approach and
                                       implement reforestation via agroforestry to restore a climate resilient cocoa
                                       sector as a joint mitigation adaptation effort. This type of effort could be
                                       attractive to governments that are looking for investments or areas to
                                       channel climate finance to that will both boost economic growth and address
                                       climate change issues in-country.

                                       Promote research and data collection aligned with zero-deforestation
                                       goals. Stakeholders also need to be able to access to current deforestation
                                       data and updated baselines on the role of cocoa and other crops on
                                       deforestation. Information on deforestation and HCV areas are essential to
                                       allow companies to develop and target sustainability programs. A related
                                       data gap is information on cocoa farms inside protected forests boundaries.
                                       Without this information, there can be no serious conversation and policy
                                       development from appropriate government administrations for how to resolve
                                       these infractions within protected areas. Research and research outputs
                                       need to be aligned and variables standardized. Datasets need to be put in
                                       the public domain and all publications (especially public funded) need to be
                                       open access. Also, there is a need to align current and expected climate
                                       impact science with the appropriate place-specific actions and strategies
                                       before companies and governments can move forward. There needs to be a
                                       concerted effort to transform actionable research conclusions into
                                       sustainable landscape strategies that inform sustainable governance bodies.




                                                                                                                   60
A Vision of Zero-Deforestation Cocoa



                                       In addition, there is a need to gather, mobilize, showcase and disseminate
                                       information available on agroforestry experiments/pilots conducted in West
                                       Africa, other cocoa producing regions, and current farmer practices.
                                       Collaboration is also needed for economic modeling for existing systems,
                                       forest-income substitution, and intensification best practices on marginal non-
                                       forest lands. It is imperative that the cocoa sector identify the optimum
                                       scenarios for different types of cocoa-agroforestry systems so that they may
                                       be deployed where appropriate to address needs like revenue diversification,
                                       climate adaptation, and enhancement of ecosystem services. Also, technical
                                       experts need to be engaged to scale up industry satellite mapping abilities.

                                       Alignment and harmonization. It is important to continue to increasingly
                                       align industry efforts around cocoa and the environment. Principles that
                                       guide an industry-wide effort to address deforestation are essential. These
                                       principles could be translated in concrete criteria that complement or go
                                       beyond existing certification efforts and company programs with a focus on
                                       measurable results. To maximize synergies and minimize confusion,
                                       company efforts can be coordinated with public efforts to halt deforestation.
                                       This effort needs to include a specific strategy and action plan for how
                                       smallholders will be able to comply with a zero-deforestation standard while
                                       taking into consideration smallholder limitations on mobility, land claims, and
                                       availability of non-forested and agriculturally suitable land.

                                       The WCF can continue to lead cocoa sustainability and improve industry
                                       alignment, and its CocoaAction program can explicitly address the issue of
                                       deforestation and other environmental concerns. This has created a lag in
                                       implementation because it has prevented some supply chain actors from
                                       using CocoaAction as an interface with other companies and with origin
                                       governments on deforestation issues. The next step could be to incorporate
                                       deforestation and climate change as new key elements under a specific
                                       environmental pillar of CocoaAction to complete the messaging around
                                       productivity, community and now environment.

                                       While a global action agenda is important, action in priority countries
                                       could be fast-tracked. Deforestation associated with cocoa can be traced to
                                       a few countries where the majority of deforestation is concentrated. Targeted
                                       action in these countries is particularly important to reduce agro-commodity-
                                       driven deforestation. At the same time, companies could be taking pre-
                                       emptive and concerted action through a landscape approach in the Congo
                                       Basin, Southeast Asia, and the Amazon region to prevent continued
                                       deforestation for cocoa that has already occurred in West Africa.

                                       The barriers to zero-deforestation cocoa are different across cocoa
                                       production regions. The next step in developing an action framework
                                       could be to specify what type of preventative and/or mitigation
                                       activities are appropriate for each region to ensure a sustainable future of
                                       cocoa landscapes.




                                                                                                                      61
