IFC Advisory Services in Indonesia




                             Developing a Sustainable
                             Plantation Wood Supply Through
                             Successful Community-Company
                             Partnerships in Indonesia
                             In partnership with:
Introduction

Since the early 1990s, the industrial timber plantation (Hutan Tanaman
Industri - HTI) scheme has been intended to serve as a major source
of timber to meet domestic and export demand. The need to meet
a large gap between legal wood supply and demand for forests
products has been the recent years as high as 50 million m3 per year
(MoF 2007) although statistics on domestic consumption are lacking.
As Indonesia’s human population grows by some 3 million people
per year and GDP growth is over 5% per year, wood consumption is
set to continue increasing – as are opportunities to export wood and
wood products.

                               While the plan to meet timber production needs from plantations offers
                               promise, the development of the timber plantation has been slower than
                               originally planned. As of 2008, from the total of 7.1 million hectares
                               allocated for Indonesia’s plantation development, less than 4 million
                               hectares have actually been planted (Ministry of Forestry 2008). Some
                               major constraints related to the development of timber plantation in
                               Indonesia, include: unclear HTI licensing processes, poor land use
                               planning, land use conflicts, limited financial viability, and the threat
                               from other land uses such as oil palm and mining (IFC 2010).

                               Of the above obstacles identified, plantation development is probably
                               constrained more often by social issues than by managerial or
                               environmental issues (Nawir et al 2003). Unclear boundaries, a lack of
                               communication between local communities and government agencies
                               responsible for concession allocation, encroachment and ancestral land
                               claims are frequent. In most cases, these issues lead to conflict between
                               companies and local communities in areas surrounding the plantation
                               For timber concession holders, resolving these conflicts takes time and
                               significantly increases costs.




2    Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
     Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
This paper focuses on company-community partnership as a means of reducing conflict
and turning the constraint into a positive relationship that benefits both the companies
and the communities. Some companies have had good success in working with local
communities on or near HTI lands. This paper discusses lessons learned from company-
community programs in three Indonesian timber companies: PT Wira Karya Sakti,
PT Finnantara Intiga, and PT Xylo Indah Pratama. Other companies have community partnership
programs as well – but are not reported here. The last section of the paper will discuss some principles
and approaches that are worth trying as companies and communities find a way to find mutual
benefit from industrial tree plantations.




                                                                   Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   3
                                                  Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
CONFLICTS IN TIMBER PLANTATIONS
In general, there are three underlying causes of conflict over natural resources in Indonesia, particularly
in HTI, which are: (i) unclear land tenure, (ii) environmental degradation, and (iii) imprecise
employee recruitment systems (Sakai 2002, Wulan et al 2004). Of these causes, unclear land tenure
has been the main trigger of most conflicts . When some forest areas were assigned to a forest
concession, local communities faced difficulties in accessing the land and resources (Kartodihardjo
and Supriono 2000, Obidzinsky and Chaudhury 2009). In most cases, the communities’ legal
position over the land rights (and resources) was weaker than the forest concession holders. In
addition, company’s lack of knowledge on existing land use or title considered as sacred or important
to the local community further damaged the relations in some areas. This can be portrayed in the
land use of graveyards or agricultural lands.

The implementation of the Decentralization Policy in 1999 encouraged local stakeholders to
participate more actively in the decision making processes related to land use. The local communities’
awareness increased as they were encouraged to stand up for their rights and participate in the
forest allocation processes, particularly those in the forest areas adjacent to their villages. Since the
implementation of this policy, conflicts between companies and the communities in the forestry
sector are reported to have increased. Research conducted by Wulan et al (2004) found that during
the period of 1997 to 2003 the number of conflicts in forestry increased greater than those in the
New Order era (1970-1998). Some 39% of the 359 recorded conflict cases occurred in HTI.

                                                                          These conflicts have cost the
                                                                          companies a significant amount of
                                                                          money, as the communities claimed
                                                                          not only for compensation of the
                                                                          land used but also for the loss of
                                                                          trees in the concession areas. Social
                                                                          conflicts increase costs related to
                                                                          timber plantation development
                                                                          in many ways, including higher
                                                                          investment costs caused by
                                                                          the delay of projects; higher
                                                                          operational costs, when conflicts
                                                                          disrupted the operations (e.g., land
                                                                          invasions, road blockages, theft of
                                                                          timber) and result of damage to a
                                                                          company’s reputation that may lead
                                                                          to potential loss of market (Wilson,
                                                                          2009).




4        Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
         Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
COMMUNITY-COMPANY PARTNERSHIP IN HTI
In the Government Regulation No. 6/2007 on Forest management and the Development Plans
for the Usage and Management of Forests (Tata Hutan dan Penyusunan Rencana Pengelolaan serta
Pemanfaatan Hutan), HTI concession holders are required by law to allocate a maximum 5%
of the total plantation area to develop a partnership program with the local community. Similar
requirements appeared in the Ministerial Decree No P.3/Menhut II/2008 on the delineation
processes of HTI concession areas which require HTI companies to develop partnership in the
enrichment planting area.

Since 1997, the government has sponsored several types of partnership, such as HTI-Trans
with requirement to hire transmigrates’ as labor in the plantations, community forestry (hutan
kemasyarakatan), village forest (hutan desa) social forestry programs, and farm forestry credit
schemes. Maturana et al (2005) includes two types of approaches for company and community
interactions i.e.: the direct cash benefit schemes (also known as community development (CD))
and the partnership schemes.

The Community Development (CD) program, proposed through the Law No. 41/1999 on Forestry
and the Government Regulation No 34/2002, requires forest companies to provide direct cash
benefit schemes for agricultural support and to build infrastructure amenities, such as: religious,
education and health facilities. In addition to this, 20% of the company’s shares should be allocated
                                                                  to the local community cooperatives
                                                                  (Walhi 2003). To some extent,
                                                                  providing (unskilled) employment
                                                                  to local communities is considered
                                                                  as an alternative income solution
                                                                  for the communities and minimizes
                                                                  the conflicts (Obidzinsky and
                                                                  Chaudhury 2009). However, these
                                                                  jobs are often seasonal and are rarely
                                                                  “permanent” jobs as they relate to
                                                                  field activities of land preparation,
                                                                  planting, weeding and harvesting.

                                                                          Partnership     schemes      require
                                                                          involvement of the communities as
                                                                          company partners in establishing
                                                                          profitable timber plantations. In
                                                                          these partnerships both parties share
                                                                          the risks and profits in developing
                                                                          the plantation in conflict areas, in




                                                                   Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   5
                                                  Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
addition to providing regular job opportunities in the plantation for the communities themselves.
The partnership is more crucial when the concession area is an important source of income for the
communities and when community expectations are high. The partnership is regarded as a mutual
and sustainable partnership where the company and the community work together based on a
shared agreement, in order to secure their mutual interests and objectives.

Several types of partnership have been implemented across Indonesia (Mayers and Vermeulen 2002,
Nawir et al 2003, Wulan et al 2003, and Maturana et al 2005). If these studies show one thing
in common, it is that perfect partnerships rarely happen and that successful partnerships require a
great deal of effort by both parties.

The following are examples from three partnership programs between companies and communities,
i.e. PT Wira Karya Sakti, PT Finnantara Intiga and PT Xylo Indah Pratama.


PT Wira Karya Sakti1
Since 1990, PT Wira Karya Sakti (PT WKS) has manageed a concession area of approximately
203,450 ha in Jambi to supply the Lontar Papyrus Pulp and Paper Industry. With a mill capacity
of 430,000 tons per year, PT WKS is committed to supplying some 1.9 million m3 of pulpwood
per year.

The communities living in the surrounding concession areas are dominated by Malay, Javanese, and
Sundanese ethnic people. Some of these communities claim that PT WKS concession areas overlap
with some of their private and adat lands. At the beginning of concession operations, the adat lands
claims by local communities covered some 40% of the concession area – of which some 27,000 ha
was deemed suitable for plantation development.

To resolve these land conflicts, the company initiated two partnership schemes:
   1.	 WKS-Hutan Rakyat (Community Forest) in 1995, which later in 1999 was improved to WKS
       Hutan Rakyat Pola Kemitraan (Community Forest Partnership). This partnership involves
       developing plantations on private lands.
   2.	 In 1999, PT WKS also developed another partnership scheme called WKS-Hutan Tanaman
       Pola Kemitraan (Timber Plantation Partnership), covering areas where the concession area
       overlapped with lands claimed by communities.

PT WKS started with Hutan Rakyat program in 1995 designed to develop better relationships with
the local communities by proposing to develop plantation on community land. The partnership
developed an 8-year contract with a benefit sharing scheme of 50/50 at the end of harvesting period
with PT WKS bearing all of the risk. For this scheme, the landowners were represented by farmer


1	   This part is mostly generated from Nawir et al 2003, Maturana et al 2005.




6              Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
               Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
groups. The agreement was drafted in a simple and easy-to-understand language for farmers. It also
set out only the responsibilities and rights of the parties involved.

In the two newer schemes, both WKS Hutan Rakyat Pola Kemitraan and WKS-Hutan Tanaman
Pola Kemitraan, formal arrangements included better legal coverage aspect in the institutional
development with the hopes of avoiding any further conflicts over the concession lands. PT WKS
in particular involved the local government from the initial development of the program to ensure a
better socialization process to the communities. The community group, Forest Farmer Cooperative
(KTH – Kelompok Tani Hutan) was established, followed by a Memorandum of Understanding
before signing the contractual agreement. This process is presented in Figure 1 below:


Figure 1. The processes of the community-company partnership development in
	         PT Wira Karya Sakti (source: Nawir et al 2003)




                                      REQUISITION LETTER FROM
                                         THE LAND OWNERS




                                PAPERS ON INDIVIDUAL LAND STATUS
                                   PROVIDED BY LAND OWNERS




                           MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN
                               COMPANY AND THE LAND OWNERS




                  LETTER OF AUTHORITY OR LETTER OF DECLARATION TO HAND
                   OVER LANDS TO THE COMPANY (SURAT PENYERAHAN LAHAN)




                                   MAPPING AND LAND INVENTORY




                                      CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENT

                                (SPK – SURAT PERJANJIAN KERJASAMA)




                                                                        Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   7
                                                       Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
With these schemes, the aspirations are not only to reduce the number of conflicts but also to
enable the company to increase the amount of Acacia mangium produced. Acacia planting would
turn the unproductive lands into more productive use, providing local jobs and fiber for the mill.
In addition, for up to 1 year, PT WKS would pay the standard labor wages for planting and
maintenance activities. In both schemes, the plantation developed 90% of the areas stipulated in
the agreement; while the remaining 10% was allocated for agribusiness practices, including: food
crops, cash crops, and fishponds. The contract period is for 43 years.

The partnership went further by trying to transform the farmer cooperatives to be more commercial.
PT WKS and the farmer cooperative formed a joint venture company called Bumi Teguh Pratiwi.
In the early stages, the sharing profit was 80:20 for PT WKS and the cooperative respectively.
Eventually the share due to e the cooperative would increase - after 35 years, the composition
would shift to 35:65 for PT WKS and the cooperative. Then the new scheme would add financial
and in-kind agribusiness support, capacity building development, and specific social funds from
PT WKS .

However, these objectives were not met as smoothly as expected. The joint venture did not work as
planned and in some places, conflicts between the company and the communities still occurred. In
2008, around 300 farmers from 5 districts of the Jambi Province held a demonstration at the local
government office to protest the land confiscation by PT WKS over their private lands (Tempo
Interaktif 2008). Then in February 2010, the farmers claimed that the partnership was not profitable.
Additionally, there were concerns that some of the private and ‘adat’ lands managed by PT WKS
would not be returned to the communities (Media Indonesia 2010a, Tempo Interaktif 2010). The
conflict continued until June, escalating in July 2010 with the community’s revolt by initiating the
planting of oil palm, palm, and pineapple produce within the concession area. By August 2010
the conflict intensified, resulting in the detainment of the company’s heavy equipments and a
coup d’état over the plantation areas. As a consequence, the company has indefinitely suspended
its operations (Media Indonesia 2010b) and is now seeking legal approaches and negotiations to
resolve the conflicts. This approach is specifically for the land containing timber plantation’s license
issued to PT WKS currently being occupied/claimed by the community. As for the concession
land occupied prior to the company’s operation, PT WKS would offer an enclave status to the
landowners according to the Ministry of Forestry regulations.


PT Finnantara Intiga2
PT Finnantara Intiga (PT FI) manages 299,700 ha of concession area in West Kalimantan province.
PT FI started their HTI operation in 1996. Initially, the majority of ownership was held by Nordic
Forest Development Holdings Pte Limited (NFDH), a subsidiary of STORA ENSO, at that time


2	   This part is generated from direct communication with PT FI, Rousyikin 2005, and Nawir et al 2003.




8             Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
              Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
the second largest pulp and paper company in the world. In 2004, the majority of shares were
bought by Global Forest Limited, a limited liability company under the Sinar Mas Group. The
remaining shares remained with PT Inhutani III. Of the 299,700 ha (mostly degraded lands), only
63% or 190,000 ha was available/financially feasible for plantation development.

Communities in the surrounding areas are mostly dominated by the indigenous Dayak people
(80%), while the remaining are from the Javanese and Malayan ethnic origins. During the early
stages of plantation development, PT FI learned that the Dayak communities lived within most of
the concessions areas. Thus, before establishing the plantation, PT FI initiated partnerships with
local communities to recognize the local people’s rights while securing the operational concession
areas.

It took a while for PT FI to convince the communities who were traumatized by the previous
bad experience with the partnership scheme of PT Inhutani III. The program started in 1996
with almost no villages wanting to cooperate with PT FI. After three years of intensive courtship
and regular discussions, the relationship with the communities improved and showed some good
results. In 1998, 7,000 ha of the areas were planted on the area under the partnership agreement
with no less than 130 villages surrounding or within the concession areas joining the partnership
by 2005.

Figure 2 describes the partnership scheme developed within PT FI’s concession. In this scheme,
the process starts with planning and technical preparations, including collection of the information
needed regarding the communities’ socio-economic conditions, to the identification of potential
areas for planting. Then, a socialization process was conducted by a task force team comprising
some stakeholders, including the local government of districts and sub district levels. Communities
and the company then designated areas for the partnership program, which in return determined
the amount of compensation for the communities and the potential job opportunities. The types of
established infrastructures and planted species were also included in the negotiations.




                                                                 Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   9
                                                Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
Figure 2. The processes of the community-company partnership development in
	         PT Finnantara Intiga (source: Nawir et al 2003)


                                                           PLANNING AND
                                                           PREPARATION



        SOCIO-ECONOMIC                                                            ACCESIBILITY
                                                       FIELD ORIENTATION
            SURVEY                                                                  SURVEY



                                                SOCIALIZATION (EXTENSION)
                                                AND COMMUNITY APPROACH




                                                       AREA MAPPING AND
                                                         DESIGNATION




                                                            NEGOTIATION




                                                             AGREEMENT



             PLANTATION                                                          COMMUNITY
            DEVELOPMENT                                 IMPLEMENTATION          DEVELOPMENT


                                                          Mutually supporting




The agreement included the following points:
  1.	 Both parties agreed to manage the designated area with the division of: 85% for Acacia
      plantation, 10% for native species planting and 5% for rubber planting.
  2.	 After harvesting, the company and the communities will share 90%/10% of the profit
      respectively.
  3.	 Currently the minimum royalty for communities is IDR 15,000 per ton of harvested timber.
      Since the initial stage of the program, the royalty provided has been doubled to IDR 30,000
      per ton.




10       Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
         Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
In addition, the company also provides land incentives (IDR 40,000/ha of land planted),
infrastructures funds (IDR 20,000/hectare of land planted), assistance in developing organizations,
social funds, credit assistances and technical assistance in agriculture.

The communities, with guidance from PT FI, established a Community Development Group
(KBU- Kelompok Usaha Bersama) so that the communities may improve the management of the
partnership with PT FI. The group is responsible for the implementation of five major components
covered in the partnership, including: credit and savings, community plantation, permanent-types
of agriculture, short-term perennial crops cultivation, and local species plantation.

The whole partnership process brings about intangible benefits for the communities involved. The
communities themselves have improved their negotiation skills when dealing and resolving conflicts
with the company. Conflicts are now resolved through dialogue instead of physical confrontation or
demonstrations. PT FI has started outsourcing some plantation operations jobs requiring low-level
skills and virtually no investment for expensive equipment. It also provides more job opportunities
for communities and opens greater involvement in the plantation operation leading to an improved
understanding and trust between both parties.

However, this partnership scheme requires large financial support from PT FI as the timber
concessions owner. It is expensive to develop the plantation derived from partnerships due to the
geographically fragmented location of plantation lands. This form of partnership also increased
the production costs per m3 of timber by providing shared profits to communities. At some point
it caused delays to the operation of the company’s plantation. For example the harvesting period,
which was set for 8 years, was delayed due to a lack of budget for profit sharing and infrastructure
development.


PT Xylo Indah Pratama3
PT Xylo Indah Pratama (XIP) started their business in 1989 when they set up a factory in Musi
Rawas, in South Sumatera Province and bought local woods to supply a large pencil producer,
Faber Castel. Since 1995 they have used Pulai darat (Alstonia scholaris) timber from local
communities. This species is a good material source for pencil slat and has been grown for years in
many community areas, next to rubber and home garden plantations. Interestingly, this species was
previously considered a weed and had a very low value .

To meet the growing demands for its pencil industry, PT XIP has since developed several community-
based schemes. First is a direct buying scheme from the farmers. Up until 2010, PT XIP bought
from 72,652 farmers in Musi Rawas District where the pulai timber comes from some 221,000
ha of community lands in 20 sub districts. Partly urged by the requirements to obtain timber


3	   This part is generated from direct communication with PT XIP, Mayers and Vermeulen 2002, Nawir et al 2003




                                                                                                       Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   11
                                                                                      Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
certification from Forest Stewardship Council (FSC), the company initiated the establishment of
community groups in 2007. However, until 2010, only 3 groups are established.

The main limitations to facilitating the establishment of more groups are PT XIP’s lack of budget
allocation. In addition, many group members feel that they gain only small additional economic
benefits by joining the groups. There is no price difference for timber coming from farmers who
join the groups and those who don’t. PT XIP provides benefits for farmers who join the group
through a compensation fee for existing/standing pulai tress in their land for approximately IDR
5,000 per tree per year and free pulai seeds. Apparently, those benefits are not attractive enough for
farmers to join the groups.

The second scheme was a partnership program initiated in 1997 between PT XIP and the local
communities. The District Forestry Office provided initial funding through the Dana Reboisasi
(Reforestation Fund) from the Forestry Department. PT XIP received IDR 10 billion to established
5,000 ha of pulai gading plantation on the communities’ lands. The local communities provided
the lands, while PT XIP was responsible for providing planting materials and management of
the plantation for 11 years as covered by the contract period. Figure 3 shows the process of this
partnership scheme.
Figure 3. The processes of the community-company partnership development in
	         PT Xylo Indah Pratama (source: Nawir et al 2003)


                                                      PREPARATION OF
                                                       INSTITUTIONAL
                                                       ARRANGEMENT




                                                    LAND PREPARATION




                                                        PLANTING AND
                                                        MAINTENANCE




                                              THINNING AND HARVESTING

During the contract, the community was not allowed to cut or replace the plants with species other
than pulai gading. At the end of the contract, the landowner would get 50% of the net profits,
after a deduction for tax and other harvesting costs. Plus, the landowner would gain some income
from tree thinning within the 5th and 7th year timeframe. Until 2003, 3,007ha of plantation was
developed from the target of 5,000 ha ( Table 1).




12       Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
         Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
Table 1. Planting realization of PT XIP in communities’ lands


    Year         Planting area (ha)        Location unit
    1997                 274               Jayaloka, Rahma
    1998                 704               Cecar, Pagar Ayu, SP7, SP8, SP9
    1999                 440               Cecar, Rahma, SP7, SP8, SP9, Tapah
    2000                 305               Cecar, Rahma, SP7, SP8, SP9, Tapah
    2001                 617               Cecar, SP7, SP8, SP9
    2002                 199               Lubuk Linggau
    2003                 352               Lubuk Linggau
    2004                 115               SP5
    TOTAL                3007
	


To facilitate the implementation of the partnership scheme, some new farmer groups were established.
PT XIP dealt with communities only through the leaders of the groups. In the beginning, it is
thought that the arrangement would make the partnership more efficient (low-cost) as PT XIP
dealt only with the appointed community representatives. For PT XIP the arrangement would also
help to manage communities’ expectations and demands to the company that are not relevant to
the partnership. However, the community felt this did not help them to establish trust with PT XIP
and reduced the possible transfer of knowledge needed to support plantation maintenance.

Some bigger issues surfaced during the implementation of the partnership, adding to the
communication concerns. First, the additional income from thinning activities in the 5th and 7th
years did not materialized. Second, it turned out that the selected main species of pulai gading was
not suitable for plantation in the designated areas resulting in a lower growth rate than expected.
The communities started to compare earnings with the rubber plantations in the neighboring areas
which are more profitable. Some community groups demanded early harvesting so their areas could
be replaced with rubber. For those who decided to harvest after 11 years, as agreed in the contract,
the harvesting volume was much lower than the target. The average production volume was around
30 m3 per ha from the targeted 500 m3 per ha and the net profit shared for the farmer was IDR 20
million per ha, way below the expected financial shares. After this experience, the company decided
to discontinue the second scheme. Now PT XIP obtains most of their timber supply from the pulai
trees that grow on community lands, as they had done in 1995. There are concerns over timber
shortage in the near future, but no solution has been proposed so far.

Regardless of the failure in increasing timber production, the whole process improved the relationship
between PT XIP and the local community. There has been no recorded increase of conflicts, even
when the partnership didn’t bring any positive results or when it was terminated.




                                                                             Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   13
                                                            Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
LESSONS LEARNED

Experiences from these three partnerships provide valuable lessons for
future development of community-company partnerships in timber
plantation areas. One thing is obvious from all of the cases above: it
takes years to gain mutual trust, to establish effective partnerships,
and it requires continuous efforts from all parties involved.


                                Informative and flexible agreements are required
                                Sound understanding and common expectations from all parties involved
                                in the partnership is essential in achieving effective collaboration.
                                Thoughtful consideration, such as the simplicity of using straightforward
                                and comprehensible language for the written agreement, may lead to
                                better understanding and greater commitment from all parties. When
                                compared to PT FI and PT WKS, PT XIP, provided a simple contract
                                that was easily understood by most of the landowners. This resulted in a
                                commitment by the landowners to obey the contract. When the trees did
                                not grow as expected, the communities did not harvest the trees without
                                prior notice to the company; some even decided to keep the trees until the
                                end of the contract. Another valuable lesson from the PT XIP partnership
                                is the flexibility of PT XIP to provide solutions based on existing progress.
                                Although not required in the contract, when the pulai trees showed slow
                                growth and some groups opted for early harvesting and a switch to
                                rubber, PT XIP still provided some maintenance fees for the farmers. In
                                a long-term partnership, some aspects in the agreement might change and
                                would not be relevant to the current situation. It is important to provide
                                room for adjustments as conditions change.


                                Better knowledge of technical issues will ensure a better
                                end result
                                Good planning and appropriate technical knowledge is essential for an
                                effective collaboration. The examples from PT XIP show how the lack
                                of knowledge on the tree species suited for the terrain negated the main
                                objective of the agreement. Being confident of technical information
                                on critical aspects such as growth rates is essential before entering into
                                contracts. This will not only improve plantation production but also
                                establish better communications with the communities and build trust
                                and confidence for all parties.



14    Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
      Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
Expenses related to social issues should be included in long-term financial plan
It takes time and resources to build an effective partnership. From all the partnerships above,
each took longer than 10 years to develop. The whole process required human resources and
financial support paid mostly by the lead company. Figure 4 shows the proportion of cost for
loan repayment, investment, operational (planting and harvesting), partnership/social costs and
overhead (administration, fee and taxes).
Figure 4. Proportion (%) of cost components in HTI development in three companies in Indonesia
(Source: Nawir et al 2003)




The three companies provided more than 10% of their total cost to finance the social issue
and partnership development – and in the case of PT FI, over 40% of total cost. The expenses
include training costs, income/livelihood diversification program, infrastructure constructions and
other occasional social funds. Social costs are recurring and company-community partnership
development is a long-term effort - hence, the cost related to social matters should be included in
the long-term financial plan. It will help to ensure sustainability and avoid unexpected disruption
of the program (references: PT XIP and PT FI).

When possible, alternative cost-sharing or alternatives revenues to bear social costs should be sought.
The companies can involve the sub-national government and share some of social costs (example of
PT XIP and the reforestation fund). Carbon revenues gained from a CDM (Clean Development
Mechanism) or VCS (Voluntary Carbon Standard) program for plantation on degraded lands is
another potential alternative. Potential use of carbon revenues to solve social barriers and improve
social condition provides a very strong case for the additionality needed in a carbon project
(Voluntary Carbon Standard 2007.1).




                                                                          Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   15
                                                         Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
POSITIVE COMMUNITY-COMPANY
PARTNERSHIP: WHAT PRINCIPLES ARE
NEEDED?

This section discusses some general principles considered crucial to the
development of a positive community-company partnership. Social,
economic, political, market and ecological attributes of a site also
combine to encourage adaptation and innovation.


                                Getting all required information at the initial stage.
                                Having sufficient information to design a good plan is a pre-condition to
                                start the partnership; including documenting the expectations from all
                                parties. This also includes understanding the production economics of
                                the crop – costs, cash flows and net revenues are all vitally important.


                                Proper socialization and comprehensible agreements.
                                Complicated or difficult language used in a contract causes confusion,
                                leading to a low level of commitment and can lead to disagreements.
                                Providing clear explanations and proper socialization to all parties involved
                                before the contract is signed is essential.


                                Intensive and continuous approach.
                                Having regular meetings with the community, both formal and informal,
                                helps build better relationships between both parties and improve
                                transparency. By discussing openly all things related to the agreement
                                and the partnership, concerns which may lead to future conflicts can be
                                voiced and dealt with. Regular monitoring and evaluation is also essential
                                to assessing if some adjustments should be made to accommodate new
                                developments that may affect the partnership. This should be done
                                regularly and communicated openly to all parties.


                                Providing alternative livelihood incomes.
                                All the partnerships of three companies above had agreed to share some
                                economic benefits at harvest. However, the partnership should also




16    Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
      Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
consider options for communities to get some income prior to the final harvest. In addition,
competition with other perennial crops such as oil palm and rubber may make it harder to justify
forest plantations where it is legally allowable to plant other crops. Rising prices and regular income
from oil palm and rubber provides a major economic incentive for communities to plant these
crops. Considering the growing competitiveness, it is important to agree on how best to support the
community economic interests, while continuing to respect the provisions of the agreement, and
the law, in establishing a productive timber plantation.


Intermediary agent.
Intermediaries, including local governments, NGOs, or other local authorities, play an important
role in facilitating the agreement process, as well as monitoring the implementation of the
partnership; even though the involvement of these institutions will increase the transaction costs.
Nevertheless, their involvement should ensure fair treatment for all parties and help provide capacity
building and the technical assistance required by the communities and the company in supporting
the implementation of a partnership program.

In most cases, the local government’s role is limited only to the socialization process of the program
during the initial phase. Their support is also limited to conflicts resolution processes when conflicts
already occur, but rarely in conflict prevention. Actually in some cases, active participation of the
local government would prevent any violation to the agreement. The local government can also
align the agreements with or even include it in the development plan of the district or province.




                                                                   Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   17
                                                  Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
CONCLUSION

Partnership is not an impossible mission nor an inexpensive one.
Partnerships are able to work effectively as long as it is based on a
win-win situation for all parties involved. A mutual and beneficial
relationship is created when all the parties involved agree on compatible
goals and are clear about their expectations, particularly related to the
responsibilities for both the costs, benefits and risks of engaging in
plantation forestry.



                                Fewer conflict in the area covered in the agreement can be a clear, positive
                                impact of a company-community partnership. Avoiding conflict and
                                the costs associated with conflict should be considered as a form of net
                                income by both parties.

                                Access to alternative revenues will help expedite the development of
                                sustainable plantation in Indonesia, to pay some costs associated with
                                social issues and to help ensuring sustainability of company-community
                                partnerships. Revenues from carbon projects that establish plantations
                                on degraded land offer new opportunities for plantation owners and
                                communities alike while contributing to Government climate change
                                mitigation goals (IFC 2010a).




18    Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply
      Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
REFERENCES
Barr, C. 2001. Banking on sustainability: structural adjustment and forestry reform in post-Suharto Indonesia.
        WWF,Washington D.C. and CIFOR, Bogor.
Cossalter, C. and Pye-Smith, C. 2003. Fast-Wood Forestry. Myths and Realities. Bogor, Indonesia: Center for
       International Forestry Research.
Hindra, B. 2009. Indonesia community Forestry 2005. Jakarta, Indonesia: Ministry of Forestry.
IFC. 2010. Using degraded lands to Help Meet Indonesian Demand for Wood and Climate Change Mitigation.
       International Finance Corporation. Jakarta, Indonesia.
IFC. 2010a. Using Climate Change Revenues to Grow More Wood and Reduce Net Carbos Emissions: Dual Purpose
       Forest Plantations. International Finance Corporation. Jakarta, Indonesia.
Kartodihardjo, H. and Supriono, A. 2000. The Impact of Sectoral Development on Natural Forest Conversion and
       Degradation: The case of Timber and Tree Crop Plantation in Indonesia. COFOR Occasional Paper No 26(E).
       Bogor, Indonesia.
Nawir, A.A., Santoso, L., and Mudhofar, I. 2003. Towards Mutually-Beneficial Company-Community Partnerships in
       Timber Plantation: Lesson learnt from Indonesia. CIFOR Working Paper No. 26. Bogor, Indonesia.
Maturana, J., Hosgood, N., and Suhartanto, A.A. 2005. Moving Towards Company-Community Partnerships. Element
      to take into account for fast Wood Plantation Companies in Indonesia. CIFOR Working Paper No. 29. Bogor,
      Indonesia.
Maturana, J. 2005. Economis Costs and Benefits of Allocating Forest land for Industrial Tree Plantation Development
      in Indonesia. CIFOR Working Paper No. 30. Bogor, Indonesia.
Mayers, J. and Vermeulen, S. 2002. Company-community forestry partnerships. From raw deals to mutual gains?
      London, UK: International Institute for Environmental and Development.
Media Indonesia. 2010a. Ribuan Petani di Jambi Tuntut PT WKS Kembalikan Lahan.
       17 Maret 2010. Jakarta, Indonesia.
       http://www.mediaindonesia.com/read/2010/03/17/129927/126/101/Ribuan-Petani-di-Jambi-Tuntut-PT-WKS-
       Kembalikan-Lahan (last accessed: 23 September 2010)
Media Indonesia. 2010b. Lahan HTI PT Wirakarya Sakti Diduduki Massa.
       5 August 2010. Jakarta, Indonesia.
       http://www.mediaindonesia.com/read/2010/08/08/160214/126/101/Lahan-HTI-PT-Wirakarya-Sakti-Diduduki-
       Massa (last accesed: 23 September 2010)
Ministry of Forestry. 2008. Statistik Kehutanan Indonesia Tahun 2008. Jakarta, Indonesia: Ministry of Forestry.
Obidzinski, K and Chauduri, M. 2009. Transition to timber plantation based forestry in Indonesia: towards a feasible
       new policy. International Forestry Review Vol 11 (1),79-87.
Rohsyikin, H. 2005. Resolusi konflik sosial dan lahan di PT Finnantara Inttiga Propinsi Kalimantan Barat. Bogor,
       Indonesia: APHI-Working Group Tenure.
Tempo Interaktif. 2008. Petani Protes Lahan Wira Karya Sakti. 4 February 2008. Jakarta, Indonesia.
      http://www.tempointeraktif.com/share/?act=TmV3cw==&type=UHJpbnQ=&media=bmV3cw==&y=JEdMT0JBT
      FNbeV0=&m=JEdMT0JBTFNbbV0=&d=JEdMT0JBTFNbZF0=&id=MTE2ODc5 (last accessed: 23 September 2010)
Tempo Interaktif. 2010. PT Wirakarya Sakti Dituding Serobot 41 Ribu Hektare Lahan Warga. 17 Maret 2010. Jakarta,
      Indonesia.
      http://www.tempointeraktif.com/share/?act=TmV3cw==&type=UHJpbnQ=&media=bmV3cw==&y=JEdMT0J
      BTFNbeV0=&m=JEdMT0JBTFNbbV0=&d=JEdMT0JBTFNbZF0=&id=MjMzMTY5 (last accessed: 23 September
      2010)
VCS Association. 2008. Voluntary Carbon Standard 2007.1. Washington D.C., United States.
Wilson, Emma. 2009. Company-Led Approaches to Conflict Resolution in the Forest Sector. The Forests Dialogue
       (TFD) Publication Number 4, 2009. London, UK.




                                                                           Developing a Sustainable Plantation Wood Supply   19
                                                          Through Successful Community-Company Partnerships in Indonesia
Contact Information
Indonesia Stock Exchange Building
Tower 2, 9th. floor
Jl. Jend. Sudirman Kav 52-53
Jakarta 12190
T: +62 (21) 2994 8001
F: +62 (21) 2994 8002
ifc.org/indonesia




                                    2010
