Waterlife: Improving Access
to Safe Drinking Water in India
		
How a social enterprise provides a sustainable and
affordable drinking water solution to underserved
populations in rural India




                                                     1
    © Copyright April 2017
    The World Bank
    1818 H Street, NW
    Washington, D.C. 20433
    All rights reserved


    Acknowledgements
    This case study was prepared by Natalia Agapitova, Cristina
    Navarrete Moreno and Rahul Barkataky from the World Bank’s Social
    Enterprise Innovations team, with support from NRMC India, a
    management consulting firm in New Delhi, India.

    The team would like to thank the Waterlife team, led by CEO
    Sudesh Menon, the operators of the plants that were visited and
    the customers who took part in the survey. Special thanks to Dr.
    Smita Misra, Lead, Water and Sanitation Specialist; Bhavna Bhatia,
    Regional Coordinator, LLI; and their team at the World Bank, New
    Delhi office for offering comments and suggestions during the
    preparation of the case.

    Sharon Fisher provided design and additional editing support.


    Contact Information
    Social Enterprise Innovations
    Leadership, Learning, and Innovation at the World Bank Group
    Contact: Cristina Navarrete Moreno
    www.worldbank.org

    Waterlife India Private Limited
    Madhapur, Hi Tech City, Hyderabad, India
    Contact: Sudesh Menon, CEO
    info@waterlifeindia.com
    Web: www.waterlifeindia.com
    Facebook: www.facebook.com/waterlifeindia
    Twitter: @waterlifeindia




2
Waterlife: Improving Access
to Safe Drinking Water in India


Contents
Summary................................................................................................................................. 5
Challenge............................................................................................................................... 6
Innovation............................................................................................................................... 9
Implementation................................................................................................................... 12
Impact................................................................................................................................... 16
Sustainability and Scale-Up................................................................................................ 18
Lessons Learned.................................................................................................................. 20


Appendices
I. References........................................................................................................................... 21
II. Case Study Research....................................................................................................... . 22
III. Waterlife Background..................................................................................................... . 23
IV. Waterlife’s Other Services and Products ...................................................................... . 24
V. Sample Communications.................................................................................................. 25
VI. Implementation Chart.................................................................................................... . 26
VII. Financial Charts............................................................................................................. . 27




                                                                                                                                               3
4
Summary
With 700 million people residing in rural India over a large and diverse topography, providing
access to safe drinking water is a significant challenge. The government has tried, playing a
key role in financing and implementing drinking water schemes. However, about 30% of urban
and 90% of rural households still depend completely on untreated surface or groundwater.1
    The health and economic burdens of poor drinking water are enormous. It is estimated
that about 21% of communicable diseases in India are water-related. The economic costs of
these waterborne diseases are an estimated USD 600 million annually with 73 million days of
lost labor.2
    In response, Waterlife, a for-profit company based out of Hyderabad, has experimented
with an innovative business model—building and operating stand-alone water purification
plants in underserved areas of India that would otherwise have no access to safe drinking water.
Waterlife partners with local governments to provide the location and money for construction
of the plants. Customers pay a small fee to fill up their 20-liter water jars, and this fee is used to
pay back the government expenditure and cover ongoing plant maintenance and operations.
    This is a decentralized safe drinking water model, with each plant able to serve approxi-
mately 5,000 individuals—in an area of about 5 km radius for walk-in customers and 10 km
for the small portion of customers who have water delivered. Satisfaction levels of surveyed
customers are quite high, at almost 100%.
    The Waterlife model builds strong community ownership due to a transparent operating
system with responsive customer service; community awareness campaigns on the importance
of safe drinking water; locations in convenient public settings; and the training of a local corps
of villagers to manage plant operations and maintenance. This community connection and
trust, along with a replicable business model, effective and self-sustaining operations and
maintenance, and strong partnerships with local governments and leaders, lend promise to
the scaling up and sustainability of Waterlife plants.
    Impact to date can be seen in a reduced incidence of waterborne diseases and related
medical expenses and improved job opportunities and school attendance for local villages.
The expectation is that if continued and expanded, the utilization of Waterlife plants will
enhance long-term economic and health development outcomes for disadvantaged and dis-
enfranchised populations in India.




                                                                                                         5
    Challenge
    Health and Economic Burdens
    India ranks 122 out of 123 countries surveyed on the safe water index.3 Water sources are
    increasingly being contaminated from pollution and over use. The population in rural India
    is mainly dependent on the groundwater as a source of drinking water. Groundwater in one-
    third of India’s 600 districts is not fit for drinking as the concentration of fluoride, iron, salinity
    and arsenic exceeds tolerance levels.4
         The health burden of poor drinking water is enormous. Waterborne diseases affect nearly
    37.5 million Indians annually. Unsafe water leads to stunted development in approximately
    20 million children every year. The single largest cause of ill health and death among children
    is diarrhea, resulting from the inadequate water quality along with poor sanitation practice
    and hygiene.5 Additionally, 66 million Indians are at risk due to excess fluoride and 10 million
    due to excess arsenic from drinking water.6
         The economic costs of these
    waterborne diseases are an esti-           Figure 1. Water Quality Status in India as of 2012
    mated USD 600 million annu-
    ally with 73 million days of lost
    labor.7 Individual families bear
    the burden with high household
    medical expenses. Nearly two-
    thirds of hospital beds are filled
    with patients with waterborne
    diseases, stressing an already
    inadequate health infrastruc-
    ture.
         The hardest hit by these eco-
    nomic, health and social burdens
    are those living in extreme
    poverty: according to the India
    National Family Health Survey,
    40% of those in extreme poverty
    used unimproved drinking water.8
    In rural and undeveloped areas
    it is not economically feasible to
    build expensive infrastructure for
    conventional water distribution                      Sixteen states               66 million
    systems. Monitoring groundwater                                                   people at risk
                                                         affected
    quality is challenging because of
    the geographical spread of vil-                      Severely affected            Moderately affected
    lages and many are not accessible
    to regular monitoring by central                     Affected: Severity           Data not available
                                                         not well known               or not affected
    agencies.9
                                              Source: WHO and UNICEF Joint Study, 2012


6
    There are also environmental concerns. 26.5 billion liters of untreated wastewater are dis-
charged into bodies of water every day, leaving these bodies of water not up to environmen-
tal protection standards.10

Government Strategy
The Government of India set targets to provide access to 40 liters per capita, per day of
piped water to households, or within a 100-meter radius of their household for at least 50%
of the rural population.
    The provision of clean drinking water has been given priority in the Constitution of India.
Article 47 confers the duty of providing clean drinking water and improving public health
standards to the individual states. However, within each state, the water sector is fragmented,
with separate agencies responsible for irrigation, domestic and industrial water supply.
Supply to domestic consumers, especially in the urban areas, is further fragmented.
    Traditionally throughout India, local governments have set up large-scale, centralized
piped water schemes where untreated water from a source is treated through sand filters,
chlorinated and then pumped up to overhead tanks for piping to houses. It is supply driven,
involves large capital expenditure, insufficient support structures at the state and commu-
nity levels, and lack of budget and professionals who can regularly operate and maintain the
systems. This leads to intermittent supply and poor quality of water.
    The purification methodology commonly used to disinfect water is bleaching powder or
hypochlorite solution. Most of the time, the quantity added into the water is uncontrolled;
leaving the possibility of too little being added so that the water is not disinfected properly,
or too much is added, allowing the water to become carcinogenic and toxic. Furthermore,
this method only removes biological contaminants and does not remove fluoride, iron and
arsenic.
    In April 2009, the National Rural Drinking Water Program was launched to provide grants
for the construction of rural water supply schemes with a special focus on areas where water
has poor quality. The goal of the program is decentralization—putting the planning, imple-
mentation, operation and maintenance in the hands of beneficiaries, which can be more
effective. Private participation to help with the planning and operation of water systems is
encouraged to this end.

Continuing Need
Despite the combined efforts and investment of both the national and state governments,
the goal of providing safe and adequate domestic water to every rural person in the country
remains to be achieved. Nearly 30% of urban and 90% of rural households still completely
depend on untreated surface or groundwater.11
   Considering India’s large and diverse topography and social and cultural differences, a
“one-size fits all” solution will not work. Private actors have made efforts to bridge the gap,
such as:
   •	 Water “ATMs,” which are cloud-managed, solar-powered, cashless vending machines
       providing clean drinking water 24 hours a day
   •	 Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) community hubs run by women’s groups
       that account for the internal revenue returns from water dispensing and sanitation
       charges
   However, the scaling up of these initiatives is difficult. Constraints include the limited avail-
ability of human resources, lack of transparency, lack of coordination mechanisms among
private actors, civil society and government, and bureaucratic delays by the local govern-
ments and states.



                                                                                                       7
    Table 1. Summary of Key Issues in the Quality of Water

     PROBLEM                                                  POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS

     Weak oversight by government institutions and poor       A decentralized, community-owned and managed
     provider accountability with respect to quality of       system in the hands of beneficiaries could ensure the
     water provided.                                          sustainability of impacts and benefits achieved.

     Expensive, large-scale infrastructure systems that are   Stand-alone water systems with purification components
     not economically viable for low-density (rural) areas.   that serve a certain radius provide added value and a
                                                              cost-effective scheme.

     Poor operation and maintenance, including lack of        Operation and maintenance measures can be imple-
     replacement and expansion, which results in support      mented at the local level to ensure the skills and finance
     structures that are insufficient or decaying and rapid   for operation and maintenance, replacement and expan-
     deterioration in the quality of water services.          sion.

     A limited purification methodology and system fail-      A water safety plan implemented at the local level could
     ures that lead to biological and chemical contamina-     prevent contamination at the source along with cost-
     tion. Ensuring water quality at the source and finding   effective and more stringent purification technologies.
     new technologies are crucial for water quality.

                     Despite these difficulties, the need for strong, scalable water delivery models remains
                 high—demand for clean drinking water will rise drastically, with intense competition for water
                 from agriculture and industry, and increasing scarcity and variability of water resources. Con-
                 tinuing financial and technological contributions from the private sector in the development
                 of sustainable water solutions is important. Synergy between the private and public sectors
                 will be crucial in solving the imminent water crisis.




8
Innovation
Waterlife Organization
In 2008, Waterlife established as a for-profit company based out of Hyderabad, India. Water-
life came about through a chance meeting of Mr. Sudesh Menon, one of the co-founders,
with Dr. Anji Reddy, founder of Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories, one of the largest pharmaceutical
companies of India. Mr. Menon was inspired by Dr. Reddy’s strong beliefs on the importance
of clean drinking water for the Indian people. Mr. Menon co-founded Waterlife along with
Mohan Ranbaore and Indranil Das to provide high quality safe water to underserved and chal-
lenging areas in an affordable and sustainable manner.
    Waterlife provides several services, including retail products to treat specific contamina-
tion on a small- and large-scale basis, treatment systems for institutional complexes such as
apartments and restaurants, and mobile water purification units (see Appendix IV).

Community Drinking Water Solution
Waterlife’s flagship service is building and managing community drinking water plants in under-
served areas of rural India that otherwise have no access to safe drinking water. The plants
provide safe, convenient, and affordable drinking water in 20-liter jars to individual walk-in
customers (Figure 2).




Figure 2. Overview of Waterlife’s Community Safe Drinking Water Solution




                                             Government pays
                                                                                              Construct plant
Target community     Partner with local      USD 60,000 to set       Conduct awareness
                                                                                              with green
that needs           government and          up 1,000 liters per     campaigns on safe
                                                                                              technology and
access to safe       council for space,      hour water plant        drinking water and to
                                                                                              a contaminant
drinking water       water source and                                generate customers
                                                                                              removal unit
                     electrical connection




Provide a                                                               Use walk-in
                                                                                              Charge customers
sustainable, cost-   Use customer fees        Train operators from      model for 90% of
                                                                                              one-time fee for
effective drinking   as revenue stream        the village for           customers; the rest
                                                                                              water jar, and a
water source for     to cover operating       operations and            have house-to-
                                                                                              low fee to fill up at
community            expenses and pay         maintenance               house distribution
                                                                                              each plant visit
                     back government


                                                                                                                      9
         Each plant offers a standard 1,000 liters per hour—the total capacity of the plant is 24,000
     liters per day. The plants are designed to be flexible and can cater to small hamlets at 500 liters
     per hour, or to bigger villages at 5,000 liters per hour. The most cost effective is a 1,000-liters
     per hour tank that can be expanded to 2,000 liters per hour by just adding a few additional
     components. In non-grid areas, Waterlife uses a solar powered model.
         The purification system removes both biological and chemical contamination, including
     fluoride, arsenic, nitrates and iron. The water quality meets Indian standard specifications for
     drinking water and WHO guidelines.12 Depending on the contamination of the water source,
     the configuration of the treatment system changes with multiple types of filtration.
         To raise demand for its product and access a large customer base, Waterlife forms non-
     traditional partnerships with community volunteers, NGOs, hospitals, schools and colleges
     to increase awareness about the importance of safe and hygienic drinking water. It also trains
     and appoints local youth as plant operators to instill ownership among the community and
     maintain continuity of operations.
         Waterlife makes sure it is the community that benefits from the plant by restricting water
     sales to individual customers and local institutions serving a catchment of around 5 km radius
     (for walk ins) and 10 km radius (for household distribution). By offering water only through
     20-liter jars, it creates regular community visits to the plant.

     Cost Structure and Analysis

     Capital expenses
       •	 USD 50,000 to set up a 1,000 liters/hour plant
       •	 USD 65,000 to set up a 1,000 liters/hour solar enhanced plant


     Operating expenses
     For a typical individual plant, total monthly operating costs equal about USD 410
        •	 Spares and consumables total USD 112 monthly
        •	 Electricity totals USD 102 monthly
        •	 Salaries total USD 196, broken down as follows:
            oo Operator salaries are USD 162 per month
            oo Collection agent (covering 20 plants) is USD 5 per month
            oo Service agent (covering 20 plants) is USD 5 per month
            oo Supervisor with Technician (covering 20 plants) is USD 8 per month
            oo Health and awareness executive for outreach campaigns (covering 10 plants) is
               USD 16 per month

     Revenue streams
     For a typical individual plant, total monthly sales equal about USD 1,215.
        •	 Customers pay a one-time fee of about USD 2.4–3.2 for a 20-liter water jar, and USD
            2.5 for a dispenser, which is optional.
        •	 Customers pay USD 0.08–0.11 for a 20-liter refill of the jar on each visit.
        •	 From the customer fees, about USD .01–.03 goes back to the government, toward
            paying the capital expenditure.
        •	 The service delivery charge is incorporated into the cost of the 20-liter jar.
        •	 Customer fees pay all of the operating expenses, listed above.


        In a conventional water system that pipes water into homes, the cost to the customer is
     0.25 cents/month for unlimited usage, and the cost to the government is approximately USD



10
8 million. In the Waterlife model, the cost to the customer is 0.0004 cents/liter, and the cost
to the government is a one-time USD 60,000 for the capital expenditure.
   A detailed breakeven analysis covering detailed revenues and expenses for individual
Waterlife plants in available in Appendix VI—this table indicates operations and maintenance
are cost-effective and self-sustained through customer fees. When considering capital expen-
diture, a detailed payback analysis is also available in Appendix VI.

Results Chain

Figure 3. Results Chain for Waterlife Model

         Inputs                     Outputs                    Outcomes               Development Goal
 •	 Financing                •	 Installation of           •	 Reduced incidence of     •	 Enhance long-term
 •	 Machinery                   community water             waterborne diseases          economic, social,
                                plants                      and related medical          environmental and
 •	 Infrastructure
                             •	 Increased delivery          expenses                     health development
 •	 Human resources                                                                      outcomes for
                                of safe drinking          •	 Increased
 •	 Training of operators       water meeting               productivity and             bottom of the
                                India standard              gender equity                pyramid through the
 •	 Awareness
                                specifications                                           sustainable provision
   campaigns                                              •	 Ensured                     of safe drinking water
                             •	 Increased awareness         environmental
                                of the importance of        benefits with safe
                                safe drinking water         filters and less waste
                             •	 Generation of               of water
                                revenue from
                                customer fees




                                                                                                                  11
     Implementation
     Location
     Since Waterlife depends on government subsidies for covering the costs of the plants, iden-
     tifying the location of the plant depends on government recommendations. A list of possible
     locations is jointly drafted. The Waterlife head office team reaches out to local governments,
     either through direct contact or personal introductions and presents the community water
     plant solution. After the meeting, the regional office follows up.
         Based on the recommendation, the Waterlife team meets with ward councilors or Panchayat
     members (the local body representatives at the village level). They create awareness about
     the proposed solution and understand community demands and openness of the local body
     to provide necessary infrastructure, such as space for construction, available water source and
     electricity connection. Once the local body gives consent, the Waterlife team tests the water
     to understand water quality in that area.

     Viability
     Three main areas are considered regarding the viability of a plant:
         (1) Customer base
         For a plant to be operationally viable, Waterlife needs about 3,000 individuals in their popu-
     lation area of around 2 km from the plant.
         (2) Awareness of community
         To create brand value before the plant is built, Waterlife runs a door-to-door hygiene educa-
     tion campaign that reaches out to schools and institutions and organizes regular health clinics.
     These campaigns make the customer base aware of the issues with contaminated drinking
     water and how the plant will change community members’ health.
         (3) Identification and training of operators
         To create a sense of ownership, Waterlife recruits operators from the community, based
     on recommendations by the local council. They train the operators onsite while the system is
     set up, so that on the day the plan is commissioned, the operators are ready to manage daily
     activities.

     Delivery Model
     Waterlife generally follows a walk-in model for delivery of water to create a sense of owner-
     ship among community members (Figure 4). Customers interviewed say they take comfort
     that the plant is safe and hygienic and not filled with water from contaminated sources since
     they can see for themselves they are receiving safe water directly to their jars from the source.
        In addition, when customers walk in with their jars to the plant, Waterlife can take this
     opportunity to educate or remind customers about the importance of safe drinking water and
     check whether the jars are being properly cleaned before the next visit. This helps monitor
     and control the health aspects of the customers.

     Operations, Monitoring and Maintenance
     It takes about 45 days to construct a plant once all approvals have been received. Appendix
     V provides a sample chart of the main activities with the number of days to complete each.

12
Figure 4. Distribution Methods for Water from the Waterlife Plant




                                          90%

                                                          Customers collect water at the plant
                                                          after paying user fees, creating a sense
                                                          of ownership and trust in quality




Waterlife community plant
                                                                             10%

                                         Women self-help groups fill water          Local entrepreneurs deliver jars to
                                         from the plant to be distributed to        households within a catchment of
                                         households within a radius of 2 kms        around 5 kms, for an extra charge



   Operators are critical to ensuring that the plant properly runs and receives needed mainte-
nance. Waterlife recruits operators from the community and trains them during construction.
Plant operators are contracted to an outside company, and Waterlife pays the rest of the team.
   Figure 5 shows a typical Waterlife team that manages all of the plants within the state and
reports to the head office. The service-in-charge takes care of operations and maintenance-
related issues within a geography. Generally one service-in-charge takes care of 2–3 districts
covering about 10–20 plants. Service engineers report to the service-in-charge and are respon-
sible for servicing 5–10 plants within a district. The plant operators are also trained as techni-
cians and by default each plant has one technician.



Figure 5. Typical State-Level Service Team for Plants

                               Service-in-charge
                                     (State)




                   Service Engineer           Service Engineer
                    1 (a number of             2 (a number of




                                   Technician                 Technician
                                  (a cluster of              (a cluster of



                                                                                                                          13
     Figure 6. Typical Operations Flow Chart for Waterlife Plant




     •	 Track daily water sales and transmit                                         •	 Spread awareness of plant
        report                                                                       •	 Conduct marketing and canvassing
     •	 Register new customers
     •	 Perform daily plant maintenance
     •	 Conduct water tests



                                                                                     •	   Conduct preventive maintenance
                                                                                     •	   Trouble shoot
                                                                                     •	   Train operators
                                                                                     •	   Conduct water tests




     •	 Visit plants for daily/weekly cash                                           •	 Review data and monitor
       collection                                                                    •	 Reconcile accounts with bank
     •	 Check sales and tally with flow meter                                        •	 Perform audits
     •	 Deposit cash in bank



                             Operators conduct daily maintenance of the plant. All plants have a maintenance chart, which
                         is the Standard Operating Procedure for the plant. It is primarily an easy maintenance model:
                             •	 The first change of major parts and filters takes place only after 3–4 years depending
                                 on the water quality of the plant for 500 bottles per day capacity.
                             •	 The average downtime of visited plants in a year is just two days.
                             •	 The operator is able to perform minor maintenance and repairs.
                             •	 For major maintenance requests, Waterlife has appointed service engineers who are on
                                 call 24/7 through a toll-free number.
                             Waterlife has a customized management information system to track bottle sales and total
                         cash collection each day from plants across India. The system is based on a mobile platform
                         that sends an SMS at the end of each day to the head office giving water meter readings,
                         electricity meter readings and total jar sales.
                             Water quality of each plant is monitored every month through analysis in certified labs and
                         reports are prominently displayed in each plant for customers. In some cases the local govern-
                         ment also conducts monthly analysis in their own labs and displays this report.
                             All plants prominently display a toll-free number for customers and operators to connect
                         with the head office team in case of any complaints and for maintenance issues. This gives
                         customers a direct line to ensure the plant is maintained well and the quality of the water is
                         accounted for.



14
Outreach Strategy
To reach out to its customers and educate its beneficiaries on the importance of safe drinking
water, Waterlife uses both traditional and non-traditional outreach methods.
   •	 Health workers: Waterlife appoints health workers who go from house-to-house build-
      ing awareness with leaflets and posters about safe drinking water and how it can impact
      overall health (see Appendix IV for samples). The health workers mainly target women
      of the household since they play a critical role in the water the family drinks.
   •	 School campaigns: To increase awareness among students who can influence their
      parents on the need for safe drinking water, Waterlife conducts drawing competitions
      and other awareness camps. It provides drinking water from its source to the school so
      that the teachers and students can sample the water and communicate its qualities to
      the community.
   •	 Health camps: In some of the project areas, Waterlife conducts health camps that provide
      free diagnoses and in some cases medicines to its beneficiaries. The health camp aims
      to diagnose waterborne diseases in the locality and communicate the importance of
      prevention from such diseases by drinking safe water.

Environmental Standards
Waterlife ensures full compliance with Indian environmental regulations and is driven by envi-
ronmentally friendly solutions. Waterlife ensures safe disposal of filters, membranes and dis-
charge water. Membranes are down cycled for disposal at authorized centers.
   Due to high pressure pumping of water into the filters, the present water recovery for
Waterlife plants range from 70–75%. The wastewater is discharged into the sewerage system.
   The water follows filtering standards in which it becomes free of all suspended impurities
down to 1 Micron, including organic impurities and waste as well as color, odor and taste.
Additional components ensure that a specific impurity, such as fluoride, is treated before the
water is released into the main stream or secondary usage.




                                                                                                 15
     Impact
     Community Empowerment
     One of the most important aspects of the Waterlife business model is the sense of owner-
     ship and trust that is created among community members because of the transparency of
     operations and opportunity for feedback. The plant operations are visible to customers who
     walk in every day to fill their jars. They see that the water they receive is actually filtered, every
     individual from every caste is treated equally, the plant is always kept clean, and they can call
     a posted toll-free number if they are not satisfied with the quality of the water, the operator
     or the plant.

     Community Perceptions of Waterlife
     In 2013, the Institute of Rural Management (IRMA), Anand, India surveyed 195 households in
     areas where Waterlife has community water plants: 120 in rural areas and 75 in urban areas. At
     present almost 60% of respondents in the urban and rural areas use Waterlife water for drinking.
         Since acceptance of Waterlife as the preferred mode of drinking water by the targeted
     population is important for both financial viability and impact on health, the research captured
     information on reasons why an existing customer would shift to using water from Waterlife
     plants. The survey found that the main factors are:
         •	 In the rural areas: 57% listed better health and 16% listed better taste.
         •	 In the urban areas: 89% listed better taste and 33% listed better health.
         The difference in factors might be that in urban areas, alternatives are available if the
     existing source is not good but in rural areas, there are no such alternatives. Other triggering
     factors listed were affordability, better quality of life and following a trend.

     Health and Economic Impact
     Based on the IRMA research, along with analysis of data and interaction with customers and
     public health center health workers, 97% of customers in the rural areas have seen improve-
     ment in their overall health, leading to a decrease in their visits to health centers and reduc-
     ing costs for medicine. In the urban areas 56% of the respondents said that there have been
     significant health benefits.
        Data from a public health center in Madav-     Table 2. Before/After Installation of
     ganfarata, Maharastra, India, one of the health   the Plant, Average Cases Per Day
     centers covered in the study area, indicates
     there has been a significant reduction in water-        Diseases         Before After
     borne diseases: about 65% in diarrhea, 57%
                                                             Diarrhea          30–40     10–15
     in urinary stones and 57% in skin diseases
     (Table 2).                                              Urinary stone 15–20          5–10
        In a cost-savings analysis undertaken
                                                             Skin diseases 30–40         10–20
     among the targeted households it was found
     that monthly savings in expenditures due to
                                                       Source: Public Health Center, Madavganfarata,
     better health was USD 28 for rural households     Maharashtra
     and USD 15 for urban households.



16
    Waterlife has also seen a corresponding increase in attendance at nearby schools or angan-
wadis (courtyard centers that provide education and health care) due to a lower rate of illness
in children. For example, data from an aganwadi in Gingera in the state of Karnataka, showed
the average number of school days missed due to waterborne diseases was three days per
month. After usage of the purified water, the absence was zero.



Table 3. Summary of Impact from Waterlife Plant Usage
An assessment of the Waterlife model based on an analytical framework.

 Reach                •	 Access: Expanded access to safe drinking water to underserved communities.
                      •	 Availability: Community centered plants serve an area of around 5 km radius (walk ins) and
                         10 km (distribution), equipped to serve about 5,000 individuals.
                      •	 Affordability: The one-time cost for a 20-liter water jar is USD 2.4. This jar can be filled up
                         over the course of its life for USD 0.08 per visit.

 Effectiveness        •	 Provides safe drinking water that is needed in underserved areas, with the purification
                         process customized to local water conditions.
                      •	 Walk-in delivery model is an efficient and convenient way for community to access water.
                      •	 Satisfaction levels of surveyed customers is almost 100%.

 Accountability       •	 Water quality meets Indian standard specifications.
                      •	 Waterlife has a service and quality team for quality assurance.
                      •	 Monthly water tests conducted at accredited labs and water results are prominently
                         displayed at the plant.
                      •	 Posted toll-free number for customers if they are not satisfied with the quality of water,
                         operator or the plant.

 Economic             •	 Surveyed customers indicate they are fine with paying for a trusted source of clean, quality
 Efficiency              drinking water.
                      •	 Cost to the government is USD 60,000 as the capital expenditure, but with revenue stream
                         coming from customer fees.

 Impact on            •	 Job creation for youth in underserved areas, who are trained in operations and
 Development             maintenance of the plants.
 Outcomes             •	 According to a public health center data, reductions of 65% in diarrhea, 57% in urinary
                         stones, 57% in skin diseases.
                      •	 Significant drop in frequency of visits to doctors and related household medical expenses.
                      •	 Related increase in children’s school attendance and academic results
                      •	 Water recovery of Waterlife plants is 70–75%.
                      •	 Safe disposal of filters, membranes and discharge water.

 Potential for        •	 Revenue from customer fees pays back government capital expenditure costs.
 Sustainability       •	 Revenue from customer fees creates a sustainable stream that takes care of all operating
                         expenses—the individual plant monthly cost analysis shows a gross margin of 66%.
                      •	 Plant operations and maintenance are locally managed.
                      •	 Waterlife takes care of operations and maintenance of the plants for an extended period,
                         thereby ensuring that the quality of the end product is not compromised.

 Potential for        •	 Strong partnerships with community groups, NGOs, local governments.
 Scalability          •	 Variety of outreach channels.

Please note: At present Waterlife has no separate monitoring and evaluation department or an individual directly responsible for
gathering and analyzing data. While the monthly water quality and daily sales data of each plant is looked at, they do not track data
to help measure impact on a regular basis. Impact is still being measured and progress will be updated.


                                                                                                                                        17
     Sustainability and Scale-up
     Opportunities
     Waterlife is a community-based approach that involves local governance authorities and actors
     and encourages the participation of beneficiaries in the management of water resources.
     Waterlife is in a competitive position to partner with local governments to scale up and reach
     a larger audience.
         Based on financial data, the Waterlife model operates with cost-effectiveness and effi-
     ciency. The constant revenue from customer fees covers a plant’s monthly operating and
     maintenance expenses, including salaries and electricity. According to monthly cost analysis,
     the gross margin for revenues vs expenses for individual plants is 66%. Capital expenditure
     has a specific payback plan, as described in Appendix VI.
         Strong partnerships with the local government, NGOs, Panchayats, women’s groups, com-
     mercial institutions and international aid agencies help weave long-term sustainability. In par-
     ticular, Waterlife partners with community volunteers, NGOs, hospitals, schools and colleges
     to increase awareness about the importance of safe and hygienic drinking water. It trains and
     appoints local youth as plant operators to instill ownership among the community and main-
     tain continuity of operations.
         To date, Waterlife has approximately 600 community water systems and 3,500 contamina-
     tion removal units across 12 states. After a successful pilot working with the Ranchi Municipal
     Corporation, they are working with the government of Jharkhand for a larger roll out of the
     community water system model across the state. Over the next three years they expect to set
     up hundreds of units in Maharashtra, Pondicherry, Rajasthan and other states.

     Factors to Consider Moving Forward

     Partnerships
        •	 It can take time to explain the Waterlife business model and convince local government
           or bodies to allot land and water sources for the plant.
        •	 Legal formalities and delays in documentation can also pose issues.
     Financing
        •	 Currently, scaling is based on a capital expenditure by the government and corporates.
        •	 The budgets are spent in needy areas where the community generally does not have
           access to safe water. This helps Waterlife scale fast and keeps costs low.
     Infrastructure
        •	 Waterlife depends on the local government or bodies for access to viable sites for instal-
           lation and water and power sources.
        •	 The availability of power poses challenges in areas that have regular load shedding
           (intentionally engineered electrical power shutdowns).
     Communication and Education
        •	 Pushing for first-time usage and increasing adoption rates takes time and concerted
           efforts. Increasing the usage will require continued awareness campaigns and significant
           commitment to manpower with the requisite financial implications.



18
   •	 Creating awareness is one of the major challenges to change customers’ mindset, yet
      Waterlife has not implemented its communication strategy as a standard operating pro-
      cedure. It is left to the regional coordinator or the state in-charge to decide whether to
      undertake any outreach activities.

Usage and Distribution
  •	 As of yet, Waterlife is solely a safe drinking water solution and does not provide water
     for multiple uses.
  •	 Waterlife is primarily a walk-in model. They do not provide formal, networked distribu-
     tion to individual households or any other point of source.
Data Collection and Evaluation
  •	 From an impact assessment perspective, the company has, to date, not put efforts into
     developing a monitoring and evaluation plan. They do not collect baseline data and
     have not identified outcome indicators to understand its impact on the community from
     a social perspective.
  •	 According to Waterlife senior management, a monitoring and evaluation plan is not a
     priority right now since they are too focused on reaching out to as many communities
     as possible.




                                                                                                   19
     Lessons Learned
     Business model focused on ease of replication
     Waterlife innovated a standard business model that can be operationalized within a short
     timeframe across any geography and thus can scale and replicate quickly. Waterlife insists
     on a “pay and fetch” model that has a clear competitive advantage and value added in the
     water distribution businesses.

     Ownership and trust of local community
     By involving government and community leaders at the outset and training and recruiting
     local actors to manage the units, Waterlife brought a necessary sense of ownership to the
     plants that improved management and sustainability for their business model. They focused
     on earning the community’s trust by showing water drawn from the source, ensuring the plants
     run smoothly and provide uninterrupted water and supplying an experienced team of service
     engineers so that all issues related to the plant are addressed immediately.

     Need for education and marketing
     Pushing for first-time usage and increasing adoption rates can be difficult. Waterlife conducted
     several camps to educate the community about the benefits of safe drinking water and the
     availability of the plant. Distribution of pamphlets and door-to-door campaigning helped.
     They also distributed jars, creating a tie-in and reminder for customers to come back regu-
     larly to the plant.

     Customized to needs of the area
     Wherever Waterlife has a presence, they conduct a detailed hydro and topographical mapping
     of the geographical area and customize their water and purification solution based on the
     issues from that groundwater.




20
APPENDIX I

References
1.	 Kumar, R., R.D. Singh and K.D. Sharma. 2005. “Water Resources India.” Current Science 89(5).
2.	 Khurana, I. and S. Romit. Drinking water quality in rural India: Issues and approaches.
     Background Paper. WaterAid.
3.	 WHO/UNICEF. 2012. Joint Monitoring Report.
4.	 http://www.naandi.org
5.	 http://fluoridealert.org
6.	 Khurana, I. and S. Romit. Drinking water quality in rural India: Issues and approaches.
     Background Paper. WaterAid.
7.	 Akhilesh, G., R.K. Mall, S. Ranjeet, L.S. Rathore and R.S. Singh. 2006. “Water resources
     and climate change: An Indian Perspective.” Current Science 90(12).
8.	 2005-6 India National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3). Available at http://www.rchiips.org/
     nfhs/nfhs3.shtml.
9.	 http://fluoridealert.org
10.	 India Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. Available at http://www.ddws.nic.in.
11.	 Kumar, R., R.D. Singh and K.D. Sharma. 2005. “Water Resources India.” Current Science 89(5).
12.	 Indian Standard Specifications for Drinking Water IS: 10500. Available at http://hppcb.
     gov.in/eiasorang/spec.pdf.




                                                                                                    21
     APPENDIX II

     Case Study Research
     To understand the business model of Waterlife, the World Bank team conducted a study over
     two weeks covering rural, peri-urban and rural locations over different topographies where
     Waterlife has a running plant, including old and new units and one solar unit. The study relied
     on interaction with customers, operators, engineers and supervisors, including top manage-
     ment, and studying relevant materials shared by Waterlife.
        The study also relied on data and findings from a separate study conducted by a manage-
     ment student with the Institute of Rural Management (IRMA), Anand, India.

     Study objectives
        •	 To do a holistic assessment of the impact of Waterlife on the lives of rural and urban
           people by providing them with safe drinking water at the village level and thereby influ-
           encing their lives at the household level.
        •	 To conduct a control-treatment group study in two villages to throw light on the ripple
           effects of providing safe drinking water.
        •	 To present case studies so as to highlight the impact of providing safe drinking water
           and the findings of a cooking experiment.
        •	 To map the business model on a sustainable development framework and based on
           findings develop a Logframework Matrix.

     Primary sources of data
        •	 Field visits
        •	 Baseline study of the villages
        •	 	Questionnaire survey
        •	 Interviews and unobtrusive observations


     Secondary sources of data
       •	 Online data sources
       •	 Data on health collected from the public health centers
       •	 Panchayat records and Aganwadi registers
       •	 Data shared by Waterlife team


     Sample locations
       •	 Maharashtra—Mandavganpharata, Naigaon, Maregaon, Nanded
       •	 Karnataka—Irkalgada, Mangalore, Ginigeda, Basapur
       •	 Pondicherry—Kombakkam, Thengaithitu, Rainbownagar, Iyyanagar, Veduthalainagar




22
APPENDIX III

Waterlife Background
Organizational structure




Waterlife presence mapped on WASH map




Waterlife Presence in India:
Andhra Pradesh
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
Pondicherry
Maharashtra
Karnataka
Bihar
Jharkhand
Chattisgarh
Kerala
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu




                                        23
     APPENDIX IV

     Waterlife’s Other Services and Products

     Customized Contamination Removal Units
     Hand pump integrated - Working without power

              	  




       Solar Dual Submersible Pumps
       Integrated with Handpumps
       Escalates the yield of hand pump
       multifold, catering to the required
       community volumes, and bifurcates
       water for drinking and cooking
       through filtration, from water for
       general use.



     Disaster Management Mobile Units
     Treats nuclear, biological and chemical
     contamination. Also converts chemically
     contaminated flood water to safe drinking
     water pouches. Licensed technology from
     Defence Research Development Organisa-
     tion, Government of India. Used for disas-
     ter management and the armed forces.




     Retail Units
                                   	     Institutional Systems   Mobile Water Purification Units




24
APPENDIX V

Sample Communications

Poster




                        25
     APPENDIX VI

     Implementation Chart

     Activity chart for setting up a Waterlife community-based system




26
APPENDIX VII

Financial Charts
Individual plant revenues vs expenses for break-even analysis




Capital expenditure payback period analysis
To understand the payback period of a Waterlife plant, a detailed analysis was carried out
using the following scenarios:

1.	   No subsidy on capital expenditure
2.	   50% subsidy on capital expenditure
3.	   50% subsidy on capital expenditure and operating expenses
4.	   100% subsidy on capital expenditure
5.	   Waterlife solar plant vs diesel generator

For calculation purposes, the following assumptions was taken based on expenses incurred
in the existing plants:

Capital expenses were taken at USD 60,000; Annual Maintenance Costs (AMC) costs at around
330/year and Operations and Maintenance (O&M) was taken as USD 3500/year. Average rate
for a 20L jar at USD 0.11 and average jar sales per day at around 250.




                                                                                             27
     Scenario Analysis for Payback Period

     1. No subsidy on capital expenditure




     At present the capital expenditure of Waterlife is supported by a third party. In case there is
     no subsidy provided, the plants are at a loss.



     2. 50% subsidy on capital expenditure




     In the second scenario where 50% of capital expenditure is subsidized, the analysis shows
     that the plants are at a loss.




28
3. 50% subsidy on capital expenditure and operating expenses




In case where both the capital expenditure and operating expenses are subsidized by 50%,
the plant breaks even in Year 3.



4. 100% subsidy on capital expenditure




In the existing scenarios, where Waterlife capital expenditures are fully subsidized, the plants
break even in Year 1 since operation and maintenance costs are recovered from Day 1 through
charging a small fee from the users.




                                                                                                   29
     5. Comparison between solar and Diesel Generator (DG) set in non-grid areas
     In non-grid areas where the major source of power is through Diesel Generator (DG) sets, the
     analysis below shows that within a three-year timeframe solar powered plants provide almost
     50 percent savings over DG sets, besides being environment friendly.




30
31
     Providing access to safe drinking water remains a challenge in India,
     leading to enormous health and economic burdens. Without innovative
     solutions to plug the gap it is estimated that by 2020, India will become
     a water-stressed nation, which can lead to local and regional conflicts.

     With the help of local government and NGOs, Waterlife establishes
     decentralized community drinking water plants with purification units as
     a valuable add on to traditional water supply for underserved populations
     in rural India. Low customer fees create a revenue stream that covers
     operating costs and pays back capital expenditures.

     The Waterlife model has built a sense of ownership and trust among
     community members because of its inclusiveness and transparency:
     90% of customers are walk-ins to the plant; local villagers are trained in
     plant operations and maintenance; and awareness campaigns are held
     throughout the community on the safe aspects of drinking water. Waterlife
     has started replicating this successful model in East Africa.




32
