 From Panic and Neglect to
Investing in Health Security:
Financing Pandemic Preparedness
        at a National Level




 INTERNATIONAL WORKING GROUP ON FINANCING PREPAREDNESS




                 Conference Edition
INTERNATIONAL WORKING GROUP ON FINANCING PREPAREDNESS

Peter Sands (Chair), Harvard Kennedy School
Dominic Casserley, formerly Willis Towers Watson
Rodrigo Chaves, World Bank Group
Timothy G. Evans, World Bank Group
Sanjeev Gupta, International Monetary Fund
Judith Hazlewood, McKinsey & Company
Dean Jamison, University of Washington
Donald Kaberuka, African Development Bank
Marie-Paule Kieny/Agnes Soucat, World Health Organization
Outi Kuivasniemi, Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, Finland
Soonman Kwon, Asian Development Bank
Jane Pepperall, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australia
Alwyn Didar Singh, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
Oyewale Tomori, Nigeria Academy of Science
Jeanette Vega, Fondo Nacional de Salud, Chile
Ron Waldman, United States Agency for International Development
Edward Whiting, Wellcome Trust
Ngaire Woods, Blavatnik School of Government




                                    i
Statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those of the
International Working Group on Financing Preparedness (IWG).

The World Bank served as Secretariat for the IWG. The World Bank team was
led by Mukesh Chawla, and included (in alphabetical order, by last name),
Franck Berthe, Senior Livestock Specialist; Eleonora Cavagnero, Senior
Economist; Erika Hartingh, Consultant; Samhita Kumar, Consultant; Adrienne
McManus, Consultant; Rocio Schmunis, Operations Officer; and Gabrielle
Williams, Consultant.

The World Bank team was supported by Anas El Turabi, Doctoral Candidate
in Health Policy, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University;
and Philip Saynisch, Doctoral Candidate in Health Policy, Harvard Business
School and Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University.
Analytical support was also provided by McKinsey & Company.



The International Working Group was supported by the World Bank and
Wellcome Trust.


REVIEWERS

This report has been reviewed in draft form by the following individuals
chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise:

David Barash, GE Foundation
Beth Cameron, Nuclear Threat Initiative
Ashish Jha, Harvard University
Rebecca Katz, Georgetown University
Richard Zeckhauser, Harvard University




MAY 2017

The text of this conference edition is a work in progress for a forthcoming
publication.




                                     ii
                       The Influenza, 1890
                                  (excerpts)


                         By Winston Churchill, 1890


                     Oh how shall I its deeds recount,
                      Or measure the untold amount
                          Of ills that it has done?
                     From China's bright celestial land
                       E'en to Arabia's thirsty sand
                        It journeyed with the sun.

                    O'er miles of bleak Siberia's plains
                    Where Russian exiles toil in chains
                      It moved with noiseless tread;
                         And as it slowly glided by
                     There followed it across the sky
                          The spirits of the dead.

                      The Ural peaks by it were scaled
                      And every bar and barrier failed
                          To turn it from its way;
                       Slowly and surely on it came,
                        Heralded by its awful fame,
                          Increasing day by day.

                   On Moscow's fair and famous town
                   Where fell the first Napoleon's crown
                         It made a direful swoop;
                   The rich, the poor, the high, the low
                    Alike the various symptoms know,
                           Alike before it droop.




Source: https://www.nationalchurchillmuseum.org/winston-churchill-the-influenza-
                                  poem.html




                                      iii
Preface

Multiple pandemics, numerous outbreaks, thousands of lives lost and billions
of dollars of national income wiped out – all since the turn of this century, in
barely 17 years – and yet the world’s investments in pandemic preparedness
and response remain woefully inadequate. We know by now that the world
will see another pandemic in the not-too-distant future; that random
mutations occur often enough in microbes that help them survive and adapt;
that new pathogens will inevitably find a way to break through our defenses;
and that there is the increased potential for intentional or accidental release
of a synthesized agent. Every expert commentary and every analysis in recent
years tells us that the costs of inaction are immense. And yet, as the havoc
caused by the last outbreak turns into a fading memory, we become
complacent and relegate the case for investing in preparedness on a back
burner, only to bring it to the forefront when the next outbreak occurs. The
result is that the world remains scarily vulnerable.

In the wake of Ebola, a number of commissions and panels made
recommendations about how the world could be better prepared to prevent,
identify, contain, and respond to infectious disease outbreaks. All these
reviews – including the one I chaired for the U.S. National Academy of
Medicine – agreed on three key priorities: strengthening preparedness at a
national level; improving coordination and capabilities at a regional and
global level; and accelerating R&D in this arena. Over the last twelve months
we have seen some important steps taken, such as the creation of the Health
Emergencies Program at the World Health Organization (WHO), the launch
of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), and the
establishment of the World Bank’s Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility
(PEF). Many countries have signed up for external evaluations of their
preparedness and response systems, signaling a welcome openness and
willingness to collectively identify problem areas and explore solutions. Yet
this also presents a challenge. Countries that develop detailed plans to
reinforce their disease surveillance, diagnostic services, infection control,
emergency preparedness, etc. in the wake of these assessments will become
rapidly disillusioned if there is no money available to translate these plans into
reality.

Any individual or government that has had direct experience of an epidemic
or pandemic does not need convincing of the case for investing in pandemic
preparedness. The cruel statistic of lives lost is only the first measure of
impact. To that must be added the cost to the broader economy and to society
as a whole. Pandemics cause enormous economic disruption and can quickly
undermine communities and governance. Responding to outbreaks once they
have happened is far more expensive – in lives and money – than investing in
preparedness.

Yet in many countries the argument has not been won. Governments struggle
to reconcile limited resources with many competing priorities. Health does
not always rank as one of the top budget priorities, and within health

                                        iv
spending, pandemic preparedness is often overlooked in favor of more
immediate and visible goals.

To address this challenge, an International Working Group on Financing
Preparedness was created in November 2016. This Group, which I chair,
comprises experts and leaders from multilateral organizations, academia,
philanthropic institutions, governments and businesses. The objective of the
International Working Group is to propose ways in which national
governments and development partners can ensure adequate and sustainable
financing for actions to strengthen pandemic preparedness and thus enable
effective compliance with the International Health Regulations (IHR) as well
as World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) standards. Our primary focus
is on the prevention, identification, and containment of infectious disease
outbreaks, so we have concentrated on the financing of critical capacities such
as disease surveillance systems, laboratory networks, and emergency
operations centers, as well as “One Health” initiatives designed to protect
people from pathogens in the animal population. We also recognize the crucial
importance of supporting health systems strengthening as a key investment in
preparedness.

For many countries, the starting point in assessing what needs to be financed
will be the results of a Joint External Evaluation (JEE) or outcome of a
Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) pathway analysis. The recently
introduced JEE process is a huge step forward. It provides a systematic and
objective assessment of a country’s capabilities across core domains, plus a
prioritized list of gaps to be addressed. But of course, a good diagnostic is only
the first step. We want the outcomes of these evaluations to be translated into
adequately funded action plans that countries can implement. And it is crucial
that the financing is sustained: investing in preparedness is not a one-off, but
an ongoing requirement.

The scope of our investigation includes domestic resource mobilization,
development assistance, and private sector engagement. For many countries,
financing preparedness through the domestic public sector budget is the best
way to ensure sustained funding and seamless integration with the rest of the
health system. Yet this requires ensuring sufficient priority is attached to
investing in pandemic preparedness in budget allocations. In some cases, it
may also require enhancing fiscal mobilization or attracting direct financing
from the private sector. For many countries, especially the poorest and most
fragile, there is clearly a role for international development assistance in
reinforcing pandemic preparedness. Here, the challenge is to ensure such
contributions are effectively coordinated and prioritized, and that we
transition to a sustainable funding arrangement, rather than something that
withers when donor priorities change.

Ensuring sustained commitment to financing preparedness will be difficult,
since the mark of success is that nothing happens, and there will always be
multiple competing priorities. In this context, we need to harness the powerful
incentives that business and the financial markets can provide. We want
investors and business leaders to be taking account of health risks as they
decide where to invest and trade. This will reward those countries that have

                                        v
translated their JEE and PVS assessments into implemented action plans, and
expose those countries which have failed to act. Through developing indices
that measure intrinsic risk, state of preparedness, and economic vulnerability,
we can make the threat of infectious disease outbreaks much more visible and
concrete. This in turn will incentivize governments and the private sector to
mitigate these risks.

Investing in health security through financing preparedness is a highly cost-
effective way to protect lives and safeguard livelihoods and communities.
Whether measured in human lives saved or economic disruption avoided, the
return on investments in pandemic preparedness is extraordinarily high.
Moreover, many of the capabilities and much of the infrastructure required
for pandemic preparedness also support efforts to fight endemic diseases and
counter the threat of antimicrobial resistance. Taken together, the
recommendations of the International Working Group set out in this report
represent a pathway towards achieving the goal of universal health security,
whilst strengthening health systems and helping ensure delivery of the
Sustainable Development Goals.


Peter Sands, Chair
International Working Group on Financing Preparedness




                                      vi
Acknowledgements

The International Working Group (IWG) deeply appreciates and would like to
thank individuals, organizations and institutions who took the time to provide
their knowledge, experience and advice to the Group. Those contributions
were instrumental in guiding the Group and ultimately enhanced the quality
of the report. However, the IWG takes full responsibility for the facts, opinions
and recommendations contained in this report

We are especially grateful to the sponsors of the IWG, the World Bank and the
Wellcome Trust, for their technical and financial support throughout the
course of the work. We are also particularly appreciative of the support of the
World Bank team who comprised the secretariat of the IWG.

We are also grateful to Anas El-Turabi and Philip Saynisch for their technical
expertise and contributions to the report in working with the World Bank
team.

We would like to thank many individuals from academic institutions, private
companies, multilateral agencies, non-governmental organizations and
national governments who willing gave their time and insights in contributing
to the report. These are too many to mention but we would particularly like to
thank Ben Oppenheim, Mark Gallivan, and Nita Madhav of Metabiota, David
Barash, Allan Tennenbaun, Katie Zabronsky, Allison Neale, Julie Whipple,
Jennifer Esposito, Todd Spangler, Deena Buford, Renuka Gadde, Tina Flores,
Hannah Oros, and Nicole London of the Private Sector Round Table, Rowan
Douglas and colleagues at Willis Towers Watson, Beth Cameron at the Nuclear
Threat Initiative, Rebecca Katz of Georgetown University and Ashish Jha and
Richard Zeckhauser of Harvard University. We gratefully acknowledge the
advice and suggestions of members of the Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry who participated in a round-table especially
organized for the IWG.

We are appreciative of the support and advice from the members of the United
Nations Global Health Crises Task Force who provided insightful guidance to
the Group.

We want to especially acknowledge and thank the peer reviewers of the report,
whose comments were invaluable in sharpening arguments and clarifying
expression.

We thank Erika Hartingh for successfully organizing the launch event of the
report, as well as Anugraha Palan for coordinating the release of the report to
the public. We also thank Sheryl Silverman and Aisha Mahmood Faquir for
supporting our online communication efforts.

We owe a special thanks to Alexander Irwin, who gave generously of his time
in writing and rewriting sections of this report.



                                       vii
Contents

Preface ................................................................................................................... iv
Acknowledgements.................................................................................................................................. vii
Acronyms and Abbreviations ................................................................................................................. ix
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................. xi
1. Introduction.......................................................................................................... 1
   The Preparedness Problem ................................................................................................... 1
   The International Working Group ........................................................................................ 1
   How We Worked ................................................................................................................. 2
   Overview of the Report ........................................................................................................ 3
2. Setting the Context ........................................................................................................... 4
   The Case for Investing in Pandemic Preparedness ................................................................ 4
   The Challenge of Financing Preparedness ............................................................................ 9
   Universal Health Coverage and Security ............................................................................. 12
3. Identifying Gaps and Estimating Funding Needs ............................................... 19
   International Cooperation on Infectious Threats: Historical Background ........................... 19
   Using JEE and PVS to Map Preparedness Gaps ................................................................. 21
4. Preparing a Financing Proposal, a Compelling Investment Case and a Change
   Management Strategy ....................................................................................... 33
   Preparing a Financing Proposal .......................................................................................... 33
   Developing a compelling investment case and change management strategy ....................... 37
5. Identifying Sources of Finance and Means of Mobilizing/Allocating Funds
   to Preparedness ................................................................................................ 41
   Government Spending on Health: Variations Across Countries.......................................... 41
   Domestic vs. International Funding: Basic Principles ......................................................... 42
   Domestic Resource Mobilization for Preparedness ............................................................. 43
   Mobilizing Development Assistance for Preparedness ........................................................ 48
   Engaging the Private Sector in Financing Preparedness ...................................................... 53
   Leveraging Insurance to Finance Preparedness ................................................................... 57
   A New Science of Risk Management .................................................................................. 57
   Disaster Response Insurance: Regional Initiatives ............................................................... 58
   Insurance Innovation: The Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility .................................. 59
6. Incentivizing Countries to Prioritize Allocation of Funds to Preparedness .......... 63
   Assessing Economic Vulnerability to Infectious Disease Outbreaks ......................................... 63
   Sovereign Credit Rating ...................................................................................................................... 64
   The Downside of Indices ................................................................................................................... 66
   Elements to be Addressed in Assessing Economic Vulnerability to Infectious Disease
   Outbreaks ............................................................................................................................................. 66
   IMF Article IV Staff Reports ............................................................................................................ 70
   Incorporating Assessment of Pandemic Preparedness in Country Policy and Institutional
   Assessments.......................................................................................................................................... 71
7. Conclusion: Health Security in Dollars and Cents .............................................. 76




                                                                           viii
Acronyms and Abbreviations

AIDS      Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
AMR       Antimicrobial Resistance
APSED     Asia Pacific Strategy for Emerging Diseases
ARC       African Risk Capacity
BMGF      Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
BSL       Biosafety Level
CARICOM   Caribbean Community
CCRIF     Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
CDC       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CEPI      Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations
CPIA      Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
CPF       Country Partnership Framework
CPR       Country Performance Rating
CRA       Credit Rating Agency
CRS       Creditor Reporting Survey
CSR       Corporate Social Responsibility
DAC       Development Assistance Committee
DRC       Democratic Republic of Congo
DRM       Domestic Resource Mobilization
FAO       Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
FDIC      Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GHS       Global Health Security
GHSA      Global Health Security Agenda
GIZ       Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GNI       Gross National Income
HDI       Human Development Index
HIV       Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HSFAT     Health Security Financing Assessment Tool
HSS       Health System Strengthening
IADI      International Association of Deposit Insurers
IBRD      International Bank of Reconstruction and Development
IDA       International Development Association
IDC       Infectious Disease Crisis
IDSR      Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response
IHR       International Health Regulations
IHR-MEF   International Health Regulations – Monitoring and Evaluation
          Framework
IMF       International Monetary Fund
IPC       Infection Prevention and Control
IPCC      Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRAI      IDA Resource Allocation Index
IWG       International Working Group on Financing Preparedness
JEE       Joint External Evaluation
JICA      Japan International Cooperation Agency
LSHTM     London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine

                                 ix
MERS      Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
NAM       National Academy of Medicine
NAPHS     National Action Plan for Health Security
ODA       Overseas Development Assistance
OECD      Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OIE       World Organization for Animal Health
PAHO      Pan American Health Organization
PEF       Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility
PHE       Public Health and Environment
PHEIC     Public Health Emergency of International Concern
PPR       Portfolio Performance Rating
PSRT      Private Sector Roundtable
PVS       Performance of Veterinary Services
R&D       Research and Development
REDISSE   Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement
S&P       Standard & Poor’s
SARS      Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
SCD       Systematic Country Diagnostics
SDG       Sustainable Development Goals
SICA      Central American Integration System
TB        Tuberculosis
UHC       Universal Health Coverage
UK        United Kingdom
UNDP      United Nations Development Programme
UNISDR    International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
US        United States
USAID     United States Agency for International Development
VRAM      Vulnerability, Risk Assessment and Mapping
WBG       World Bank Group
WEF       World Economic Forum
WHA       World Health Assembly
WHO       World Health Organization




                                x
Executive Summary

Deadly infectious pandemics will mark humanity’s future, as they have shaped
its past. Neither individual governments nor the global community can
entirely prevent the emergence of infectious threats. But we can be much
better prepared.

This report by the International Working Group on Financing Preparedness
(IWG) proposes ways in which national governments and development
partners can finance investments in country and regional preparedness and
response capacities for pandemics and other health emergencies.

Preparedness for pandemics refers to health and non-health interventions,
capabilities, and capacities at community, country, regional, and global levels.
Their purpose is to prevent, detect, contain and respond to the spread of
disease and other hazards, mitigating social disruptions and limiting risks to
international travel and trade.

The Case for Preparedness

Pandemics cause vast human suffering and devastating economic costs.
Experts differ in their estimates of the economic cost of pandemics and the
closely related threat of drug-resistant infections. However, all the figures
advanced are alarmingly high. Even the most conservative estimates suggest
that a pandemic could destroy over 1.0 percent of global GDP, comparable to
other global threats such as climate change. Even much smaller outbreaks can
cause significant loss of life and immense economic disruption. Investments
improving preparedness therefore offer an extraordinarily high potential
return. Yet we invest relatively little in mitigating the risks of infectious
disease crises relative to what we spend against other risks to human lives and
livelihoods, such as climate change, war or financial crises.

In countries where there is a reasonably comprehensive and well-functioning
underlying health system, which would include a number of low-income and
many middle-income countries, financing improved preparedness might cost
less than $1 per person per year, not a huge sum compared to the scale of the
risks to human lives and livelihoods. More advanced economies can and do
choose to spend much more per person. Achieving improved preparedness in
countries with fundamental gaps in health coverage and capacities,
particularly in primary care, will cost more, since preparedness is built on
these foundations.

In addition to mitigating the risks to human lives and livelihoods from
infectious disease risks, investing in preparedness has important benefits for
the broader health system. Many of the capabilities and infrastructure
required for preparedness are also needed to combat antimicrobial resistance
and endemic infectious diseases.



                                       xi
The Goal of Preparedness: Universal Health Security

The concept of universal health security best captures the ultimate purpose of
reinforcing preparedness. At its simplest, health security means protecting
people from threats to their health. Universal health security means protecting
everybody, not just because that is the equitable thing to do, but because with
infectious diseases, true health security can only be achieved if everyone is
protected.

Achieving universal health security is an essential component of the ultimate
goal of providing universal health coverage. It both depends on and
complements broader efforts to strengthen health systems and make them
more resilient, so needs to be pursued as part of an integrated plan, not as a
separate silo. When an infectious disease outbreak occurs, health systems
come under enormous pressure, and other health objectives are often
compromised, as resources are diverted to contain the outbreak and patients
avoid seeking care. Better preparedness is key to making health systems more
resilient.

Achieving Universal Health Security

In this report, we set out 12 specific recommendations to ensure adequate and
sustained financing of preparedness. The recommendations are integrated
and interdependent. Together they constitute a unified framework. To be
effective in achieving universal health security, we need to pursue them all.

Recommendation 1: National governments and development partners should
commit to a path towards universal health security by adopting and implementing
the framework set out in this report and embodied in Recommendations 2-12.

Identifying Gaps and Developing a Plan

The first step for countries seeking to strengthen their preparedness is to make
an accurate assessment of their current state of preparedness and thus to
identify gaps and resource needs. The Joint External Evaluation mechanism
(JEE), launched in 2016 by the World Health Organization (WHO), provides
an effective mechanism for conducting such an assessment. Through a
combination of peer review and self-assessment, the JEE delivers a systematic
evaluation of a country’s preparedness capabilities and infrastructure across
19 domains, enabling clear identification of gaps and areas for improvement.
The World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) also has a well-established
equivalent evaluation mechanism, the Performance of Veterinary Services
Pathway (PVS), which assesses the quality of national veterinary services and
animal health systems. Together, the JEE and the PVS provide national
governments with the essential starting point for any initiative to improve
preparedness: a detailed and objective assessment of the current status
against agreed benchmarks.

Recommendation 2: (i) By the end of 2017, all national governments should
commit to participate in, and by the end of 2019, conduct a Joint External

                                      xii
Evaluation (JEE) to assess their capacity to comply with the requirements of the
International Health Regulations 2005 (IHR) to prevent, detect, and rapidly
respond to public health threats; (ii) By the end of 2017, all national governments
should commit to participate in, and by the end of 2019, conduct an evaluation of
Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) to assess their capacity to comply with
the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) standards.

Following the JEE and PVS assessments, the next step is for countries to
develop a prioritized plan to rectify gaps and remedy weaknesses. To support
countries in this effort, WHO has developed Guidelines for Development of a
National Action Plan for Health Security (NAPHS). The Guidelines outline
steps for situation analysis, strategic planning and prioritization, costing,
budget allocation and implementation of the NAPHS. As of the end of April
2017, three countries – Tanzania, Pakistan and Eritrea – had completed the
crucial costing phase of their preparedness plans.

For many countries, particularly smaller or island nations, the plan may
involve extensive regional cooperation. Infectious diseases do not respect
national boundaries. Cooperation and the sharing of specialist facilities can
deliver better preparedness and be more cost-effective.

Recommendation 3: Within nine months of completion of JEE and PVS, national
governments should develop and publish a prioritized and costed plan to
implement recommendations emerging from the JEE and PVS assessments,
including regional elements where relevant.

Devising a Financing Proposal, Building a Compelling Investment Case
and Creating a Change Management Strategy

Once a country has developed a costed and prioritized plan, the next steps are
to work out how to finance this plan and then how to implement it effectively.
This requires: first, a robust and realistic financing proposal to ensure
inclusion in domestic budgets and where relevant, to attract donor support;
second, a compelling investment case, that ensures sustained economic and
political support for improving preparedness; and finally, a change
management strategy that ensures the committed engagement of relevant
stakeholders. Reinforcing preparedness is not a quick fix: it is a complex
multi-stakeholder process that stretches well beyond the ministry of health
and can often entail far-reaching changes in established attitudes, practices,
and institutions.

To support national governments in translating costed and prioritized plans
into detailed financing proposals the World Bank is developing the Health
Security Financing Assessment Tool (HSFAT), which is designed to
complement the JEE and PVS assessment mechanism.

Recommendation 4: Depending on the national budget cycle, but ideally within
three months of developing a prioritized and costed plan following JEE and PVS
assessments, national governments should prepare a detailed financing proposal
to support implementation of the plan to improve preparedness.

                                       xiii
A prioritized and costed plan, plus a detailed financing proposal are essential
prerequisites for effective action to improve preparedness. Yet experience
suggests these alone are not enough. To catalyze the commitment of resources
to deliver the plan, its proponents in each country need broad political and
social support. To win such support requires a compelling investment case
that articulates the political and economic arguments for reinforcing
preparedness in the context of each individual country. Furthermore,
ensuring effective delivery of the plan requires an integrated change
management strategy that engages and coordinates relevant stakeholders.

Recommendation 5: Each national government should develop an investment
case, articulating the political and economic arguments for integrating the costed
plan into national budget cycles and committing resources to reinforce and
sustain preparedness, plus a change management strategy to engage and
coordinate relevant stakeholders.

Identifying and Mobilizing Sustainable Financing for Preparedness

Rigorous planning, a compelling investment case and convincing
implementation strategy are indispensable, but will achieve little unless
adequate funds can actually be identified and deployed. In many countries this
will be achieved through giving greater priority to funding preparedness
within existing budgets. But in other countries, it may be necessary to explore
ways to increase fiscal space.

For most countries, the optimal source of finance for preparedness is the
domestic budget, which is the best way to ensure sustainable financing of a
public good like preparedness and to facilitate seamless integration with
broader efforts to strengthen the health system and extend coverage.
However, in many low-income countries, the challenge will be inadequate
domestic resource mobilization. Weaknesses in tax design and collection
mean inadequate resources against a huge number of competing priorities. As
preparedness rarely ranks high on the list of priorities, weak domestic
resource mobilization leads to sustained underinvestment in preparedness.

Yet there is considerable potential to increase tax revenues in most developing
countries. Through sustained focus on improving tax capabilities, many low-
income countries could raise their tax ratios by 2–4 percent of GDP, with
significant potential benefits for multiple aspects of social and economic
development, including preparedness (IMF 2011). Most of this can be
achieved through improving the effectiveness of the overall taxation system.
However, earmarked taxes may also have a role to play, given the fact that
people are often more prepared to pay taxes for health than for other
government activities. While there is considerable debate about the longer-
term effectiveness of earmarked taxes, countries should consider their
introduction where they might prove an effective way to generate additional
fiscal space for preparedness.




                                       xiv
Recommendation 6: To increase fiscal space, national governments should
examine ways of generating incremental domestic resources to finance
preparedness, whether by (i) improving overall tax design and collection; or (ii)
introducing earmarked taxes where they might be an effective way to generate
additional resources.

For some lower income countries, development assistance will play an
important role in financing better preparedness. Many advanced economies
have made significant collective and individual commitments to providing
development assistance for reinforcing preparedness, such as the G7
commitment to support 76 countries or the World Bank’s to support at least
25, and it is important that such commitments are fulfilled. Given the scale of
the risks to mankind as a whole and the global economy, there is a strong self-
interest argument for richer countries to deploy development funds for
investing in universal health security. To maximize the catalytic impact of such
development assistance, development partners should prioritize three
categories of financial support:

Financing capital investments or one-off expenditures to achieve a step
change in preparedness capacities in poorer countries. These might include
laboratories or specialized training. Wherever possible, beneficiary countries
should then take on the financing of ongoing recurrent expenditure.

Financing regional initiatives. Regional laboratory facilities and cross-border
disease surveillance systems should be important components of many
smaller countries’ plans to reinforce preparedness. Yet gaining agreement
between countries on how to finance such shared capacities may impede their
implementation. Here development assistance can play a critical role.

Financing the creation of baseline preparedness and prevention capacities in
fragile and conflict-affected states, where domestic resourcing is an unrealistic
aspiration and there are significant gaps in the underlying health system.

In all cases, development should seek to support the financing of preparedness
through the national health security plans and budgets emanating from the
JEE process, and use the JEE criteria as benchmarks of achievement.
Wherever possible development partners should seek to secure commitments
from recipient governments around matching and ongoing funding so as to
maximize the impact of the development assistance.

Recommendation 7: Development partners should fulfill and build on existing
collective and bilateral commitments to help finance preparedness in countries
needing support, focusing on: (i) in-country capital investments and one-off
spends; (ii) multi-country regional initiatives; and (iii) failed and fragile states
where domestic resourcing is not a realistic option. To maximize the catalytic
impact of their assistance, development partners should structure their support to
the health security plans emanating from the JEE process and encourage national
governments to match investments and commit to ongoing financing from
domestic resources.



                                        xv
Engaging the Private Sector in Reinforcing and Financing
Preparedness

Private-sector companies have much to lose from disease outbreaks, but are
often only marginally involved in the implementation of initiatives to reinforce
preparedness and response and typically make little direct financial
contribution to preparedness. This must change.

There are a variety of possible ways to engage the private sector more
effectively, though none is a “silver bullet.” First, it is important to build much
greater awareness of the risks of infectious disease outbreaks amongst private
sector leaders. In addition to stimulating companies to improve their own
internal preparedness, such awareness-building should make business
leaders less resistant to taxes or regulations related to reinforcing pandemic
prevention and response and more inclined to work with governments to
mitigate the risks. Second, governments should seek to involve the private
sector in plans to reinforce preparedness and response, leveraging relevant
private sector assets and capabilities. Third, where private sector companies
contribute to the risks of infectious diseases as a result of their business
activities, such as livestock production, governments should introduce
regulations to require appropriate investment in risk mitigation and
preparedness. Governments may also want consider encouraging or even
mandating corporate social responsibility (CSR) spending on preparedness.

Recommendation 8: National governments should incorporate the private sector
into their strategy for reinforcing preparedness, through a combination of
awareness-building, direct involvement in preparedness and response planning,
and regulation. Where private sector companies contribute directly or indirectly
to the risks of disease outbreak and spread by the nature of their business,
national governments should introduce regulations requiring such companies to
invest in risk mitigation and preparedness.

Leveraging Insurance to Finance Response and Incentivize
Preparedness

As has been demonstrated in the earthquake and drought contexts, insurance
can play an important role in ensuring rapid disbursement of funds to finance
disaster response, and in creating incentives for investing in risk mitigation
and preparedness.

To pioneer the deployment of insurance mechanisms in the infectious disease
arena, the World Bank, and other partners developed the Pandemic
Emergency Financing Facility (PEF), a parametric insurance vehicle designed
to provide rapid disbursement of emergency finance. The PEF covers a range
of diseases and is focused on countries that are part of the International
Development Association (IDA), with the premiums funded by donor nations.
Through this initiative the World Bank and its partners have worked through
numerous challenges and technical issues associated with utilizing innovative
insurance mechanisms for pandemic response. There is an opportunity to
build on this experience to develop a “PEF2”, and to encourage the

                                        xvi
development of insurance products for the private sector. While rapid
disbursement of funds in response is a real benefit, the greater prize from
introducing insurance mechanisms for both governments and the private
sector are the incentives insurance creates for investment in preparedness.
This will require the development of much broader markets, which will
inevitably take time.

Recommendation 9: The Insurance Development Forum, the World Bank, and
other partners should work together to: (i) develop the next iteration of the
Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility (PEF2) that specifically ties recipient
countries’ investments in preparedness to relief of their contributions to PEF2
premiums; (ii) deliver maximum participation from the insurance markets to
provide capacity for PEF2; and (iii) investigate how insurance for business
interruption resulting from disease outbreaks can be provided to private sector
companies in target countries.

Incentivizing Countries to Invest in Preparedness

We will only achieve a substantial reduction in the risks to human lives and
livelihoods across the globe from infectious disease outbreaks if individual
countries commit to investing in national preparedness. For this to happen,
governments need to be convinced that investing in public health systems is
absolutely necessary despite the multitude of competing demands for scarce
budget resources. The current under-preparedness of many countries
indicates that this case has not been convincingly made.

One approach is to ensure that plans and financing proposals for improving
preparedness are underpinned by a more compellingly articulated investment
case. That is the logic of Recommendation 5.

Yet this alone is not enough. The most powerful way to reinforce the
investment case and create more direct incentives for investment in
preparedness is to ensure that the risks attaching to infectious disease
outbreaks are reflected in financial markets and businesses’ investment
decisions. Another complementary approach would be to use measures of
preparedness to influence the flows of development assistance, such as
concessional financing from the World Bank.

If a country’s economic vulnerability to infectious disease outbreaks was
incorporated in mainstream macroeconomic analyses, bond ratings and
investment criteria, investment in pandemic preparedness would no longer be
solely the concern of the Health Minister. Encouraging the development of
metrics around intrinsic risk, state of preparedness and sectoral vulnerability
would change the way such decisions are made. This could be achieved
through official initiatives, academic efforts or private endeavors, or through
creative partnerships (perhaps along the lines of UNDP’s partnership with
S&P to include the Human Development Index (HDI) in devising sovereign
ratings). Inclusion of infectious disease risks in the IMF’s Article IV
consultations, in situations where such risks are considered macro-critical,
would have a powerful signaling effect.


                                     xvii
Recommendation 10: To reinforce incentives for national governments to invest
in preparedness, the IMF and World Bank should work to facilitate the
incorporation of the economic risks of infectious disease outbreaks into
macroeconomic and market assessments, including: (i) inclusion into Article IV
assessments where such risks are macro-critical; (ii) encouraging the
development of academic and private sector indices and maps of intrinsic risk,
preparedness and economic vulnerability.

Countries are also likely to pay more attention to investing in preparedness if
doing so increases access to concessional international finance. One way of
achieving this is by introducing an assessment of preparedness as a criterion
in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) tool that the World
Bank uses to determine the country allocation of IDA resources.

Introducing an assessment of pandemic preparedness would have two
benefits. First, the fact that countries are being assessed on pandemic
preparedness will raise its visibility, profile and importance. Second, countries
that do well on this assessment will be able to increase their allocations of
concessional finance through IDA.

Recommendation 11: The World Bank should include assessment of pandemic
preparedness capacity in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA)
tool and include the rating in the overall country score used as part of the IDA
allocation formula. Other multilateral development banks should consider
introducing equivalent mechanisms to incentivize investment in preparedness.

In 2013, the World Bank adopted a new strategy focused on aligning the
institutions work with the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting
shared prosperity in a sustained manner. The World Bank introduced a
diagnostic exercise, called the Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD), to
identify key challenges and opportunities for a country to accelerate progress
towards development objectives consistent with the twin goals. This
diagnostic is a reference point for World Bank Group client consultations with
countries. Incorporating an assessment of a country’s pandemic preparedness
in the Bank’s SCD will emphasize the importance of preparedness and give the
issue greater visibility in the eyes of policy makers. Further, it will help
countries make a strong case for concessional Bank finance in support of
investments in pandemic preparedness.

Recommendation 12: The World Bank should incorporate analysis of pandemic
preparedness in country-specific Systematic Country Diagnostics that identify a
set of priorities through which a country may most effectively and sustainably
achieve the poverty reduction and shared prosperity goals.




                                      xviii
For far too long, our approach to pandemics has been one of panic and neglect:
throwing money and resources at the problem when a serious outbreak
occurs; then neglecting to fund preparedness when the news headlines move
on. The result has been too many lives lost, too much damage to human
livelihoods. As recent news of a new Ebola outbreak demonstrates (May 2017),
the threat of deadly pathogens is ever present. New outbreaks will occur, but
by investing in prevention, detection, containment and response we can
reduce their frequency and impact. Investing in global health security is an
imperative. Otherwise we will all too often see poorer, more vulnerable
countries suffering terrible loss of life and being knocked off their trajectory
of social and economic development. And we put the world as a whole at risk
of some highly contagious deadly influenza or other virus that could kill
millions and wipe trillions from the global economy.

Strengthening preparedness at a national level reinforces our first line of
defense against the threat of pandemics. It is not the whole answer: we also
need to strengthen capabilities and coordination at a global level; and we must
accelerate research and development to give us more scientific weapons to
fight infectious pathogens. Yet unless we can prevent, detect, contain and
respond at a local level we will always be on the back foot.

Building and maintaining preparedness requires sustained financing. The
absolute sums are not large relative to the scale of the risk, but thus far many
governments and development partners have failed to give preparedness the
priority it merits. We must demonstrate the power of the investment case. We
must secure commitments to sustained financing and monitor that these are
delivered. Only then can we be confident that we have made the world a safer
place, that we are on the path towards achieving universal health security.

                                      xix
1. Introduction
The Preparedness Problem

In the wake of the Ebola crisis that began in West Africa in 2013, a series of
reports have recommended strengthening and scaling up investments in
global health security as an urgent priority. Expert assessments by the
Harvard-London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM)
Independent Panel on the Global Response to Ebola (November 2015), the
U.S. National Academy of Medicine’s (NAM) Commission on Creating a
Global Health Risk Framework for the Future (January 2016), and the UN
High Level Panel on the Global Response to Health Crises (February 2016)
urge far-reaching improvements in nations’ public health capabilities and
infrastructure, in international leadership for preparedness and response, and
in research and development related to infectious diseases.

Emphasizing the urgent need to invest in preparedness, the Harvard-LSHTM
Panel called upon the global community and countries to agree on a clear
strategy to ensure that governments invest domestically in building core
public health and system capacities, and to mobilize adequate external
support to supplement these efforts, especially in poorer countries.
Highlighting infectious diseases as one of the biggest risks facing humankind,
the NAM Commission on Creating a Global Health Risk Framework for the
Future argued that reinforcing public health capabilities should be a top
priority and estimates that $4.5 billion must be spent annually to prepare the
world for the next global health crisis, whether it is a resurgence of Ebola,
SARS, or bird flu, a swiftly moving threat like Zika, or some entirely new
disease. Stressing the need for all countries to meet the full obligations of the
International Health Regulations 2005 (IHR), the UN High Level Panel noted
that building a global health architecture that is better prepared to respond to
health crises will require additional financial resources, and stresses the need
to mobilize domestic and international funding, especially for low-income
countries, to support the implementation of the IHR’s Core Capacity
requirements.

The International Working Group

In response to these calls for increased investment in preparedness, the
International Working Group on Financing Preparedness (IWG) was
established at the World Bank in November 2016. Comprising 17 experts and
leaders from multilateral organizations, academia, philanthropic institutions,
government, and businesses, the IWG proposes ways in which national
governments and development partners can effectively and sustainably
finance investments to strengthen country and regional preparedness and
response capacities for health emergencies. These capacities include disease
surveillance, diagnostic laboratories, field epidemiology, infection control,
and emergency planning. They are set out in the IHR, the 11 action packages
of the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA), the 19 action areas of WHO’s


                                        1
Joint External Evaluation (JEE), and the performance of veterinary services
as measured by the 4 areas of OIE PVS.

The IWG has focused on developing the business case for increasing
investment in preparedness and response; identifying approaches to prioritize
investments in country-level preparedness within existing national budgets;
suggesting options for incremental domestic resource mobilization for
funding preparedness and response from both the public and private sectors;
and identifying how development financing for health can be used to catalyze
and support domestic investments in preparedness in countries requiring
assistance. Our report sets out an overall timetable for financing this agenda
against which countries and the international community can hold themselves
accountable.

Because the IWG is primarily concerned with the challenges of financing
preparedness at the country level, many topics lie outside our scope. Our
analysis does not address funding for global capabilities and coordination,
such as the WHO itself. Nor do we discuss the financing of accelerated
research and development for either infectious diseases or antimicrobial
resistance. These latter issues are being addressed through initiatives such as
the Coalition for Emergency Preparedness Innovations (CEPI).

How We Worked

The IWG’s work was spread over three phases: a preparatory phase, during
which we established what data existed, took stock of work done already, and
identified selected individuals and organizations for further cooperation; an
analytical phase, during which we conducted data analysis, established
patterns and relationships in the data and addressed the group’s mandate
through the synthesis of numerical and narrative data; and a compilation of
recommendations phase, which marked the culmination of the first two
phases and during which members considered the various emerging options
and settled upon the recommendations contained in this report. The IWG held
two face-to-face full membership meetings and a series of theme-specific
discussions over its six-month tenure. Members used these meetings to share
ideas, examine evidence, test hypotheses and form recommendations.

The recommendations of the IWG are expected to inform the implementation
of the financing-related recommendations of the various panels, provide input
to the Global Health Crises Task Force (established by the UN Secretary-
General to monitor implementation of recommendations of the UN High
Level Panel), and contribute to the development of a financing framework to
assist in the implementation following an external evaluation. The IWG’s
recommendations will also be provided to the G20 in 2017.

Review Process

This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals identified for their
expertise, experience and perspectives. Comments and suggestions from the
peer reviewers were received in writing and in discussions, and have been

                                      2
addressed in the final report. The report has not been modified or amended in
any substantive manner (other than minor editorial corrections) after the
completion of the review process.

Overview of the Report

The remainder of this report is organized as follows. Chapter 2 summarizes
the case for investing in pandemic preparedness. Chapter 3 looks at how
countries can identify the gaps in their pandemic defenses, assess resource
needs, and develop an action plan. Chapter 4 discusses the importance of
preparing a robust financing proposal, compelling investment case and an
overarching change management strategy. Chapter 5 focuses on ways in which
countries can mobilize additional resources for preparedness, both
domestically as well as through external assistance. Chapter 6 examines
measures which can potentially incentivize countries to give greater
importance to financing preparedness. The report concludes in Chapter 7,
which also contains a list of actions that countries and development partners
must take to sustainably finance preparedness.




                                     3
2. Setting the Context

The Case for Investing in Pandemic Preparedness

The health, economic and social impacts of disease outbreaks are substantial
(Exhibit 2.1). Measured in terms of human suffering or economic disruption,
pandemics exact huge costs. The human tragedy of rapidly spreading
infections has scarred the new century repeatedly. The recent Zika outbreak
in the Americas infected over a million people. It is associated with 2,971
confirmed cases of microcephaly, a congenital syndrome in which children of
infected mothers are born with small heads and brain damage (PAHO 2017).
Between December 2013 and April 2016, the largest epidemic of Ebola virus
disease to date generated more than 28,616 cases and 11,310 deaths in Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone (CDC 2016). The 2009 H1N1 influenza resulted in
over 18,000 deaths (WHO 2009). MERS has taken 690 lives so far (WHO
2017). Early in the new millennium, SARS killed 774 among the 8,098 people
infected (WHO 2003).




In infectious disease outbreaks, it’s the health sector that often gets hit the
hardest as the sick people who come to the healthcare sector infect healthcare
workers. The recent Ebola outbreak claimed the lives of 518 medical staff out
of a total of 898 infected (The Economist 2016). Sierra Leone lost 221
healthcare workers, followed by Liberia (192) and Guinea (100). The effect is
doubly pronounced when the health sector itself is weak. Sierra Leone, for
example, spends under $300 per person per year on health at purchasing
power parity, one-tenth of most countries in Europe. Guinea has 10 doctors

                                      4
per 100,000 people, one-twentieth of most countries in Europe. One of the
key failures in Ebola was that people did not want to seek formal care because
the system itself was bad – so they stayed at home and got others in their
family sick. By the time they went to a doctor, they were already very ill, and
did not survive long. The health system therefore needs investments in
capacity to care for sick people during outbreaks.

Investments in pandemic preparedness have huge co-benefits for the
healthcare sector. Investments in surveillance and diagnostic capacities, for
instance, can be used for routine care of patients. This synergistic relationship
between investing in pandemic preparedness and investing in health systems
reinforces the argument for committing resources to strengthening public
health capabilities, which otherwise tend to get overlooked in favor of
investments that yield a more immediate and visible return.

A Threat to Economies

The high death count and social disruption are not the only costs associated
with pandemics; the financial and economic damages are also devastating.
Ebola wiped out many of the recent development gains in Guinea, Liberia, and
Sierra Leone, which had been among the fastest growing economies in the
world prior to the crisis. The disease slashed investment and caused a
substantial loss in private-sector growth; unleashed threats to food security
through declining agricultural production; and burdened cross-border trade
with restrictions on movement, goods, and services. The World Bank
estimates that as a result the three countries lost $2.2 billion in GDP in 2015
alone (World Bank 2015).

Several other estimates of the projected economic impact of infectious disease
crises bolster the case for global action on preparedness. A National Academy
of Medicine report from 2016 uses estimated probabilities of a mild,
moderate, and severe pandemic, and their expected economic costs, to
produce an annualized loss estimate of $60 billion. Fan, Jamison and
Summers (2016) offer a somewhat higher estimate of expected annual income
loss ($80 billion). Incorporating the expected costs associated with mortality,
which are not included in the National Academy of Medicine estimates, the
expected annual loses rise six-fold to $490 billion.

While experts have differed in their precise estimates of the cost of pandemics,
all the figures are alarmingly high. Even the most conservative estimates (0.1
to 1.0 percent of global GDP) suggest pandemic risks are on par with other
high-profile economic threats that concern business leaders and policy
makers, such as climate change (0.2 to 2.0 percent of global GDP, according
to IPCC 2014) and natural disasters (0.3 to 0.5 percent of global GDP and
65,000 deaths per year, according to UNISDR 2015). Precisely because they
are so high, the estimated economic losses from infectious threats underline
the significant potential return on investment that will come from improving
preparedness.




                                       5
A Spiral of Fear

The economic impact of disease outbreaks is exacerbated by fear, which makes
people modify their behavior to reduce their chance of exposure. The 2015
South Korean MERS outbreak that saw more than 16,000 people quarantined
and claimed 38 lives is a case in point. It caused widespread panic and resulted
in a substantial change in consumer behavior, with people avoiding
restaurants and shopping centers and instead meeting their purchasing needs
through online shopping. The entertainment and leisure sectors were the
worst hit. According to data from the Korean Film Council, cinema visits
dropped by 52 percent year on year in the first two weeks of June. Tourist
arrivals fell by 41 percent as many visitors cancelled their plans to visit South
Korea. In June 2015, the consumer sentiment index compiled by the Bank of
Korea fell below the neutral 100 mark, signifying a deteriorating outlook, for
the first time since 2012. Fears that the MERS outbreak would have a
dramatically negative impact on private consumption led the Bank of Korea to
cut its benchmark policy rate by 25 basis points in June (Economic
Intelligence Unit 2015).

Likewise, China, though it was slow to respond at the early stages of the
outbreak, did everything it could in 2003 to minimize human-to-human
contact as it tried to check the spread of SARS. Despite these efforts, the World
Bank estimates that China’s GDP contracted by 0.5 percent in 2003 (World
Bank 2008), while global GDP fell by $40 billion (Lee and McKibbin 2004).
Recent economic work suggests that the annual global cost of moderately
severe to severe pandemics is roughly $570 billion, or 0.7 percent of global
income (Fan 2015). The cost of a severe pandemic like the 1918 influenza
pandemic could total as much as 5 percent of global GDP (World Bank 2015).

Increasing Frequency of Disease Outbreaks

For many reasons, the frequency and diversity of disease outbreaks have
increased steadily since 1980. First, recent advances in travel, trade and
connectivity have led to rapid increases in speed and volume not only of
humans, animals and commodities, but also of deadly pathogens. Second,
there has been unprecedented increase in unplanned urbanization, because of
which millions of people live in crowded spaces and unhygienic conditions,
which can be perfect breeding grounds for diseases to spread. Third, civil
unrest and war displace large volumes of people, who move to new places,
carrying with them a variety of infectious disease organisms. And fourth,
global warming is creating new belts of warm and moist environments, which
are ideal conditions for the spread of disease vectors.

Between 1980 and 2013, 12,012 outbreaks of 215 human infectious diseases
have been recorded, comprising more than 44 million cases occurring in 219
nations. In an analysis of this dataset, Smith et al (2014) finds that after
controlling for disease surveillance, communications, geography and host
availability, it is found that the total number and richness (i.e., number of
unique causal diseases) of outbreaks increased significantly since 1980 (p <
0.0001).


                                       6
Exhibit 2.2 plots these outbreaks. Panel (a) depicts the rising trend in total
outbreaks and richness of causal diseases over time. Panel (b) presents the
same information, but according to host type. Panel (c) shows the pathogen
taxonomy, while panel (d) graphs the transmission modes.




Source: Smith et al 2014


Deadly and Unpredictable: The Example of Influenza

The unpredictability of the occurrence of pandemics makes the case for
investing in preparedness even more compelling. Influenza pandemics, which
kill many people, show no predictable periodicity or pattern – beyond that
they seem to occur roughly every 3 or 4 decades (Exhibit 2.3). There is a high
probability that the world will experience a severe outbreak in the next 10 to
30 years that could destabilize societies and economies; but it’s anyone’s guess
when and where it might emerge.

Fifty million people are believed to have died in the 1918 influenza pandemic,
which infected a third of the world’s population. This was in an age before
intercontinental air travel and globalization, and at a time when the world’s
population was under 2 billion. Two other worldwide influenza outbreaks
occurred in the last century, in 1957 (H2N2 Asian flu) and 1968 (H3N2 Hong
Kong flu), with death tolls in the 1-3 million range.1 These pandemics
represented 3 different antigenic subtypes of influenza A virus (H1N1, H2N2,


1Not classified as “true” pandemics are 3 notable epidemics: the 1947 H1N1 pseudo-pandemic in Japan
and Korea, which recorded low death rates; the 1976 H1N1 epidemic of swine influenza in New Jersey,
USA, which caused serially transmitted disease, pneumonia, and death at a military installation, but
disappeared within a few weeks; and the 1977 H1N1 Russian flu, which was almost entirely restricted to
persons under 25 years of age.




                                                  7
and H3N2 respectively), and differed from each other with respect to etiologic
agents, epidemiology, and disease severity.2




The 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic, the first of the 21st century, showed how
a new virus could spread very quickly to every corner of the globe in an era
where the concentrations of human populations and their constant global
movements prevent the local extinction of the virus population.3 The first
cases of the novel swine-derived H1N1 influenza A virus were detected in
Mexico and the United States in late April 2009, and by the end of the year the
virus had spread to 208 countries, resulting in hundreds of thousands of cases
and at least 18,000 deaths.



2 Not much is known about the antecedents of the virus of 1918 flu, but in the case of 1957 and 1968
pandemics, both of which occurred in the era of modern virology, the hemagglutinin antigen of the
causative viruses showed major changes from the corresponding antigens of immediately antecedent
strains. This renders prediction difficult, especially since “with 16 known forms of influenza hemagglutinin
(the “H” in the strain name), 9 known varieties of neuraminidase enzyme (the “N” in the name), and
different subtypes within each type, the potential for new enzymatic combinations—and recombinations—
is great.” Harmon K. 2011
3 This is also why today’s pandemic risk prediction models have begun to introduce the concept of

“effective distance” rather than actual distance to understand how infections are likely to spread. See
Brockmann D1, Helbing D. 2013.




                                                     8
If a pandemic virus equivalent in pathogenicity to the virus of 1918 were to
return in the highly inter-connected, globalized, and urbanized 21st century
world, it would likely kill more than a 100 million people, even with today’ s
vastly advanced antiviral and antibacterial drugs, vaccines, and prevention
knowledge (Taubenberger and Morens 2006).
Speaking at a conference on international security policy in Munich in 2017,
Bill Gates ranked pandemics (including the growing potential for intentional
or accidental release of a synthetic or modified agent) alongside climate
change and nuclear war as the three biggest threats facing the world (Munich
Security Conference 2017). Yet, pandemics have not caught the imagination of
world leaders in quite the same way as climate change and nuclear wars.
Pandemics attract a lot of attention when they are at their height; but once the
worst is over, the sense of urgency disappears, both at the global and country
level, and we start all over again.4 At the opening session of the Skoll World
Forum in Oxford, U.K., World Bank Group President Jim Kim said that “what
happens every time” in the face of pandemics is a cycle of “panic, neglect,
panic, neglect” (Devex 2015).

The Challenge of Financing Preparedness

The huge social, health, and economic devastation wrought by Zika and Ebola
has put the challenge of strengthening outbreak preparedness and
responsiveness of countries on the agenda at the highest political level. But
this is not the first time that the world’s attention has been drawn to the need
to be better prepared; earlier viral outbreaks such as SARs and H1N1 had also
led to similar calls. And yet, countries chronically underinvest in preparedness
planning, disease and risk monitoring, and primary care. Health sector
development strategies commonly lack focus, and public finance management
lacks means to target resources. Complex political economies undermine
strategic priority setting, and development assistance largely remains targeted
to specific diseases. External assistance prompts governments to shift budgets
away from health, and the financing of health often falls short of any
internationally agreed target, such as the Abuja pledge of allocating at least 15
percent of annual budgets to improve the health sector (WHO 2011).

What Does It Take to Be Prepared?

Long before the recent Zika and Ebola outbreaks, global initiatives had
established a comprehensive set of guidelines, tools, and technical assistance
to help countries improve their preparedness and response capacity. The IHR,
promulgated in 1969 under the auspices of the World Health Organization
(WHO), were broadened in 2005 to guide countries in detecting, assessing,
reporting, and responding to all events that could potentially constitute public
health emergencies of international concern (PHEIC).

4 The story of Zika carries a potentially threatening message. As the world scrambled to find ways to
counter transmission and understand the virus’ impact of fetal brain development, it is difficult to avoid
the thought that earlier recognition of the surge in microcephaly cases and the link to Zika infection would
have been immensely valuable. When countering infectious disease outbreaks, days and weeks matter, and
preparation is everything.

                                                     9
All WHO member states are required to have or to develop minimum core
public health capacities to implement the IHR effectively (WHO 2016).
Progress in building the needed capacities has been slow, however, and in
2014 only one-third of the countries in the world reported having the ability
to assess, detect and respond to public health emergencies (CDC 2016).
Countries in Africa scored the lowest across most preparedness indicators,
and only about two-thirds reported developing multi-hazard national public
health emergency preparedness and response plans.

WHO has also updated its global influenza preparedness plan, which outlines
components that countries should include in their national preparedness
plans with a focus on core public health components, including surveillance,
reporting, communication, and case management. Subsequent guidance
expanded preparedness to include other sectors, such as education and
interior, in a “one country” approach (WHO 2007).

More recently, about 55 countries promoted GHSA. This agenda covers 11
technical targets, including activities related to the prevention of outbreaks,
promotion of key practices, and actions to improve countries’ response
capacity. Recent years have also seen a resurgence in the concept of health
systems strengthening, with a particular emphasis on increasing systems’
“resilience” (Kruk et al. 2015). The prescription for health systems resilience
emphasizes the spectrum of essential inputs, including: health workers,
infrastructure, supply chains, health information, surveillance, infection
prevention and control, and community mobilization.

Why Is This So Hard?

With growing international attention focused on the problem, why have many
countries still struggled to achieve preparedness against infectious threats?
Part of the answer is obvious. The requirements for preparedness are
complicated (Exhibit 2.4). At a minimum, countries need a solid legal and
regulatory foundation, adequately trained and equipped public health
workforce, strong surveillance and response framework, functional national
public health laboratories, and robust multi-sectoral coordination. Many of
these components lie in different parts of government and are often financed
through a variety of different mechanisms, ranging from emergency
allocations, routine sectoral provisions and ad-hoc apportionments. Faced
with this complexity, it is not surprising that many countries have struggled
even to draft a national plan of action with specific activities, timelines, and
budgets. Rational and increased financing will require establishing a common
vocabulary, together with a common framework for defining priorities and
core investments for preparedness. This is also important to avoid a “flavor of
the month” approach whereby financing partners use the word preparedness
to justify whatever investment they would like to make.




                                      10
Preparedness and Systems Performance

The challenge of financing preparedness is not limited to ensuring a sufficient
level of resources. In many instances, there has been insufficient
consideration of the way different system sub-components need to be
combined to achieve satisfactory performance in the context of uncertainty
and emergencies.

To grasp this more clearly, it is helpful to recall what we mean by
“preparedness.” Preparedness for pandemics refers to a range of health and
non-health interventions, capabilities, and capacities at community, country,
regional, and global levels. Their purpose is to prevent, detect, and respond to
the spread of disease and other hazards, mitigating social disruptions and
limiting risks to international travel and trade.

Three aspects of investing in pandemic preparedness deserve special mention.
First, preparedness is part of a broader approach to disaster risk management.
Resources put into preparedness are investments in critical risk management
for countries, regions, and the global community as a whole. Second,
preparedness is a core component of health systems strengthening, both
depending on and contributing to other parts of the health system. This means
the costs of achieving preparedness depend on what other systems
components exist and how well they work. This is also why preparedness
measures cannot be undertaken for a single pathogen: “preparedness” reflects
the performance of the full system. Third, pandemic preparedness is
inherently multi-sectoral, requiring cooperation across different arms of


                                       11
government and with the private sector. While experts have acknowledged
these points, the persistence of narrow and fragmented approaches to
financing preparedness has constrained efforts to build more resilient health
systems.5

Clarifying these concepts matters, because smart, timely, well-directed
investments in preparedness can make a life-or-death difference for people.
The ability of the health system to mount an effective response to Ebola virus
outbreaks in Nigeria, Democratic Republic of Congo, and Uganda highlight
the importance of critical components of preparedness and response even in
the context of overall weakness. The experience of Vietnam illustrates what
can be achieved when ambition goes beyond strengthening just a few
components. Vietnam has implemented a comprehensive One Health
program drawing together the financing of agricultural, public health, health
care, and public education programs.

Universal Health Coverage and Security

Much of modern health development policy has been marked by recurrent
tensions between disease-specific programs (for example, addressing
smallpox, malaria, or HIV/AIDS) and efforts to secure comprehensive
improvements in health systems. Disease-specific programs can achieve
remarkable gains, sometimes with dramatic speed, but may fail to build
broader capacities. Systems-building efforts may initially yield scant
measurable results. The tensions among different approaches, and the
concern to swiftly remedy perceived inadequacies, have sometimes led to
abrupt shifts in the global health vocabulary, with consequences for
investment flows. Thus, in a matter of two decades, resource-constrained
governments, policy experts, and political commentators alike have welcomed
and adopted the refrains of health system strengthening (HSS), universal
health coverage (UHC), resilient health systems, and global health security
(GHS) – perhaps not always fully understanding what these terms mean or
believing them to be different ways of saying the same thing. This can matter
because although these agendas all point in broadly the same direction, the
different nuances lead to different priorities and the sheer profusion of terms
can cause confusion.

Consider, for instance, the notion of health system strengthening, which refers
to the holistic approach of supply-side interventions directed at the core
functions of a health system, including financing, production, delivery,
governance and management. It involves “putting together the right chain of
events – financing, regulatory framework for private-public collaboration,
governance, insurance, logistics, provider payment and incentive
mechanisms, information, well-trained personnel, basic infrastructure, and
supplies – to ensure equitable access to effective health interventions and a
continuum of care to save and improve people’s lives” (World Bank 2007).
Distinct from specific disease-control technologies, this approach to
developing the health sector gained popularity in the last couple of decades. It

5GHSA was largely created as a way for funders to see where the dollar was going and how it was making
an impact.

                                                 12
offered a constructive approach to multiple problems: the shifting burden of
disease, growing duplication in disease-specific investments, and increasing
system-wide bottlenecks that threatened the success and sustainability of
disease-specific programs. It is important to note, however, that health system
strengthening is not a result in itself; rather, it comprises the instruments by
which the health sector policy objectives are realized (Kutzin and Sparkes
2016).

These health sector policy objectives are captured in the goals of UHC, health
security, and health resilience. The quest for UHC is a demand for both better
health and greater equity in health. UHC is only attained when everybody has
access to affordable, quality health services, and no one is forced into poverty
to pay for the health care they need (Kutzin and Sparkes 2016). Health security
can be seen as a component of UHC, since protection against health risks is a
key part of health coverage (Anand 2011). Health system resilience is the
ability of a health system to absorb shocks, respond with the provision of
needed services, and sustain gains (Kruk et al 2015).

WHO defines UHC as access to a broad range of services, which would include
the services that contribute to preparedness. From this perspective,
preparedness is the output indicator, and is a subset of UHC (Exhibit 2.5). The
WHO framework clearly delineates that health systems (inputs) contribute to
preparedness (specific output) which is a subset of UHC (broad output). UHC
including preparedness then contributes to health security (impact).

Some worry that a narrow focus on UHC leads to the prioritization of
investments in curative healthcare services at the expense of strengthening
public health competencies. In theory, attainment of UHC requires
strengthening all aspects of the health system – including those that produce,
finance and deliver health promotion, disease prevention, treatment,
rehabilitation, and palliation – so that all people who need health services
receive them, without undue financial hardship (Boerma et al 2014). In
practice, however, public health interventions can take a back seat. Schmidt et
al (2015) identify several pressures that can lead to the prioritization of the
curative clinical services at the expense of population-level health
interventions in pursuit of UHC goals. While the concept of UHC certainly
incorporates public health services there is real possibility that public health
interventions are under-prioritized in resource-constrained countries
pursuing the UHC goal (Kutzin and Sparkes 2016).




                                      13
Universal Health Security

At its simplest, health security refers to the protection from threats to health
(Heymann 2015), and entails the intrinsic value of protection against risk
(Anand 2011). Ensuring health security for all by strengthening health and
related systems to protect all citizens from threats to health is an objective that
seems entirely consistent with UHC, although universal health security
perhaps goes further than the most narrow interpretations of the UHC goal.
Universal health security includes reducing the vulnerability of populations to
health threats that spread within and across national borders and from
inadvertent or malicious actions as well as natural causes. Moreover, universal
health security both depends on and contributes to health systems
strengthening and health systems resilience.

No terminology is perfect. For example, in some countries, “security” is a
loaded and equivocal term. Yet even acknowledging these limitations,
universal health security remains a useful framing concept, not least because
it clearly connects the health agenda to both human security and economic
security, enabling health security to be thought of in the same light as other
major risks that governments should manage.

Similarly, the concept of health security connects health action to the broader
development agenda. As Ebola demonstrated, pandemics can completely
knock countries off their development trajectory, undermining hard won
achievements, not just in health but across multiple dimensions of human and
economic development. Seen in this light, universal health security is a way of
safeguarding progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals.

                                        14
Integrated Action to Reach the Goal

In the remainder of this report, we set out 12 specific recommendations to
ensure adequate and sustained financing of preparedness. There is a risk that
countries and development partners may only accept some of these
recommendations or may implement them only partially. However, the
recommendations are integrated and interdependent. Together they
constitute a unified framework for sustainable financing of preparedness. To
be effective in achieving universal health security, we need to pursue them all.
For this reason, we call on the global community to implement the framework
in its entirety. We address this call to national governments, international and
regional bodies, and all development partners. In protecting humankind
against infectious disease crises, global preparedness is only as strong as its
weakest link.

Recommendation 1: National governments and development partners should
commit to a path towards universal health security by adopting and implementing
the framework set out in this report and embodied in Recommendations 2-12.

This chapter has summarized the case for investment in pandemic
preparedness. If countries and partners are convinced by the arguments, what
should they do next? Chapter 3 looks at how countries can identify the gaps in
their pandemic defenses, assess resource needs, and develop an action plan.




                                      15
REFERENCES
Alebachew A, Hatt L, Kukla M. 2014. Monitoring and evaluating progress towards
universal health coverage in Ethiopia.2014. PLoS Med 11: e1001696

Anand S. 2012. Human security and universal health insurance. Lancet. 2012.
January 7;379(9810):9–10. 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61148-3

Boerma T, Eozenou P, Evans D, Evans T, Kieny M-P, Wagstaff A. 2014. Monitoring
Progress towards Universal Health Coverage at Country and Global Levels. 2014.
PLoS Med 11: e1001731. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001731

Brockmann D1, Helbing D. 2013. The Hidden Geometry of Complex, Network-
driven Contagion Phenomena. Science. 2013 Dec 13;342(6164):1337-42. doi:
10.1126/science.1245200.

Commission on a Global Health Risk Framework for the Future (GHRF
Commission). 2016. The Neglected Dimension of Global Security: A Framework to
Counter Infectious Disease Crises. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press;
2016.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2016. 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West
Africa - Case Counts. Table: Countries with Former Widespread Transmission and
Current, Established Control Measures. Updated April 13, 2016. Accessed at:
https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/2014-west-africa/case-counts.html

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2016. Global Health Security:
International Health Regulations (IHR). Accessed at:
 https://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/healthprotection/ghs/ihr/#thirteen

Devex. 2015. https://www.devex.com/news/pandemic-response-a-cycle-of-panic-
and-neglect-says-world-bank-president-89995

Economist. 2016. http://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2016/01/daily-
chart-12

Fan VY, Jamison DT, Summers LH. 2015. The Inclusive Cost of Pandemic Influenza
Risk. NBER Work Pap Ser. 2015; 22137:24.

Harmon, K. 2011. What Will the Next Influenza Pandemic Look Like? Scientific
American, 2011. Accessed on 3/27/17.at
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/next-influenza-pandemic/

Heymann DL, Chen L, Takemi K, Fidler DP, Tappero JW, Thomas MJ, et al. 2015.
Global Health Security: The Wider Lessons from the West African Ebola Virus
Disease Epidemic. Lancet. 2015. May 9;385(9980):1884–901. 10.1016/S0140-
6736(15)60858-3

IPCC. 2014. Climate Change: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I,
II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. Geneva,
Switzerland: IPCC. 2014.

KPMG LLP. 2014. The Global Economic Impact of Anti-Microbial Resistance. 2014.


                                        16
Kruk ME, Myers M, Varpilah ST, Dahn BT. 2015. What is a resilient health system?
Lessons from Ebola. Lancet. 2015. May 9; 385(9980):1910–2. 10.1016/S0140-
6736(15)60755-3

Kutzin J, Sparkes SP. 2016. Health systems strengthening, universal health
coverage, health security and resilience. 2016. Bull World Health Organ. 2016 Jan 1;
94(1): 2. –10.2471/BLT.15.165050

Lee J-W, McKibbin, WJ. 2004. Estimating the Global Economic Costs of SARS.
Institute of Medicine (US) Forum on Microbial Threats. 2004. Accessed at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK92473/

Munich Security Conference. 2017.
https://www.securityconference.de/en/activities/munich-security-conference/msc-
2017/speeches/speech-by-bill-gates/

Ooms G, Hammonds R. 2015. Anchoring Universal Health Coverage in the Right to
Health: What Difference Would It Make? [Policy Brief]. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2015. Accessed at: http://www.who.int/gender-equity-
rights/knowledge/anchoring-uhc-23nov.pdf?ua=1

Pan American Health Organization. 2017. Zika Cases and Congenital Syndrome
Associated with Zika Virus reported by Countries and Territories in the Americas,
2015-2017, Cumulative Cases.
Data as of 6 April 2017 2:00 PM EST. Accessed at:
http://www2.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&Item
id=270&gid=39029&lang=en

Schmidt H, Gostin LO, Emanuel EJ. 2015. Public Health, Universal Health
Coverage, and Sustainable Development Goals: Can they Coexist? Lancet. 2015.
August 29; 386(9996): 928–30. 10.1016/S0140-6736 (15) 60244-6

Smith K.F, Goldberg M, Rosenthal S, Carlson L, Chen J, Chen C, Ramachadran S.
2014. Global Rise in Human Infectious Disease Outbreaks. Journal of Royal Society
Interface. October 2014. Doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.0950

Taubenberger JK, Morens DM. 2006. 1918 Influenza: The Mother of All Pandemics.
Emerging Infectious Diseases. 2006;12(1):15-22.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1201.050979

Taylor J, Hafner M, Yerushalmi E, Smith R, Bellasio J, Vardavas R. 2014.
Estimating the economic costs of antimicrobial resistance: Model and Results.
RAND Europe. 2014.

UNISDR. 2015. Making Development Sustainable: The Future of Disaster Risk
Management. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR). United Nations.

Victoria Y. Fan, Dean T. Jamison, Lawrence H. Summers. 2016. The National
Bureau of Economic Research. 2016. The Inclusive Cost of Pandemic Influenza
Risk. NBER Working Paper No. 22137. Accessed at:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22137

World Bank. 2007. Healthy Development: The World Bank Strategy for Health,
Nutrition, & Population Results. Washington, DC: World Bank.


                                         17
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/102281468140385647/Healthy-
Development-the-World-Bank-strategy-for-health-nutrition-population-results

World Bank. 2008. On SARS Type Economic Effects during Infectious Disease
Outbreaks. Policy Research Working Paper 4466. Accessed at:
http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-4466

World Bank. 2012. People, Pathogens and Our Planet: Volume 2 - The Economics of
One Health. Vol. 2. Washington D.C.: World Bank; 2012.

World Bank. 2015. Update on the Economic Impact of the 2014-2015 Ebola
Epidemic on Liberia, Sierra Leona and Guinea. April 15, 2015. Accessed at:
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/21965/95804.pdf
?sequence=4

World Bank. 2015. Pandemics Overview. Last updated Sep 10, 2015. Accessed at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/pandemics/overview

World Bank. 2016. Drug-resistant infections: A Threat to Our Economic Future.
Washington D.C.: World Bank Group; 2016.

World Health Organization. 2003. Emergency preparedness, response. Summary of
probable SARS cases with onset of illness from 1 November 2002 to 31 July 2003.
Last update: 31 December 2003. Accessed at:
http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/table2004_04_21/en/

World Health Organization. 2010. Emergencies preparedness, response. Pandemic
(H1N1) 2009 - update 100. Updated 14th May 2010. Accessed at:
http://www.who.int/csr/don/2010_05_14/en/

World Health Organization. 2011. The Abuja Declaration: Ten Years On. Accessed
at:
http://www.who.int/healthsystems/publications/abuja_report_aug_2011.pdf?ua=
1

World Health Organization. 2016. Strengthening health security by implementing
the International Health Regulations (2005).
http://www.who.int/ihr/procedures/monitoring/en/

World Health Organization. 2017. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) webpage. Coronavirus Infections News. Accessed at:
http://www.who.int/emergencies/mers-cov/en/




                                       18
3. Identifying Gaps and Estimating Funding Needs

International Cooperation on Infectious Threats:
Historical Background

The first International Sanitary Conference took place in Paris in 1851 in
response to a cholera epidemic that ravaged Europe for nearly 15 years. A
hundred years later, in 1951, member states of the newly-constituted WHO
adopted the International Sanitary Regulations, which were replaced by and
renamed the International Health Regulations in 1969. Narrowly focused on
six serious infectious diseases (cholera, plague, yellow fever, smallpox,
relapsing fever, and typhus), IHR (1969) depended on official country
notification of disease outbreaks and did not establish a formal internationally
coordinated mechanism to contain disease spread or ensure country
commitment to standards. Further, some countries were reluctant to report
diseases for fear of trade and travel restrictions (WHO 2009). The resurgence
of cholera, plague, and Ebola in the 1990s exposed the limitations of IHR
(1969), which led to calls for their revision in 1995, and a call to WHO in 2001
to support countries in strengthening their capacity to detect and respond
rapidly to communicable disease threats (WHO 2009).

All this while, the IHR remained largely unchanged. Negligence persisted
among countries, and the capacities of most countries to detect and respond
to disease outbreaks remained low. This inertia was shaken by SARS, which
made its first appearance in November 2002 in China's Guangdong province
(Huang 2004). The disease spread rapidly around the globe. Concerns raised
by SARS intensified the IHR revision process, and by 2005, the scope of the
regulations was broadened to cover all public health threats, including
existing, new, and emerging threats and those caused by non-infectious
disease agents. The revised IHR (2005) required countries to report all
possible hazards with the potential to be public health emergencies of
international concern, regardless of cause, and provide this information in a
timely manner.

Another important change introduced in IHR (2005) required all countries to
develop, strengthen, and maintain core capacities for surveillance and
response (Katz and Fischer 2010). These revisions came into force in 2007
and are binding for all WHO member states. However, they did not include an
enforcement mechanism for states that fail to comply. Peer pressure and fear
of tarnished international image were deemed to be sufficient motivators for
countries to invest in strengthening their core public health competencies.

IHR (2005) enjoyed only a couple of years of respite before the world was
shaken by another public health threat. In 2009, H1N1 triggered the IHR
mechanisms. While the response was largely successful, shortcomings of the
IHR (2005) also became apparent (Katz and Fischer 2010). The gaps and
limited capacities in their public health systems meant that countries could
not keep up with the public health, trade, and travel recommendations of the
IHR. This not only exposed vulnerabilities in states whose domestic capacities

                                      19
were limited, but increased risks for their regional and global peers. What
became clear is that, even though all WHO member states had agreed to IHR
(2005), only a few had developed the mechanisms needed to meet their
obligations.

Strengthening IHR Implementation: Slow Going

After the entry into force of the IHR (2005) in 2007, the 61st World Health
Assembly (WHA) adopted a resolution whereby countries and WHO are
required to report to the WHA on IHR implementation progress. The WHO
secretariat subsequently published the IHR Core Capacity Monitoring
Framework in 2010, accompanied by an IHR Monitoring Tool (WHO 2011).
The Monitoring Tool identifies 13 core capacities for preparedness, detection,
and response. These capacities are essential national public health functions
which provide health protection for domestic populations and collectively also
provide the basis for global health security.

Through the IHR Monitoring Tool, WHO asked countries to conduct annual
self-assessments on IHR implementation, focusing on the 13 core capacities.
Countries were requested to issue formal reports in 2012 (with additional
reports in 2014 and 2016 for governments that requested extensions) to
declare if they had fully implemented the regulations. However, most
countries have yet to fully establish these core capacities. In 2014, only 64
countries reported meeting core capacities, while 48 failed even to respond to
the WHO request (Gostin and Katz 2016). Despite extensions reaching into
2016, the situation had not changed much.

Even if all countries had reported accurately and in a timely manner, national
self-assessments have been shown to provide unreliable estimates of
countries’ true capability. In addition, governments have not used a consistent
set of evidence-based metrics to measure compliance. These deficiencies
undermine the integrity and utility of self-assessments.

Every WHO IHR Review Committee and all major post-Ebola commissions
have demanded that States Parties build and strengthen core capacities.
Despite this, governments have not properly funded and implemented the
required capacities, and international assistance has been limited (WHO
2016). Achieving IHR core capacities remains an indisputable baseline for
global health security; the longer it takes to detect an event, the slower the
response and the more lives lost.

Beyond Self-Assessment

Due to the recognized limitations of self-assessment-based reporting, calls for
external assessment of capabilities have been raised several times, both by the
WHO and other actors. In 2014, the United States, in conjunction with
partners from around the world, launched the GHSA, which developed eleven
specific targets to accelerate IHR and PVS implementation and piloted a
health security external assessment tool and process. In early 2014, just as the
GHSA partnership was launched, an Ebola epidemic began to spread in West


                                      20
Africa, eventually triggering the declaration of a PHEIC by the WHO and the
rapid rallying of international response measures. The explosive proliferation
of Ebola made very clear how insufficiently many countries were prepared for
such events; none of the West African nations were in compliance with IHR.

After recommendations and approval from the Executive Board at its 136th
session and the 68th World Health Assembly, the WHO Secretariat proceeded
to develop a blended evaluation approach that combined self-evaluation, peer
review, and voluntary external evaluations, involving a mix of domestic and
independent experts (WHO 2015). A task force was also established to ensure
that this tool was harmonized with existing assessment tools for IHR
implementation.

This process resulted in the Joint External Evaluation, which built on and
included the original GHSA targets. In naming the process, “Joint” was
intended to refer to an assessment combining self-assessment by a multi-
sectoral team of national experts, followed by an in-country review by a second
team of similarly multi-sectoral international peer experts, i.e., the “External
Evaluation” (WHO 2016). The WHO Global Policy Group subsequently
endorsed the JEE tool as the single standard WHO instrument to be used for
externally assessing member states’ IHR capacities. Countries are expected to
go through a JEE once every 5 years.

National animal health sectors also undergo internal and external
assessments, facilitated by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE).
OIE has developed a well-established external standard evaluation called the
OIE PVS Pathway, which assesses the quality of national veterinary services
and animal health systems by identifying gaps and weaknesses in compliance
with OIE international standards (OIE 2017). The PVS tool then supports and
promotes the establishment of priorities and strategies to help countries meet
performance and compliance standards in a timely manner. Countries have a
strong economic incentive to participate in the PVS process, since it expands
their opportunities to engage in international trade in agricultural products.

Using JEE and PVS to Map Preparedness Gaps

JEE and PVS tools thus comprise the starting points for identifying gaps in
preparedness and estimating funding needs. As of April 21, 2017, 37 and 131
countries have completed JEE and PVS assessments, respectively (Table 3.1).
Fourteen low-income countries have completed both JEE and PVS, while 25
have undergone a PVS assessment only. Among Fragile and Conflict-Affected
States (World Bank 2017), 7 have completed both JEE and PVS, 18 have
completed only PVS and 1 country has completed only JEE.6 A further 32
countries have scheduled JEE missions in the next eighteen months, and an

6 The PVS assessment is more than 5 years old in 78 (out of 131) countries, which would need to refresh
the assessments soon.




                                                  21
additional 28 countries have expressed interest but not yet scheduled a
mission. Out of 199 countries, 64 countries currently remain with neither a
completed JEE nor a completed PVS (IHR-MEF 2017).7 Tables A3.1-3.3
(placed in the annex to this chapter) list all the countries.

Table 3.1 JEE and PVS Status
                                                                                         Neither
                                        Both PVS        Only JEE       Only PVS
                                                                                         PVS nor
                                        and JEE         (no PVS)       (no JEE)
                                                                                          JEE
    Low-income countries (IDA),
    excluding fragile and conflict           14              0              25                8
    affected states
    Fragile and conflict affected
                                              7              1              18                8
    states

    Middle and high income
                                             12              3              55               48
    countries

    TOTAL                                    33              4              98               64


Recommendation 2: (i) By the end of 2017, all national governments should
commit to participate in, and by the end of 2019, conduct a Joint External
Evaluation (JEE) to assess their capacity to comply with the requirements of the
International Health Regulations 2005 (IHR) to prevent, detect, and rapidly
respond to public health threats; (ii) By the end of 2017, all national governments
should commit to participate in, and by the end of 2019, conduct an evaluation of
Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) to assess their capacity to comply with
the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) standards.

Designing a National Action Plan

Following the identification of a baseline and gaps through JEE/PVS and
other relevant assessments, the next step is for countries to develop a plan
prioritizing implementation activities. To support countries in this endeavor,
the Guidelines for Development of a National Action Plan for Health Security
(NAPHS, WHO 2017) explain the principles of planning, costing, financing,
and implementing preparedness plans, as well as key considerations to
maintain throughout the process.

Each national action plan will be specific to the country; however, a few
guiding principles for effective planning can be provided (see Appendix A).




7 In addition, 6 countries (Georgia, Peru, Portugal, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom) were assessed
through the GHSA external evaluation during the pilot phase. This tool was later revised and replaced by
the JEE.

                                                  22
The NAPHS process includes several dimensions, beginning with situation
analysis and strategic planning and prioritization exercises that establish
short-, medium-, and long-term goals based on the gap analysis (Exhibit 3.1).
Strategic planning follows the structure of the main gaps identified through
the JEE assessment, and a template for planning is provided to countries and
partners supporting the planning process to help them identify and prioritize
actions to fill major capacity gaps. The guidelines promote the development of
a monitoring and evaluation framework, which reinforces accountability and
multi-sectoral engagement, and resource planning. Resource planning aims
not just to determine how much activities cost, but also to identify domestic
and international financing opportunities.

Costing, referring specifically to the process of identifying resources required
to undertake preparedness activities and assigning them a monetary value,
provides insights on where a country has insufficient funds or a duplication of
funds for activities that strengthen health security. Since the action plan is
multi-year, the costing exercise reflects the same thinking, projecting costs
across the following five years of expected implementation. The exercise
attempts to distinguish between capital and recurrent costs, and assists
stakeholders in deciding what types of funding vehicles are relevant,
depending on the task at hand.




                                      23
Box 3.1 The Post-JEE Planning Process in Tanzania

“This year, Tanzania made history by being the first country in the WHO African region and
globally to develop a costed National Action Plan for Health Security (NAPHS). The journey has
not been easy, because it has taken over a year after the country completed the JEE in February
2016. The processes of developing of the NAPHS began in June 2016, three months after the
JEE was completed. The NAPHS development process was started by the country’s IHR
technical working group. While the focus was mainly on the JEE key findings and priority actions,
other previous assessments included the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)
Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) assessment, the Integrated Risk Profiling Assessment,
the Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) situation analysis, the integrated disease surveillance and
response (IDSR) review, and the vulnerability, risk assessment and mapping (VRAM) to mention
a few.

“During the costing workshop, there was an important discussion about the need for a
coordination platform, preferably at the Prime Minister’s Office and the creation of an inter-
ministerial committee was proposed to ensure a seamless interplay between multiple sectors and
other existing plans at all administrative levels of the country.

“The Tanzania JEE has really galvanized multiple stakeholders to work together on health
security in the country. Importantly, even at the regional and global level, the JEE and
subsequently the planning and costing workshops brought together several agencies including:
WHO (all three levels), the US CDC, Finland, the US Department of Defense, FAO, OIE, JICA,
GIZ, PHE, the US Department of Agriculture, the World Bank, national governments for cross
fertilization. In terms of forging partnerships, it is not an overstatement to say that the Tanzania
JEE and NAPHS development process have created and continue to create partnerships in ways
not seen before. Now that the plan is costed, the focus turns to its implementation. Prior to
implementation, and the country is planning high-level launch of the plan at the Parliamentary
session in June 2017. The aim is to create public awareness including ensuring that
Parliamentarians are aware and will lobby for sustained and adequate domestic funding.”


Source:http://www.afro.who.int/en/tanzania/press-materials/item/9504-who-and-partners-develop-a-costed-national-
action-plan-for-health-security.html



As of April 21, 2017, three countries – Tanzania, Pakistan and Eritrea – have
completed the costing exercise as part of the post-JEE preparedness planning.
An example of the costing exercise for the four core capacities of health
security in Tanzania is provided in Table A3.4 (placed in the annex to this
chapter). Sixteen other countries have scheduled the post-JEE planning
exercise in the last eight months of 2017 (Exhibit 3.2).




                                                        24
A further 31 countries – Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana,
Guinea, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Laos, Liberia,
Malaysia, Mali, Mozambique, Pakistan, Peru, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Tanzania, Thailand, Uganda, Ukraine, Vietnam, and CARICOM8– have also
developed national plans, but they are not costed. 9 Originally drafted with
GHSA targets before the JEE was completed, these plans are currently being
converted to be in line with the JEE framework.

This will still leave many countries with a completed evaluation but no
announced effort to go through the critical next steps of planning,
prioritization, costing, and implementation. Several elements contribute to
the current limited prioritization of preparedness in many countries. The
process outlined above should ideally apply to all countries. However, fragile
states (e.g., those experiencing conflict) need a tailored approach, since they
are likely to be at high risk of infectious disease outbreaks. However, primary
and secondary health care services in these countries are generally disrupted,
and building long-term national preparedness capacity is not a realistic aim.
The focus must be on urgent needs. These include basic preparedness
functions for prevention, detection, and response, such as ad hoc
immunization campaigns, surveillance, and the creation of emergency

8  CARICOM – or the Caribbean Community – is an organization of 15 Caribbean nations and
dependencies whose main objective is to promote economic integration and cooperation among its
members, to ensure that the benefits of integration are equitably shared, and to coordinate foreign policy.
9 Seventeen of these countries were assisted by the United States Government, which provided $1 billion

in support for the design and implementation of these plans.

                                                   25
operations centers. These resources may be supplied by health partners within
the scope of their humanitarian support.

The JEE framework includes AMR as one of the 19 dimensions for evaluation
of a country’s core capacities. For AMR, the JEE assessment includes all
activities that present integration opportunities with infectious disease
preparedness and most of the specific aspects that are particularly relevant for
the countries (health acquired infections, stewardship activities, etc.).
However, the creation of national action plans for health security and for AMR
is currently happening in most cases through different processes. Given the
substantial overlap of activities across infectious disease outbreaks and AMR
(see Appendix B), and with the aim to simplify processes and have an
integrated approach to country resilience, countries could benefit from a more
integrated approach to preparedness and AMR at the national level. While the
two topics are already mostly integrated in one of the diagnostic tools – the
JEE framework – this would mean having also a joint costing, budgeting and
funding process.

Recommendation 3: Within nine months of completion of JEE and PVS, national
governments should develop and publish a prioritized and costed plan to
implement recommendations emerging from the JEE and PVS assessments,
including regional elements where relevant.

The JEE and NAPHS offer robust frameworks for country diagnostic and
planning processes. However, to ensure that countries will be able to
successfully implement their planned actions and fill existing gaps in their
capacities for preparedness, two additional catalytic elements need to be in
place:
      A financing proposal, needed to mobilize sustainable funding over time

      A high level of buy-in and commitment – driven by the formulation of a
       compelling political-economic case for preparedness

These additional ingredients clearly sound desirable in theory. But how can
countries secure them in practice? This is the topic of our next chapter.




                                         26
REFERENCES
Aiken, C and Keller S. 2009. The Irrational Side of Change Management. McKinsey
Quarterly. April 2009.

Gostin, L, Katz, R. 2016. The International Health Regulations: The Governing
Framework for Global Health Security. 94 Milbank Quarterly 264-313 (2016).
Accessed at:
http://scholarship.law.georgetown.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2783&context=
facpub

Huang, Y. 2004. The SARS Epidemic and its Aftermath in China: A Political
Perspective. Institute of Medicine (US) Forum on Microbial Threats. Learning from
SARS: Preparing for the Next Disease Outbreak: Workshop Summary. Washington
(DC): National Academies Press (US); 2004. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK92479/

IHR-MEF Joint External Evaluation Missions Update April 2017. (IHR Monitoring
Internal Communication)

Katz, R, Fischer, J. 2010. The Revised International Health Regulations: A
Framework for Global Pandemic Response. Global Health Governance, Volume III,
No. 2 (Spring 2010). http://www.ghgj.org

Gostin, L. 2004. The International Health Regulations and Beyond. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, Volume 4, Issue 10, 606 – 607.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(04)01142-9

World Bank. 2017. Harmonized List of Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries.
Accessed at: http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/154851467143896227/FY17HLFS-
Final-6272016.pdf

World Health Organization. 2009. Frequently Asked Questions about the
International Health Regulations (2005). Accessed at:
http://www.who.int/ihr/about/FAQ2009.pdf

World Health Organization. 2011. IHR Core Capacity Monitoring Framework:
Checklist and Indicators for Monitoring Progress in the Development of IHR Core
Capacities in States Parties. International Health Regulations (2005). Accessed at:
http://www.who.int/ihr/IHR_Monitoring_Framework_Checklist_and_Indicators.
pdf

World Health Organization. 2015. Implementation of the International Health
Regulations (2005) Report of the Review Committee on Second Extensions for
Establishing National Public Health Capacities and on IHR Implementation. (Para
43). Executive. 136th session 16 January 2015 Provisional agenda item 8.3.
Accessed at:
http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/EB136/B136_22Add1-en.pdf

World Health Organization. 2016. Joint External Evaluation Tool. International
Health Regulations (2005) Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. Accessed at:
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/204368/1/9789241510172_eng.pdf

World Health Organization. 2016. Implementation of the International Health
Regulations (2005) Report of the Review Committee on the Role of the

                                        27
International Health Regulations (2005) in the Ebola Outbreak and Response.
Sixty-Ninth World Health Assembly. Provisional agenda item 14.1

World Health Organization. 2017. Guide for Development of National Action Plan
for Health Security (NAPHS). Draft.

World Health Organization. 2017. WHO and Partners Develop a Costed National
Action Plan for Health Security. [Website Post]. February 2017. Retrieved from:
http://www.afro.who.int/en/tanzania/press-materials/item/9504-who-and-
partners-develop-a-costed-national-action-plan-for-health-security.html

World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). 2017. The OIE Tool for the Evaluation
of Performance of Veterinary Services (OIE PVS Tool). Last Accessed 2017 at:
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/oie-pvs-tool/




                                       28
Annex to Chapter 3

Table A3.1 JEE/PVS Completion Status (low-income countries,
excluding fragile states)
                         Only JEE (no                Only PVS (no
  Both PVS and JEE                                                  Neither PVS nor JEE
                         PVS)                            JEE)

 Bangladesh                                     Benin               Congo, Republic of
 Cambodia                                       Bhutan              Dominica
 Ethiopia                                       Bolivia             Grenada
 Ghana                                          Burkina Faso        Moldova
 Kenya                                          Cameroon            Saint Lucia
 Kyrgyz Republic                                Cape Verde          Saint Vincent and
 Maldives                                       Guinea              the Grenadines
 Mauritania                                     Guyana              Samoa
 Mozambique                                     Honduras            Tonga
 Pakistan                                       Lesotho
 Laos                                           Malawi
 Senegal                                        Mongolia
 Tanzania                                       Nepal
 Vietnam                                        Nicaragua
                                                Niger
                                                Nigeria
                                                Rwanda
                                                Sao Tome and
                                                Principe
                                                Sri Lanka
                                                Tajikistan
                                                Timor Leste
                                                Uganda*
                                                Uzbekistan
                                                Vanuatu
                                                Zambia

*Countries that did GHSA assessments during the pilot phase




                                                29
Table A3.2 JEE/PVS Completion Status (fragile states)

 Both PVS and JEE     Only JEE (no PVS) Only PVS (no JEE) Neither PVS nor JEE


 Afghanistan          Somalia             Burundi                Iraq
 Cote d’Ivoire                            Central African        Kiribati
 Eritrea                                  Republic               Kosovo
 Lebanon                                  Chad                   Marshall Islands
 Liberia                                  Comoros                Micronesia, Federated
 Sierra Leone                             Congo, Democratic      States of
 Sudan                                    Republic of            Solomon Islands
                                          Djibouti               South Sudan
                                          Gambia                 Tuvalu
                                          Guinea Bissau
                                          Haiti
                                          Libya
                                          Madagascar
                                          Mali
                                          Myanmar
                                          Papua New Guinea
                                          Syrian Arab Republic
                                          Togo
                                          Yemen
                                          Zimbabwe




                                        30
Table A3.3 JEE/PVS Completion Status (middle and high income countries)

 Both PVS and JEE Only JEE (no PVS)                 Only PVS (no JEE)           Neither PVS nor JEE


 Albania               Finland               Algeria            Israel          Andorra
 Armenia               Saudi Arabia          Angola             Jamaica         Antigua and Barbuda
 Bahrain               United States of      Argentina          Japan           Austria
 Belize                America               Australia          Kazakhstan      Bahamas
 Jordan                                      Azerbaijan         Korea, DPR      Belgium
 Morocco                                     Barbados           Kuwait          China
 Namibia                                     Belarus            Macedonia FYR   Cook Islands
 Oman                                        Bosnia             Malaysia        Croatia
 Qatar                                       Herzegovina        Mauritius       Cuba
 Tunisia                                     Botswana           Mexico          Cyprus
 Turkmenistan                                Brazil             Palestine       Czech Republic
 United Arab                                 Brunei             Panama          Denmark
 Emirates                                    Darussalam         Paraguay        Estonia
                                             Bulgaria           Peru*           France
                                             Canada             Philippines     Germany
                                             Chile              Romania         Greece
                                             Colombia           Serbia          Guatemala
                                             Costa Rica         Seychelles      Hungary
                                             Dominican          South Africa    India
                                             Republic           Suriname        Ireland
                                             Ecuador            Swaziland       Italy
                                             Egypt              Thailand        Korea, Republic
                                             El Salvador        Trinidad and    Latvia
                                             Equatorial         Tobago          Liechtenstein
                                             Guinea             Turkey          Lithuania
                                             Fiji               Ukraine*        Luxembourg
                                             France             Uruguay         Malta
                                             Gabon              Venezuela       Monaco
                                             Georgia*                           Montenegro
                                             Iceland                            Nauru
                                             Indonesia                          Netherlands
                                             Iran, Islamic                      New Zealand
                                             Republic                           Niue
                                                                                Norway
                                                                                Palau
                                                                                Poland
                                                                                Portugal*
                                                                                Russian Federation
                                                                                Saint Kitts and Nevis
                                                                                San Marino
                                                                                Singapore
                                                                                Slovakia
                                                                                Slovenia
                                                                                Spain
                                                                                Sweden
                                                                                Switzerland
                                                                                Tanzania (Zanzibar)
                                                                                United Kingdom*

  *Countries that did GHSA assessments during the pilot phase



                                                  31
Table A3.4 Preparedness Costing Exercise, Tanzania, FY 2017 (US$ ‘000)

                            2017     2018      2019     2020     2021     TOTAL

 Prevent                     5,834    11,946   12,335    9,338    8,901    48,355
 Detect                      8,628    13,134   15,481   12,870    8,162    58,274
 Preparedness                1,467     2,970      606      735      788     6,566
 Other IHR-Related
                             2,454     5,556    5,752    3,378    3,278    20,419
 Hazards, Points of Entry
 Cross-Cutting                          154      154                          308

 GRAND TOTAL                18,383    33,760   34,329   26,321   21,129    133,922




                                       32
 4. Preparing a Financing Proposal, a Compelling
    Investment Case and a Change Management
    Strategy

Once a country has developed a costed and prioritized plan, the next steps are
to work out how to finance this plan and then how to implement it effectively.
This requires three key components: first, a realistic financing proposal to
ensure inclusion in domestic budgets and, where relevant, win the support of
development partners; second, a compelling investment case that ensure
sustained economic and political support for improving preparedness; and
finally, a change management strategy that facilitates the committed
engagement of relevant stakeholders.

All three components are essential. A financing proposal without an
investment case will get no traction. Even a well-financed plan without a
change management strategy will likely fail to deliver. Reinforcing
preparedness is not a quick fix: it is a complex, multi-stakeholder process that
needs to stretch well beyond health ministries and can often entail far reaching
changes in established attitudes, practices and institutions.

Public health priorities typically receive limited support in resource-
constrained low-income countries, where health budgets are driven primarily
by immediate health needs and vertical programs, and where finance
ministries are often less inclined to support resource commitments for longer-
term payoffs. Despite evidence of high economic rate of return on investments
in preparedness, the health and related ministries are usually not very
successful in securing the funding needed. When the competition for domestic
and donor resources is fierce, advocates of preparedness must excel in making
their case. In the words of Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, former Minister of Finance,
Government of Nigeria and presently the Chair of the Board of Gavi, the Vaccine
Alliance, “Ministers of Health and the health community in general really need
to learn to speak the language of Finance Ministers.”10

Preparing a Financing Proposal

A robust and realistic financing proposal provides the essential bridge
between having a costed and prioritized plan for reinforcing preparedness,
and having an adequately-funded plan fully reflected in line items in the
national budget. Developing a detailed financing proposal for preparedness is
often a complex exercise because it cuts across so many different types of
activity and different parts of government.

First, spending on the capabilities and infrastructure required for
preparedness typically cuts across multiple departments and budget priorities
10Keynote address delivered by Dr. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, Chair of the Board of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance,
at the first Annual Universal Health Coverage Financing Forum in Washington, DC, April 14-15, 2016.
Accessed       at:   http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/mobilizing-domestic-resources-universal-health-
coverage

                                                  33
within the health ministry. For example, some aspects of preparedness, such
as front line disease surveillance, diagnostics and curative care, are
intrinsically embedded within the primary care delivery and hospital systems.
Other aspects, such as the most sophisticated biosafety and biosecurity
procedures appropriate for the most lethal agents, national emergency plans
and vaccine stockpiles, are typically established via specialist entities at a
national level. Furthermore, other priority health initiatives, such as
combatting anti-microbial resistance or tackling endemic infections like
malaria or tuberculosis, may overlap with or inadvertently compete with the
preparedness agenda. It is important that preparedness does not become yet
another vertical silo, but complements and contributes to these other
objectives, forming part of the broader agenda of health system strengthening.

Second, significant components of the preparedness agenda involve other
government ministries, such as the ministries of agriculture, interior and
trade. This inevitably triggers debates about which part of government should
pay for which elements of the preparedness agenda. Coordination between the
ministries of health and agriculture is particularly important given that so
many infectious disease threats are zoonotic in origin. Reinforcing veterinary
systems of surveillance and control of animal health can be an important part
of strengthening of preparedness.

Third, in many countries there is a division of responsibilities for different
elements of preparedness between the national government and entities at a
state, provincial or community level. This can create considerable scope for
arguments about budget responsibilities.

Fourth, the “preparing to respond” component of the preparedness agenda
must be aligned with each government’s overall emergency response strategy,
encompassing pandemic response alongside other risks including
earthquakes and hurricanes. This inevitably involves multiple entities.
According to the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,11 the
international accord on disaster risk reduction, “effective disaster risk
reduction and management depends on coordination mechanisms within and
across sectors and with relevant stakeholders at all levels, and it requires the
full engagement of all state institutions of an executive and legislative nature
at national and local levels and a clear articulation of responsibilities across
public and private stakeholders, including business and academia, to ensure
mutual outreach, partnership, complementarity in roles and accountability
and follow-up” (UNISDR 2015).

Fifth, where development assistance is involved, issues often arise around the
trade-offs between domestic resourcing and development assistance, plus
challenges in measuring and coordinating donor flows given different

11 The Sendai Framework, adopted by UN Member States on 18 March 2015 at the Third UN World
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in Sendai City, Miyagi Prefecture, Japan, is a 15-year, voluntary,
non-binding agreement which recognizes that the State has the primary role to reduce disaster risk but that
responsibility should be shared with other stakeholders including local government, the private sector and
other stakeholders. It aims for the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and
health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses,
communities and countries.

                                                     34
development partners’ distinct priorities and reporting requirements. Finance
ministries may hold back committing domestic resources if they believe
development assistance can be obtained for this purpose. Unless there is
flexibility and coordination, development partner priorities can be difficult to
reconcile with the country’s own plan.

Sixth, where private sector health providers or non-governmental
organizations play a critical role, decisions need to be made around the
resourcing of these activities and their integration within the overall plan.
Where private for-profit providers play a critical role in a country’s health care
delivery, the answer may be to impose regulations requiring such providers
deliver the relevant elements of the pandemic plan (such as disease
surveillance for the patients they cover) at their own cost. Where non-
governmental agencies play a critical role, consideration must be given that
these are funded sustainably.

Finally, where regional networks and partnerships play an important role in
strengthening preparedness, these often require distinct financing
arrangements. Examples of regional initiatives for preparedness include the
Mekong Basin Disease Surveillance, Southern Africa Center for Infectious
Disease Surveillance, and the Middle East Consortium on Infectious Disease
Surveillance.

Given these dimensions of complexity, it should not surprise that many
countries have struggled, or at least, taken considerable time, to translate the
plans resulting from their JEE and PVS assessments into robust financing
proposals. On top of costing the required improvements, it is necessary to
allocate these costs across the different entities in a manner that fits with a
country’s established budgeting principles and processes. Doing this
rigorously involves mapping both the proposed additional investment and
ideally, existing spend across multiple entities and at least 7 dimensions:

   (i)     Administrative, legal, and regulatory measures at a national level that relate
           pandemic preparedness and response-readiness to all hazards, such as
           emergency operations center and communication systems.

   (ii)    Capacities integrated within the established preventive and curative health
           services that play a critical role in protection against infectious disease
           outbreaks, such as the overall system for capturing disease incidence and
           standard diagnostic services.

   (iii)   Stand-alone or specialized public health capabilities and infrastructure
           specifically dedicated to the identification, prevention, containment and
           response to infectious disease outbreaks, including biosafety/biosecurity
           arrangements, sophisticated laboratory services, and mechanisms for
           stockpiling vaccines, therapeutics and emergency equipment, plus relevant
           research and development capacities.

   (iv)    Capacities being introduced or developed as part of other health initiatives,
           such as those directed against anti-microbial resistance, endemic diseases, or
           those designed to reinforce key delivery systems, such as for maternal care.

                                          35
        (v)        Capacities within the veterinary health services relating to the identification
                   and control of potentially zoonotic infections.

        (vi)       Capabilities and infrastructure in sectors other than health and veterinary,
                   such as agriculture, food, chemical, transport, etc., that relate to pandemic
                   preparedness.

There is no single, universally applicable approach to surmounting these
challenges, since every country’s budgeting system and administrative
arrangements is different. Yet, various tools are available. For example, the
World Bank, with financial support from an Australia-led multi-donor trust
fund, is developing a tool called the Health Security Financing Assessment
Tool (HSFAT), which defines health security as the protection of human and
animal health from infectious diseases and other public health risks and
emergencies, and addresses health risks at the human-animal interface as it
considers the prevent, detect, respond, and other IHR-related hazards.
Structured in line with the JEE protocol, HSFAT examines important
elements of the post-emergency or recovery phase of the response, and
reviews coordination and implementation arrangements at national and
subnational levels for pandemic preparedness and response efforts. HSFAT is
currently being piloted in Vietnam with the intent to roll it out more broadly
in the second half of 2017.

Box 4.1 The Health Security Financing Assessment Tool

The HSFAT is organized into seven sections:

(i)            Health Security Organization gathers essential information about current health security
               efforts, for example as identified by the JEE, to define the scope of necessary financing
               arrangements
(ii)           Stakeholder Mapping identifies the key players in health security in the country
(iii)          Institutional Assessment examines the functionality and appropriateness of coordinating
               mechanisms and implementation arrangements
(iv)           Macro-fiscal Context provides information on the country’s overall fiscal space to address
               health security financing
(v)            Financing for Health Security Budgeting and Resource Allocation reviews the budgeting, resource
               allocation and resource mobilization for health security
(vi)           Financing for Health Security Components assesses the funding for specific health security
               action packages as defined in the JEE
(vii)          Efficiency and Sustainability of health security financing examines issues related to
               allocative, technical and economic efficiency and sustainability




Since it is important that investments in preparedness are integrated with a
country’s overall healthcare expenditure planning, there would be merit in the
World Bank and WHO working together to support countries, linking the
HSFAT with the broader medium term expenditure framework, in the context
of the National Health Accounts and preparedness sub-accounts being
developed for 2018.


                                                        36
Recommendation 4: Depending on the national budget cycle, but ideally within
three months of developing a prioritized and costed plan following JEE and PVS
assessments, national governments should prepare a detailed financing proposal
to support implementation of the plan to improve preparedness.

Developing a compelling investment case and change management
strategy

While a costed, prioritized plan and robust financing proposal are essential
prerequisites for securing sustainable funding for preparedness, experience
suggests that they are not sufficient to obtain the money and deliver the plan.
What is also required is a compelling investment case and a comprehensive
change management strategy.

The optimal mix of arguments to be used to make the investment case will
vary from country to country, depending on the scale of additional investment
required and the broader political and economic context. However, as shown
in Exhibit 4.1 the arguments are likely to be based on four motivations: (i)
ensuring economic stability and growth; (ii) contributing to universal health
coverage; (iii) improving security and protecting social stability; and (iv)
managing externalities to the regional and global community. Some
stakeholders, such as the finance ministry, may worry most about the risks to
economic stability and growth of the country, given the severe disruption
infectious disease outbreaks can cause to everyday economic life, trade and
investment. Others may be motivated more by the potential to save lives and
contribute to the strength of the health system. Some constituencies may be
concerned about the potential impact of pandemics, whether natural or as a
result of bioterrorism, on a nation’s security, and more broadly on the need to
protect governance and social stability. And finally, others, including
neighboring countries and development partners, may be motivated by the
positive effect investing in preparedness can have on reducing externalities for
the regional and global community.

In making the economic arguments, it will be much more powerful if economic
estimates of the potential losses from pandemics at a global level can be
translated into more regional or national estimates. While many countries will
have their own approaches for doing this, Appendix C could provide a helpful
starting point.




                                      37
Given the cross-cutting, multi-stakeholder nature of preparedness, an
effective change management strategy is also required to ensure successful
delivery of even a well-funded plan. Multiple parts of government, the private
sector and civil society must be engaged and coordinated to achieve the
desired objectives. Formal mechanisms – clear processes, tools and systems,
including financial incentives – are key to supporting implementation. At the
same time, other important elements need to be in place, such as:

   (i)     Buy-in and engagement of country leadership and other key influencers from
           the beginning of the diagnostic phase for sponsorship; normally, this starts
           with one sponsor in the country (e.g., the Prime Minister, Minister of Health,
           or other key actor); the country-level investment case mentioned above is key
           to support buy-in and understanding of the risks

   (ii)    Mobilization of the right capabilities and expertise; this includes the creation
           of an attractive career path and learning opportunities for experts working on
           preparedness-related topics

   (iii)   Inclusion of preparedness in the leadership’s agenda for communication with
           their citizens and with partners and stakeholders (including the private sector
           and civil society) within the country and in international forum

There is no single, universally applicable approach to devising the investment
case and change management strategy for a particular country. One practical
approach is placed in Appendix D, which provides a framework and
suggestions for development of the investment case.


                                           38
Recommendation 5: Each national government should develop an investment
case, articulating the political and economic arguments for integrating the costed
plan into national budget cycles and committing resources to reinforce and
sustain preparedness, plus a change management strategy to engage and
coordinate relevant stakeholders.

Notwithstanding that countries move forward with recommendation 2-5, its
implementation may well take us to end of 2018. The current Ebola outbreak
in DR Congo and the weekly reports of public health events in Africa (WHO
2017) suggest the urgency for countries to allocate some funds to
preparedness already in the 2018 annual budget even before the IWG report
is accepted and implemented and steps are put in place to generate
incremental resources for preparedness.

Identifying new sources of financing, both domestically and through external
assistance, is a big challenge for resource-constrained economies. This is the
focus of the next chapter, which examines how countries can mobilize and
allocate resources to strengthen pandemic preparedness.




                                       39
REFERENCES
Aiken C and Keller S. 2009. The Irrational Side of Change Management. McKinsey
Quarterly, April 2009

Basford T and Schaninger B. 2016. The Four Building Blocks of Change. McKinsey
Quarterly, April 2016

Heymann et al. 2015. Global Health Security: The Wider Lessons from the West
African Ebola Virus Disease Epidemic. The Lancet, Volume 385, Issue 9980, 1884 -
1901

Watkins SM. Perrotta DM. Stanbury M. Heumann M. Anderson H. Simms E.
Huang M. 2011. State-level Emergency Preparedness and Response Capabilities.
Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 2011;5 (Suppl 1): S134–S142

World Health Organization. 2017. Weekly Bulletin on Outbreaks and Other
Emergencies. Week 18: 29 April – 05 May 2017
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/255272/1/OEW18-294552017.pdf?ua=1
(accessed on May 14, 2017)

UNISDR. 2015. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2015-2030. Geneva




                                       40
 5. Identifying Sources of Finance and Means of
    Mobilizing/Allocating Funds to Preparedness

Government Spending on Health: Variations Across Countries

There are vast differences across countries in how much of their public
resources they spend on health, a metric that is a good proxy for the extent to
which health is prioritized by governments.12 World Bank data suggests that
in 2014 the share of health in aggregate government expenditure in 190
countries ranged from 2.4 percent in Timor Leste to 27.9 percent in Andorra,
with a mean of 11.8 percent. Unsurprisingly, higher income countries devote
a larger share of government expenditure to health (17.8 percent in the high-
income OECD countries) than do lower-income countries (9.8 percent in the
low-income IDA countries).

However, significant variations exist in the share of health in total government
spending even after controlling for national income. Among countries under
$5,000 per capita income, health’s share of aggregate government spending
ranges from a low of 2.4 percent in Timor-Leste to a high of 23.9 percent in
Nicaragua. Low-income countries that allocate more to health from public
resources than the IDA average of 9.8 percent include Rwanda, Madagascar,
Uzbekistan, Sierra Leone, Uganda, DRC, Burkina Faso, Sri Lanka, Nepal,
Zambia, Sudan, Liberia, Afghanistan, Tanzania, Kenya, Lesotho, Burundi,
Vietnam, Gambia, Malawi and Nicaragua. Likewise, there are many high-
income countries (>$10,000 per capita) that allocate less than the IDA
average of 9.8 percent of aggregate government expenditure to health. These
include Kuwait, Qatar, Malaysia, Oman, Brazil, Argentina, Gabon, Saudi
Arabia, Russia, Seychelles and Latvia.13

Empirical analyses do not provide good explanations for the observed
variations in government prioritization of health. In a review of the sparse
literature on cross-country comparisons, Tandon et al (2014) find that factors
such as democratization, lower levels of corruption, ethnolinguistic
homogeneity, and more women in public office appear to be correlated with
higher shares of government spending on health. However, the authors note
that these findings are sensitive to model specification. The study reports that
countries that explicitly focus on expanding the breadth and depth of health
coverage, as opposed to those that focus on budgetary targets only, are more
likely to be able to prioritize and sustain allocations to health.

Against this background of wide variations in national government health
spending, this chapter focuses on mobilizing and allocating resources for

12 Government spending on health is probably a good proxy for spending on preparedness, on which good
data are not available.
13 The shares of government expenditure throw light only on the issue of prioritization, not on government

health expenditure across countries, which depends not only on health’s share in the budget but also on
the budget amount. Other factors that are important in any consideration of government spending on
health are efficiency of allocations within the overall envelope and the extent to which public financing for
health is pro-poor in its outlays.

                                                     41
preparedness. It explores options related to domestic resource mobilization,
external development assistance, and the private sector, and it looks at
innovative financing models countries may want to consider.

Scale of Financing Required for Preparedness

Estimates of financing required for preparedness vary dramatically,
depending on whether underlying health system capacities need to be
strengthened first or whether only limited set of specific preparedness
capacities must be created. The post-JEE costing exercises in Tanzania and
Pakistan suggest that just $0.5 to $1 per capita per year may suffice. An
analysis of self-assessed requirements under IHR in several other countries,
such as Bangladesh, Nepal and Indonesia, also result in similar modest
estimates.

Yet the investments required will be much higher if underlying clinical
capacities must be built first, especially where it is necessary to: build and
equip new facilities or reconstruct damaged or destroyed facilities; provide
training and hire health workers; secure commodities and supplies required
to deliver a basic package of services; create a logistics system including
emergency relief for protracted emergencies; strengthen local governance
structures; introduce financial management systems and health information
systems. In a detailed analysis of a sample of 43 lower and middle income
countries without the foundations for emergency preparedness capacity,
Soucat et al (2017) calculate resource needs in the range of $15-$30 per capita
per year for low-income and fragile states.

In general, the investments required for preparedness will vary significantly
across countries depending on whether: (i) they already have reasonably well-
functioning health systems, that just need a stronger overlay of specific
preparedness capacities; (2) they need to fix underlying deficiencies in the
health systems and then integrate preparedness capacities; and (3) they are
fragile or failed states, and lack even the very basic systems components,
which must be created before preparedness can be meaningfully addressed.
For these reasons, and because it is difficult to get a precise assessment of the
amounts already being spent, it is difficult to come up with a single figure for
the additional investments required. However, the range of $1.9-3.4 billion
per year suggested by the NAM Commission is probably not far off the mark.
Incremental investments of this scale would certainly enable significant
improvements in universal health security.

Domestic vs. International Funding: Basic Principles

As a fundamental principle, countries should aim to increase their domestic
spend on development and specifically health, including preparedness, to
maximize country ownership and self-reliance over time. This idea has been
articulated in many settings: for example, the commitment of African Union
countries to allocate 15 percent of their national budgets to improve the health
sector (Abuja declaration 2001), and the partnership for improved domestic
research mobilization (Addis Tax Initiative 2015).

                                       42
Whenever international development assistance is deployed, it should focus
on “catalytic” activities or activities that have high global externalities and low
domestic demand. Catalytic activities allow a step change in a country’s level
of preparedness. These are expected to be mostly one-off costs – but can also
be recurring costs, if these are critical to establish capacities in the countries,
or if executing certain functions at a centralized level enables scale efficiencies.
Activities with high global externalities and low domestic return are those that
promise high impacts for global risk mitigation but may be deprioritized in
countries without international support.

Regional entities and neighboring countries can play an important role in
providing technical and financial support for preparedness activities in cases
where they can add value through: coordination (e.g., the establishment of the
Mekong Basin Disease Surveillance network and Africa CDC); economies of
scale (e.g., joint drug procurement in Central America by SICA); or sharing
expertise.

The private sector should also be included across the entire preparedness
planning process, and its expertise should be leveraged in carrying out
planning activities.

Domestic Resource Mobilization for Preparedness

Governments that want to invest in preparedness need to generate additional
fiscal space for health in ways that increase public spending in the desired
areas of attention without jeopardizing the government’s long-term financial
sustainability. The simplest way of generating additional financing for
preparedness is by increasing its allocation at the expense of spending on
other activities. But this is not always practical, both because of the difficulties
associated with agreeing which activities to stop financing and because of the
high unmet demand for increased investments in other public-good
interventions.

Improved Tax Collection

The search for additional resources therefore requires an assessment of other
sources of fiscal space, such as a conducive macro-fiscal environment
following high rates of economic growth, higher tax collections, increased
borrowing, higher levels of development assistance, and savings generated by
increased efficiency in current areas of public spending. All these potential
sources of fiscal space are equally applicable to health and other sectors, and
it is therefore important that countries express their specific commitment to
preparedness through the portion of new public finance they are willing to
allocate to it.

We believe that domestic resource mobilization (DRM) is the key to
development. We welcome the historic agreement reached at the United
Nations Third International Conference on Financing for Development held
in Addis Ababa in July 2015, in which countries agreed to an array of measures

                                        43
aimed at widening the revenue base, improving tax collection, and combatting
tax evasion and illicit financial flows. The modality of domestic resource
expenditures is also important; governments must establish national control
mechanisms and transparent public procurement frameworks, while ensuring
equal participation and transparency in budgeting processes.

Some countries with positive macroeconomic prospects show sizeable space
for increasing public spending on health by as much as 1 percent of GDP, even
without increasing the share of health in the budget (Barroy et al 2016). In the
case of the Democratic Republic of Congo, public spending on health could
almost double if the favorable economic growth forecasts are realized (Barroy
et al 2014). Likewise, countries like Myanmar, which is growing at 6.4 percent,
will also increase public spending on health without altering the budget share.
In countries like Guinea, however, economic stagnation following the Ebola
epidemic will result in contraction in overall revenue growth and thus also
reduce public spending on health (Barroy et al 2016).

Strengthening domestic resource mobilization, however, is not just a question
of raising revenue; it is also about designing a tax system that promotes
inclusiveness, encourages good governance, matches society’s views on
appropriate income and wealth inequalities, and promotes social justice.
Taxation, which is integral to strengthening the effective functioning of the
state and to the social contract between governments and citizens, provides
governments with the funds needed to invest in development, relieve poverty
and deliver public services. It offers an antidote to aid dependence in
developing countries and provides fiscal reliance and sustainability that is
needed to promote growth. We believe that governments should apply
progressive tax systems, make collection processes more efficient, and
increase tax compliance (IMF 2015). Through tax reform, countries can
broaden their tax base and work towards integrating the informal sector with
the formal economy.

How Much Is Enough?

There is no single target tax ratio that would be appropriate to all countries.
However, there is increasing evidence that it is hard to secure lasting economic
growth with a tax ratio below 15 percent of GDP (Gaspar, Jaramillo and
Wingender 2016). Despite marked increases in tax ratios in the last two
decades, in which median tax revenues in low-income countries increased by
4.3 percent of GDP (IMF, OECD, WBG, 2016), the median tax ratio level in
low-income countries remains at only 13 percent, which is just two-fifths of
the level in OECD countries (33.8 percent). Half of sub-Saharan African
countries still mobilized less than 17 percent of their GDP in tax revenues in
2014, below the minimum level of 20 percent that the UN considered
necessary to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Tax revenue as
percentage of GDP for IDA countries (70 out of 77 for which data is available)
shows that, in 2014, 30 countries collected less than 15 percent and 55
countries less than 20 percent of their GDP (IMF 2014).

Experts agree that there is considerable potential to increase tax revenue in
developing countries (European Parliament 2014). An econometric analysis

                                      44
(comparing performance in differing countries) suggests that many low-
income countries could increase their tax ratios by 2–4 percent of GDP (IMF
2011). A common element of success stories is sustained political commitment
at the highest levels: even administrative reforms can prompt strong
opposition. Reforms must be entrenched, however, to avoid subsequent
slippage (McIntyre 2007). As countries move to strengthen their tax systems
and improve revenue collections, development partners may lend support.
OECD, for example, has supported governments by fielding “tax inspectors
without borders”, and the IMF is providing technical assistance in the revenue
area in some 130 member countries.

Earmarked Taxes to Finance Preparedness

Another way in which countries can create additional fiscal space for
preparedness is through earmarking. The basic idea is to use specific taxes for
specific purposes. This can take the form of specific taxes for specific end uses
(such as mandatory health insurance premiums), or specific taxes for general,
unspecified uses (such as alcohol taxes) or general taxes for specific uses (such
as devoting a fixed percentage of general taxes to a specific program). A
distinction can also be made between “actual” and “notional” earmarking.
Actual earmarking is a rigid version, in which funds are channeled
mechanically to their assigned use (health or public transportation or
whatever else), with no possibility of adjustment based on changing
circumstances. Notional earmarking builds in more flexibility in the allocation
of funds, but for that reason is less protective against subsequent diversions.

Advantages of Earmarking

Earmarking is a contentious issue. We will start by considering several
advantages policy makers have found in earmarked taxes. First, visibility
associated with earmarked taxes serves to highlight the priority that the
government accords to the relevant policy issues. Where domestic revenues
are being collected for new health services or programs that are not well
known or understood, earmarked taxes may provide an opportunity to
enhance the public’s understanding of the costs associated with a service
delivered. Second, earmarked taxes for health can protect revenues destined
for social services that might otherwise be allocated elsewhere during the
policy and budget process. This is particularly relevant for countries with weak
oversight of budget expenditures and where special interests and corrupt
practices can influence budget allocations. Third, where earmarked taxes
facilitate a tighter linking between financing for health and services delivered
and received, public spending will achieve greater allocative efficiency. This
will also facilitate a more transparent budgeting process and enhance the
public’s perception that taxes received by the government are tied to a
perceivable social benefit. In addition, where these ties are overtly evident,
political pressure may enhance accountability of governments to render
services promised (Cashin et al 2017).

Thus, depending on the political and economic context, countries may find
that earmarked taxes can increase revenue protection, allocative efficiency,
public compliance, government accountability, and people’s understanding of
                                       45
the costs associated with services, without excessively constraining funding
flexibility.

In situations where public finance management processes offer little
opportunity for mid-cycle adjustments and where potential revenues from
earmarked taxes can be placed in an extra-budgetary fund, earmarked taxes
for health may actually enhance governments’ ability to respond and augment
budgeting allocations for health. In some circumstances, earmarked taxes can
be a means of counteracting negative externalities associated with certain high
risk behaviors, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, by increasing
funding for the associated health ailments and costs (Cashin et al 2017;
Tandon et al 2014). The long-term impacts of these taxes on health-risk
behaviors remain to be confirmed. However, recent country examples show
that such earmarked taxes (“sin taxes”) may initially decrease people’s
incentives to purchase health-compromising products, especially cigarettes.
These taxes potentially reduce people’s risk of suffering diseases associated
with consumption of the dangerous products (Tandon et al 2014). However,
the fact that sin taxes help reduce the consumption of, for example, tobacco
and associated disease risks has nothing to do with whether the taxes are
earmarked or not. Indeed, most countries have sin taxes which are not
earmarked to health.

The Downsides of Earmarking

Reduced flexibility, economic distortions, and the pro-cyclical nature of
earmarked taxes are some of the problems noted in the literature. Earmarking
by definition reduces flexibility in the budget process, and could also reduce
the influence of policy making on budget allocations. For example, budget
processes that are shaped by mid-term policymaking may become less
flexible, and countries with weak mechanisms for ensuring coordination
across different social sectors may encounter increases in fragmentation of
financing, adverse distributional effects, and potential inability to increase
revenue. Earmarking can discourage the use of the commodity or activity
being taxed, and thus create a distortion in the economy.

In addition, since budgets are fungible, earmarking one revenue source
(channeling it to a health initiative, for example) could be offset by cuts in
other sources, as a result of which earmarking would not bring about a
significant and sustained increase in resources for the program or initiative
being supported by the tax (Cashin et al 2017). Indeed, Barro et al (2016), in a
qualitative review of 35 studies on fiscal space for health, finds little evidence
to support the prospective role of earmarked funds in expanding fiscal space
for the health sector. Instead, it identifies economic growth, budget
reprioritization, and efficiency measures as the main drivers of fiscal space for
health expansion

Earmarking in Country Practice

Real-world practice does not necessarily follow policy experts’ prescriptions.
Notwithstanding the advantages and drawbacks of earmarked taxes as
analyzed in the literature, at least 80 countries worldwide utilize earmarked
                                       46
taxes for health in some capacity. Some countries utilize earmarked taxes for
health to finance a national health initiative, such as Ghana, Estonia, and the
Philippines, which earmark part of their revenues for national health
insurance. South Africa utilizes earmarked taxes for health to mobilize
domestic resources for the national HIV/AIDS epidemic. More than 20
countries earmark tobacco tax revenue specifically for health. Several
countries earmark all their revenues for health, while others, like Mongolia,
Thailand, Qatar, Tuvalu and Bulgaria, earmark a small percentage. Some
countries, like Thailand and the Philippines, earmark a small portion of tax
revenues from alcohol to health (Cashin et al 2017, Tandon et al 2014, WHO
2009)

Country experiences of revenue generation with earmarked taxes vary. A study
of eleven countries by the Japan-World Bank Partnership Program on UHC
examined the relationship between political commitments to UHC, financial
commitments facilitated by earmarked taxes for UHC, and the generation of
revenues for UHC. The analysis turned up little evidence that earmarked
financing is associated with enhanced domestic revenues for UHC, overall
(Maeda et al 2014). However, some countries showed quite positive results
with earmarking. Thailand, for example, which has a substantial informal
sector, has struggled to raise sufficient domestic revenues for UHC via payroll
taxes alone, and has found success with earmarked taxes on general revenues
(Maeda et al 2014).

WHO case studies on earmarking tobacco taxes in Botswana, Egypt, Iceland,
Romania, Poland, Philippines, Viet Nam, Thailand, and Panama indicate
some potential for increased domestic revenues. However, this potential must
be contextualized by the share of government expenditure on health generated
by this financing mechanism – from a low of 0.001 percent in Poland to a high
of 1.3 percent in Panama. The introduction of tobacco sin taxes in the
Philippines has been associated with an increase in revenues for health.
However, some difficulties during the application of new revenues towards
health services have arisen both in the Philippines and in Botswana. The
problems result primarily from weaknesses in the public finance management
processes (Cashin et al 2017).

Two studies provide precise quantification of the potential effect of earmarked
taxes. A fiscal space study undertaken in Peru notes that the tax rate on
tobacco products, which is just 37.8 percent of the retail price, could generate
fiscal space equivalent to approximately 0.02 percent of GDP if the tax rate on
tobacco products were increased to the average price in Latin America (Matus
et al 2015). Another study finds that increasing excise taxes on tobacco in
Gabon could expand revenues by 0.05 percent of GDP (Saleh et al 2014).

The Bottom Line: Earmarking for Preparedness Could be
a Reasonable Option

We believe that countries should seriously explore the use of earmarked taxes
to generate additional fiscal space for preparedness. This would be especially
important in countries with low tax-to-GDP ratio or where certain sectors are
not taxed. Industries and activities that contribute to increasing pandemic

                                      47
risk, such as antibiotic use for growth promotion in meat production, and
those that stand to gain the most from investments in pandemic preparedness,
such as tourism, are good candidates for earmarked taxes. Even though
budgets are fungible and over the long term increases in earmarked taxes can
be offset by cuts from other sources, the allocation of funds can be a first step
towards raising the profile and visibility of the issue and moving towards a
sustainable way of financing preparedness at the national level. Therefore, the
sectors involved in pandemic preparedness should continue their advocacy
work to maintain or increase their resources. However, we recommend that
countries examine all the pros and cons of taxing these industries and
activities, including the price elasticities of demand and supply, and take a
considered decision based on their specific-country contexts.

Recommendation 6: To increase fiscal space, national governments should
examine ways of generating incremental domestic resources to finance
preparedness, whether by (i) improving overall tax design and collection; or (ii)
introducing earmarked taxes where they might be an effective way to generate
additional resources.

Mobilizing Development Assistance for Preparedness

For most countries, domestic resources are the best solution for financing
preparedness. However, development assistance will also play a powerful role
in creating and strengthening preparedness capacities in some contexts. It is
important that development assistance for preparedness be focused on the
right countries and activities, and that the delivery of donor funds be well
harmonized across donors and well aligned with national priorities. Whenever
possible, donor support must be used deliberately to catalyze sustainable
domestic financing.

The G7 nations and many individual donor countries have made explicit
commitments to support preparedness. By delivering on these promises,
donor countries will reinforce a critical global public good. Many donor
countries and organizations are already engaged in financing preparedness
efforts at country and global levels (Box 5.1).




                                       48
Box 5.1 Current Donor Support for Preparedness

Donors contribute significant sums to strengthening prevention, preparedness and response
capacities in developing countries. Data for 2015 from OECD’s Creditor Reporting Survey
(CRS)14 and the G-Finder survey,15 show that the top 9 donors – United States, United Kingdom,
Germany, Canada, Japan, Australia, Korea, Norway16 and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
– contributed over US$ 4 billion to preparedness activities in 2015 alone.17 This funded seven
major preparedness functions: capacity strengthening, response, treatment and case management,
governance and stewardship, education and behavior change, activities in the veterinary sector,
and Research and Development (R&D).

The United States accounts for over 60 percent of total disbursements, followed by the United
Kingdom (13 percent), and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (10 percent). The remaining
donors – Canada, Japan, Australia, Korea and Norway – account for the balance 17 percent.

Countries in sub-Saharan Africa are by far the largest beneficiaries. Most of the disbursements
from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan go to Nigeria, which is also the second
largest recipient of donor fund from Canada and Norway. Nigeria, which received $220 million
in 2015, is the largest recipient of all donor flows for preparedness, followed by Uganda ($89
million), Kenya ($75 million), Malawi ($66 million), India ($64 million), Tanzania ($64 million),
South Africa ($ 62 million), Mali ($61 million), Afghanistan ($58 million) and Ethiopia ($57
million).

Forty-two percent of donor financing went to R&D, followed by capacity strengthening (31
percent), and response (10 percent). The balance 17 percent supported treatment and case
management, governance and stewardship, education and behavior change and agriculture and
unspecified activities. Of the $2.5 billion non-R&D flows, $1.8 billion went to support activities
that focused on malaria ($754 million), Ebola ($441 million), polio ($313 million), tuberculosis
($214 million), and Avian Influenza ($36 million).




14 The CRS database records individual development assistance flows from OECD donor countries to
developing countries. The database is organized by recipient country, recipient region and sector of
disbursement, such as health or agriculture, and categorized by different taxonomies relating to that sector.
For the health sector, the first sub-category is basic health or health general, followed by purpose, such as
infectious disease control or health personnel training.
15 The G-Finder database is compiled from a survey on country R&D spending on Neglected Diseases.

The survey includes information on the disease and differs from the CRS in that it details investments to
domestic research institutes and think-tanks as well as investments in R&D in developing counties.
16 The analysis considers eight donor countries that account for 85% of total health development assistance

disbursements for 2015 in the CRS database
17 Estimated duplicated reported spending between the two databases is deducted from the CRS database.



                                                    49
Priorities for Donor Investments in Preparedness

We propose that donors adopt the following three priorities for funding
preparedness activities:

   (i)     Capital investments or one-off expenditures in poorer countries, where
           such expenditures can work catalytically. Wherever possible, beneficiary
           countries should then be prepared to shoulder recurrent expenditures.
   (ii)    Regional spending on shared resources. Funding at this level can be critical
           for functions and tools such as cross-border disease surveillance and
           laboratory facilities. While critically important, these are sometimes difficult
           to fund from domestic budgets.
   (iii)   Creating baseline preparedness and prevention capacities in fragile and
           conflict-affected states, war zones, or other settings where these basic
           capacities are simply absent and must be built from the ground up, before
           meaningful preparedness activities can even begin.


In all cases, development should seek to support the financing of preparedness
through the national health security plans and budgets emanating from the
JEE process, and use the JEE criteria as benchmarks of achievement.
Wherever possible development partners should seek to secure commitments
from recipient governments around matching and ongoing funding so as to
maximize the impact of the development assistance.

The ongoing JEE and planning exercises offer enhanced opportunities to
donors and recipients alike in channeling development assistance resources
to critical areas of preparedness. The costing and financing exercises
conducted by countries after JEEs provide an objectively assessed and
validated enunciation of resource requirements for strengthening
preparedness. The rigorous process of diagnostic, planning, and costing
initiated with the JEE assessment should serve to strengthen the investment
case that recipient countries need to make for additional funding support.
Likewise, it should also give confidence to donor countries that their support
will fund gaps identified by objective external experts.

Closely related is the issue of measuring preparedness. We suggest using a mix
of indicators that would be useful, both for a country’s internal purposes in
monitoring and improving system performance, and as a way for partners to
understand how a country is progressing in its capacity to prevent, detect, and
control disease outbreaks. This could include some combination of process,
output and outcome indicators. Process indicators are those that assess
countries’ progress in planning, costing, and financing preparedness
activities. For example, a process indicator could be a completed NAPHS, with
clear timelines, ownership, and implementation plans. Output indicators,
which measure a country’s progress in implementing specific act ivities
identified in the NAPHS, could be linked to the prioritized activities identified
by the NAPHS that could move a country from one JEE level to the next.
Exhibit 5.1 provides an illustration. And finally, outcome indicators, which are

                                           50
tied to the impact that outputs have on infectious disease outbreaks, could
include the frequency and impact of infectious disease outbreaks in the period
following activity implementation, compared to a control period before
implementation.




Strengthening Regional Preparedness

A disease outbreak in a country has costly consequences not only for itself, but
also for its neighbors and the global community. Knowing this, an individual
country acting in its own interest and by itself may be motivated to
underinvest in the prevention of infectious diseases, because: (i) it would
expect its neighbors and the global community to share in the costs of
preparedness since all neighboring countries would stand to benefit from
investments by each country in that neighborhood cluster; and (ii) it would
expect richer countries to invest, since they stand to lose relatively more in the
event of an outbreak. Regional preparedness provides a classic public good –
it mobilizes investments that the market will not and in which countries
under-invest. And it is cheaper to develop high-level expertise at the regional
multi-country rather than at the level of an individual country. Thus, one
priority area that we have identified for investment by development partners
is regional preparedness.

Recent events have revealed gaps in preparedness at the regional level in some
settings, highlighting the containment opportunities that can be lost when
protective systems at this level fail. The Ebola outbreak in West Africa in 2014-
15 not only exposed weaknesses in the public health surveillance,


                                       51
preparedness, and response systems of the three affected countries; it also
emphasized the importance of regional collaboration and underscored the
need for a more harmonized approach to disease surveillance and response
for potential cross-border disease outbreaks. The Ebola epidemic began in
Guinea, but rapidly spread to neighboring countries. Containment was
hampered by the absence of systematic collection, reporting, and exchange of
surveillance and laboratory data across national borders in real time.

Recognizing this, the World Bank is investing $450 million in West Africa in
the Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement (REDISSE)
Program (Box 5.2). The program finances regional-level policy dialogue and
activities that will promote information exchange, timely collective action, and
efficient use of country and shared resources, such as reference labs, training
institutions, and commodity stockpiles, for disease surveillance and response.
It also provides countries with financing that is under their direct control to
rapidly address identified priorities. This mechanism should help countries
respond to potential pandemics at the first signs of the outbreak.

WHO is also providing Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and other West African
countries with support to develop and strengthen regional disease
surveillance and response. WHO assists these countries in assessing,
restructuring, and strengthening integrated country-level preparedness
systems.

Box 5.2 The West Africa Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement
(REDISSE) Program

The REDISSE Program is an interdependent series of projects to strengthen national, regional
and cross-sectoral capacity for integrated disease surveillance and response in West Africa. It is
financed by a combination of IDA credits and grants, with co-financing through multi and single
donor trust funds. The Program allows countries to access both country and regional IDA
financing, such that for every dollar of IDA allocated to the Program from the country IDA
envelope, one to two dollars is allocated from the regional IDA envelope.

Total proposed financing for the REDISSE Program is estimated to be US$450 million of which
US$261 million has been committed under the first two projects in the Program in support of
preparedness activities in Guinea, Sierra Leone, Senegal, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Nigeria and
Togo (Benin and Cote d’Ivoire are confirmed to join in the third project). In order to ensure that
the human-animal-environment interface is addressed and the One Health approach is central to
project design and implementation, the Program has been developed jointly by the World Bank’s
Health and Agriculture practices with two main objectives: (i) to address systemic weaknesses
within the animal and human health systems that hinder effective cross sectoral and cross border
collaboration for disease surveillance and response; and (ii) in the event of an eligible emergency,
to provide immediate and effective response to said eligible emergency. Areas supported by
REDISSE include surveillance and information systems; strengthened laboratory capacity;
epidemic preparedness and rapid response; workforce training, deployment and retention; and
institutional capacity building for project management, coordination and advocacy.

The REDISSE Program builds upon partnerships at the global and regional level and promotes
partnership and collaborative approaches at the national and subnational levels. Consultations
with other partners have been extensive, and includes WHO, OIE, US CDC, USAID, BMGF,
Canada and China.


                                                52
The World Bank is also supporting a regional laboratory-strengthening
initiative in East Africa. The $129 million East Africa Public Health Laboratory
Networking Project is helping Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda and
Burundi establish a network of efficient, high quality, accessible public health
laboratories for the diagnosis and surveillance of TB and other communicable
diseases in the East African Community member states. The project supports
32 facilities across the five countries, of which 26 are hospital-based satellite
laboratories located in cross border districts, with the aim of enhancing access
to diagnostic services, expanding disease surveillance and emergency
preparedness efforts, and serving as a platform for learning, knowledge
sharing, and training.

We believe that development assistance should further emphasize regional
approaches to strengthening preparedness. Increased financial flows in
support of regional initiatives will help countries reap economies of scale and
other efficiencies by acting collectively in pursuit of common objectives
through trans-border collaboration and cooperation. The World Bank already
dedicates IDA resources for regional projects and provides them to countries
on a concessional basis, in order to encourage countries to adopt regional
solutions to shared national problems. We encourage other development
partners to follow suit.

Other development banks can make especially important contributions.
Regional multilateral development banks are well placed to support regional
initiatives on preparedness. Development banks can see that features such as
regional laboratory networks and disease surveillance systems are critical
components of countries’ risk management infrastructure, and these banks
can plan their lending and investments accordingly.

The IWG further proposes that a discussion be initiated on including
preparedness as an individual item in the Development Assistance Committee
(DAC). Such a move would enable better monitoring of development partners’
support for preparedness. It would facilitate holding development partners
accountable for the commitments they make and create a forum for regular
discussion of preparedness financing issues among stakeholders.

Recommendation 7: Development partners should fulfill and build on existing
collective and bilateral commitments to help finance preparedness in countries
needing support, focusing on: (i) in-country capital investments and one-off
spends; (ii) multi-country regional initiatives; and (iii) failed and fragile states
where domestic resourcing is not a realistic option. To maximize the catalytic
impact of their assistance, development partners should structure their support to
the health security plans emanating from the JEE process and encourage national
governments to match investments and commit to ongoing financing from
domestic resources.

Engaging the Private Sector in Financing Preparedness

Investment in preparedness against outbreaks of infectious diseases and
antimicrobial resistance is generally financed through the public purse. Such


                                        53
funding is constrained by fiscal capacity and the inevitable budget trade-offs
among competing priorities. Private sector companies (including the whole
range of business enterprises spanning manufacturing, services,
transportation, agriculture, and natural resources) have much to lose from
disease outbreaks, but typically make little direct financial contribution to
preparedness. We believe that this must change.

Business and Preparedness: Untapped Opportunities

To date, companies have generally made very limited contributions to
financing preparedness. There are two broad reasons for this. First, private
sector companies lack adequate awareness of the risks of infectious outbreaks
(including drug-resistant strains), and tend to underestimate those risks. Only
those that have directly experienced disruption to customers, supply chain,
and workforce from such causes attach much weight to such risks. Second,
private sector companies find it difficult to justify investments in public goods,
such as national disease surveillance systems, national vaccination programs,
national laboratory networks, and national emergency operations centers,
because these do not generate profits for their shareholders. It is therefore
important that a case is made to show that preparedness is a good investment
for business – which is likely to attract attention of private companies. Private
sector companies do fund philanthropic/corporate social responsibility
activities, but these are typically limited in scale.

Where a company is aware of the risks from infectious diseases, it might well
make specific investments in its own preparedness – e.g., protecting its
workforce or enhancing the resilience of its supply chain – where the private
benefits justify the spend, but it is unlikely to invest significantly in broader
public goods, unless industry associations or the government can overcome
the collective action problem. While the lack of awareness can be tackled, the
fact that much of pandemic preparedness involves the creation of public goods
is intrinsic – and why most public health spend is financed through
government. A deeper understanding of shared value and collective impact of
investments in preparedness should be leveraged to shift this dynamic.

Finding Solutions

There are a variety of possible solutions to this problem, though none is a
“silver bullet.” First, it is important to build greater awareness of disease
outbreak risks among private sector companies. This is a prerequisite for any
other action, since making companies more aware of the risks will likely make
them less resistant to potential taxes or regulations. It will encourage them to
reinforce their own resilience, and will facilitate their engagement in
preparatory planning with government agencies, particularly where they have
relevant assets or capabilities. Greater awareness may be achieved through
such means as observing “pandemic awareness” days and running simulation
exercises.

Second, private sector companies can be required to invest in certain aspects
of preparedness through regulation. In other arenas, the financing of risk


                                       54
mitigating actions is largely achieved through imposing the costs on the
private sector through regulation. For example, banks are required to commit
vast amounts of capital and spend significant sums to reduce the risk of
financial crises, and often pay levies to fund the regulatory agencies that
oversee them (Box 5.3). In theory, similar approaches could be applied to
mitigating the risks of disease outbreaks. Companies could be required to
ensure a basic minimum level of protection for their employees. Companies
whose activities contribute to the risk of outbreaks – such as food producers
– could be required to invest in capabilities and infrastructure to reduce such
risks. The challenge here is that in many of the countries where the risk of
infectious disease outbreaks is high, the proportion of people employed by the
formal private sector is very small, and the market share of such companies in
key industries like food production is also minute. Imposing regulations like
those described would have little real impact in reducing risks (and to the
extent that it disadvantaged the formal private sector, could increase the risk).

Third, governments can encourage or mandate corporate social responsibility
(CSR) spending dedicated to preparedness. India, for example requires larger
companies to commit at least 2 percent of their profits to corporate social
responsibility. Indonesia has also mandated CSR. Further, governments can
encourage corporate philanthropy by giving public recognition or matching
funds for private contributions toward preparedness. The challenge, however,
is that companies typically prefer to devote their philanthropic activities to
projects with more visible outcomes.

Box 5.3 Deposit Insurance

Explicit deposit insurance is a measure implemented in many countries to protect bank
depositors, in full or in part, from losses caused by a bank’s inability to pay its debts when due.
Deposit insurance institutions are for the most part government run or established, and may or
may not be a part of a country’s central bank. In some instances, they may also be private entities
with government backing, or completely private entities. Many national deposit insurers are
members of the International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI), an international
organization established to contribute to the stability of financial systems by promoting
international cooperation and to encourage wide international contact among deposit insurers
and other interested parties. According to the IADI, 125 countries have instituted some form of
explicit deposit insurance.

The United States is one of the first countries to have implemented a deposit insurance scheme.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which is a government corporation,
provides deposit insurance for depositors at US banks. The FDIC was created by the 1933
Banking Act during the Great Depression to restore trust in the American banking system. More
than one-third of banks failed in the years preceding establishment of the FDIC, and bank runs
were common. Since the passage of the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act in 2011, the FDIC insures deposits in member banks up to US $250,000 per
ownership category. The FDIC and its reserves do not receive public funds; member banks’
insurance dues are the FDIC's primary source of funding.

Several African countries employ deposit insurance institutions. In Uganda, deposit insurance is
part of the National Bank. In Sudan and Kenya, deposit insurance institutions are part of their
Central Banks. Zimbabwe utilizes a deposit insurance countries corporation. In all cases, these
institutions are primarily funded with premium levies collected from member institutions. In
Zimbabwe, for instance, the current annual premium rate is 0.2 percent of average eligible

                                                55
deposits, and the premium is paid on a quarterly basis. The notion of requiring the banking
industry to invest in mitigating their own risks is quite well established, even in low-income
countries.


Finally, governments can work with companies that can leverage existing
assets and capabilities to contribute directly to preparedness. One example
that is already being pursued is the use of cellular tower networks to provide
distributed refrigeration capacity for vaccines. Another example is private
sector healthcare providers, who must be integrated into national
preparedness arrangements to ensure comprehensive disease surveillance
and coordinated response planning. This would probably require a
combination of regulation and practical cooperation, but in this way, private
sector healthcare providers could contribute “in kind” to financing
preparedness. Likewise, companies specializing in logistics and supply chains
must also be integrated into strengthening delivery systems, which are an
integral part of preparedness.

Leveraging such corporate assets is a potentially powerful approach, since the
private sector has significant infrastructure and capabilities, but making it
work requires companies to understand the risks and preparedness
requirements, and governments to understand what companies can
contribute – plus an atmosphere of trust and cooperation.

Vehicles for Business Collaboration in Preparedness

Several alliances, forums, and other mechanisms exist that can be mobilized
to help promote and coordinate private-sector engagement in preparedness
efforts at global, national, and local levels. On the global stage, the World
Economic Forum (WEF) may be an important facilitating platform. In local
settings, chambers of commerce may serve as coordinating vehicles.

The Private Sector Roundtable (PSRT) was instituted in 2015 to mobilize
industry to help countries prepare for, detect, and respond to health-related
crises, and strengthen systems for health security. The PSRT engages with
governments and companies in the health care, communications, energy,
finance, technology, transportation, logistics, and other sectors to support
countries in reaching the goals of the GHSA’s 11 Action Packages. PSRT
members align public health needs with business objectives, and are
committed to leveraging their investments and infrastructure to protect
employees and their families; to preserving the functioning of high quality
health services for the entire population; and to maintaining assurance of
economic development in the countries where they operate.

The PSRT aims to be the central touchpoint for companies seeking to
contribute to the aims of the GHSA, and to coordinate its efforts to promote
global health security. It has identified several GHSA Action Packages, as well
as cross-cutting priorities, which align with member companies’ capabilities
and which have the potential to impact several Action Packages. These include
supply chain and logistics; policy development and advocacy; workforce
development; partnerships; technology and analytics; and AMR.

                                             56
We see a role for the PSRT in mobilizing the private sector all over the world.
The PSRT is well-positioned to identify industry-specific roles and
contributions during pandemic preparedness and response phases, especially
among companies involved in healthcare, financial services, transportation,
logistics, and public relations, as well as other firms with widespread
marketing networks. We believe that the PSRT should establish national
chapters in all countries, which should include multinational, national, and
local industry groups.

In coordination with the public system, the national chapters of private
companies should work toward building greater awareness of pandemic risks
among their members, conduct periodic simulation exercises, and foster
collaboration at the national and local levels for implementation of their roles
and contributions of preparedness and response.

Recommendation 8: National governments should incorporate the private sector
into their strategy for reinforcing preparedness, through a combination of
awareness-building, direct involvement in preparedness and response planning,
and regulation. Where private sector companies contribute directly or indirectly
to the risks of disease outbreak and spread by the nature of their business,
national governments should introduce regulations requiring such companies to
invest in risk mitigation and preparedness.

Leveraging Insurance to Finance Preparedness

The role of insurance in disaster response has been increasingly recognized
over the past ten years. Contrary to traditional development assistance
models, in which money invariably arrives too late, insurance can be designed
such that it disburses very rapidly. For instance, it has been estimated that $1
received quickly as a drought is recognized is worth $4 to $5 received after the
lag associated with the traditional response process. The fast delivery of
money, coupled with a pre-determined contingency plan, can be very effective
in saving lives and livelihoods, and reducing the negative economic impact of
the crisis (Clarke and Hill 2013).

A New Science of Risk Management

Insurance is not just about financial payment at times of loss but necessarily
includes a whole system of risk identification, risk assessment, risk modelling,
risk monitoring, risk preparedness, risk management, and contingency
planning. Membership in an insurance scheme can include both requirements
to meet certain standards of preparedness and incentives to further improve
preparedness and reduce risk.

The global catastrophe re/insurance market has been transformed over the
past thirty years by an engagement with science and engineering. The process
of catastrophe risk modelling has led not only to far greater knowledge of the
hazards faced, but also of the property and people at risk and their
vulnerability to the hazard events. The culture of active risk management

                                      57
encoded into insurance of domestic, commercial, industrial, and technical
risks—for example, refusing coverage if sprinklers are not installed or
rewarding a firm that installs them with premium discounts—has spread
throughout the industry. This greater knowledge has allowed the development
of financial models that enable firms to assess the comparative cost and
benefit of different risk management strategies. Metrics such as average net
loss cost, the worst loss that may be expected every 10 years (a measure of
impact on annual result), and the worst loss that can be expected every 200
years (a measure of capital safety) have been broadly adopted. Regulators and
rating agencies have embraced these metrics. Overall, the insurance industry
has advanced in technical and scientific sophistication far beyond the earlier
periods of its history. This has strengthened the industry financially – and
made it an especially important partner for preparedness.

Disaster Response Insurance: Regional Initiatives

The value of disaster response insurance in the natural catastrophe field is
proven. The first regional disaster response scheme, the Caribbean
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) was launched in 2007 offering
insurance to governments against tropical cyclones and earthquakes. CCRIF
is effectively a mutual insurance entity, operated on behalf of its member
governments and protected by the international reinsurance market. Over its
10 years of operation, CCRIF has paid out almost $70 million over 22 separate
claims, in every case money being paid to member governments within 14 days
of the event occurring. Governments receive confirmation that payment will
be made within days of an event occurring, allowing them to pre-plan rather
wait for an uncertain claim payment paid at an unspecified time in the future.

Likewise, the African Risk Capacity (ARC), was created in 2014 to offer
insurance policies to African countries against drought and tropical cyclone.
As part of the design of ARC, an Agency of the African Union was created to
help countries understand their risk, design appropriate insurance solutions,
make appropriate contingency plans and, after a loss, review the contingency
plans and monitor their implementation. Countries are not allowed to buy
insurance products unless they have been through this process, with
contingency plans and product design signed off by ARC Agency
representatives. In 2014-15, ARC paid three West African countries a total of
$26 million in response to a drought event.

Insurance companies could potentially play a significant role in stimulating
investment in preparedness. Pandemic insurance schemes do not directly
contribute to financing preparedness, but are designed to ensure the
availability of financial resources should an outbreak occur, which can
facilitate rapid containment and overall resilience. The most powerful benefits
of insurance from a risk reduction perspective tend to be: a) the additional
insights that are generated by insurance providers into risk drivers and
mitigants; and b) the incentives created for governments and private sector
companies, which will be incentivized to take action to reduce the risks and
thus the premiums.



                                      58
Insurance Innovation: The Pandemic Emergency
Financing Facility

During 2015 and 2016, the World Bank and other partners developed the PEF,
a parametric insurance fund across a range of diseases focused on IDA
countries, with premiums being funded by donor nations. Through this
initiative the World Bank and its partners have worked through many of the
issues around the framework within which insurance fits, the structures of
parametric triggers, the modelling of the risks, and the finding of insurance
capacity. But all agree that the PEF is a pilot, a first step. For example, the PEF
does not directly incentivize recipient countries to invest in preparedness in
order to reduce premiums; is focused just on IDA countries; and has a limited
basis of (re)insurance carrier support. Finally, the PEF was never intended to
focus on the private sector operating in the risk regions, and so is silent on the
opportunities to provide business interruption type insurance into the private
sector, again to incent preparedness.

In that context, there is an opportunity to build on this pilot to develop a PEF-
2 that directly incentivizes recipient country investment in preparedness by
involving recipient countries in paying some portion of the premiums. This
may mean broadening the focus beyond IDA countries and focusing on those
that have already achieved a certain minimum standard against the JEE
criteria. The priority in countries with fundamental gaps in preparedness and
the underlying health system infrastructure should be to fund the rectification
of these weaknesses.

In addition, there is also an opportunity to extend the delivery of parametric
insurance to the private sector. Broader take-up business interruption
insurance that covered infectious disease risks would simultaneously increase
economic resilience and create greater awareness of infectious disease risks
among private sector leaders. The product offering would rely on the same
data and analytical tools as the offering to governments. Here the challenge is
to stimulate the demand since most companies underestimate the risks to
their businesses.

New partnerships between multilateral organizations and insurance firms
may accelerate innovation. A promising collaborative platform is the
Insurance Development Forum, set up in 2015 during the Paris Climate
Summit as a public/private partnership between the insurance industry and
international organizations.

Recommendation 9: The Insurance Development Forum, the World Bank, and
other partners should work together to: (i) develop the next iteration of the
Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility (PEF2) that specifically ties recipient
countries’ investments in preparedness to relief of their contributions to PEF2
premiums; (ii) deliver maximum participation from the insurance markets to
provide capacity for PEF2; and (iii) investigate how insurance for business
interruption resulting from disease outbreaks can be provided to private sector
companies in target countries.


                                        59
REFERENCES
Barroy H., Sparkes S., Dale E.; 2016. Assessing Fiscal Space for Health in Low and
Middle Income Countries: A Review of the Evidence. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2016 (WHO/HIS/HGF/HF Working Paper/16.3; Health Financing
Working Paper No.3).

Evaluative Science & Statistics 2014. Investing in Universal Health Coverage:
Opportunities and Challenges for Health Financing in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/782781468196751651/Investing-in-
universal-health-coverage-opportunities-and-challenges-for-health-financing-in-
the-Democratic-Republic-of-Congo

Cashin C, Sparkes S, Bloom D. 2017. Earmarking Revenues for Health: From
Theory to Practice. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Clarke DJ, Hill RV. 2013. Cost-Benefit Analysis of the African Risk Capacity Facility.
IFPRI Discussion Paper 01292. September 2013.

Crivelli E, and S. Gupta. 2014. “Does Conditionality in IMF-Supported Programs
Promote Revenue Reform?”. An International Monetary Fund (IMF) Working
Paper.

European Parliament. 2014. Tax Revenue Mobilization in Developing Countries:
Issues and Challenges. Directorate-General for External Policies of the Union –
Directorate B: Policy Department Study.

Gaspar V, Jaramillo L, and P. Wingender. 2016. “Political Institutions, State
Building, and Tax Capacity: Crossing the Tipping Point.” An International Monetary
Fund (IMF) Working Paper.

Inaugural 2016 Report of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for
Development – Addis Ababa Action Agenda: Monitoring commitments and actions.
Chapter II.A on Domestic Public Resources.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), the United Nations (UN), and the World Bank Group
(WBG). 2016. July Enhancing the Effectiveness of External Support in Building Tax
Capacity in Developing Countries. A report prepared for submission to G20 Finance
Ministers.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2011. “Revenue Mobilization in Developing
Countries.” Prepared by the Fiscal Affairs Department March 8, 2011.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2015. "Current Challenges in Revenue
Mobilization: Improving Tax Compliance." A Staff Report presented in an informal
session.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. Government Finance Statistics
Yearbook, 2015.
International Monetary Fund. 2015. "Making Public Investment More Efficient." A
Staff Report presented in an informal session on June 5, 2015.
James C, Lievens T, Murray-Zmijewski A, Aikaeli A, Booth P. Fiscal Space for the
Tanzanian Health Sector. Oxford Policy Management, 2014.

                                         60
Jurberg, C, Humphreys, G. 2010. Brazil’s March Toward Universal Health
Coverage. Bulletin of the World Health Organization; 2010; 88(9):641-716.

Maeda A, Araujo E, Cashin C, Harris J, Ikegami N, Reich M. 2014. Universal Health
Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: A Synthesis of 11 Country
Case Studies. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Matus M, Prieto L, Cid C. 2015. Evaluating Fiscal Space for Health in Peru.
Washington, DC: WHO/ PAHO, 2015.

McIntyre, D. 2007. Learning from Experience: Health Care Financing in Low- and
Middle-Income Countries. Global Forum for Health Research: Geneva.

OECD. 2016. Revenue Statistics 2016: Tax Revenue Trends in the OECD.

Rottingen J, Ottersen T, Ablo A, Arhin-Tenkorang D, Benn C, Elovainio R. 2014.
Shared Responsibilities for Health: A Coherent Global Framework for Health
Financing. London: The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2014.

Saleh K, Couttolenc BF, Barroy H. 2014. Health Financing in the Republic of Gabon.
Washington, DC: World Bank Group. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Tandon, A., Fleisher, L., Li R., and W.A. Yap. 2014. “Reprioritizing Government
Spending on Health: Pushing an Elephant Up the Stairs?” A Health, Nutrition and
Population Discussion Paper published in January 2014 by the World Bank Group:
Washington, DC.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2016. Public Financing for Health in Africa:
From Abuja to the SDGs. Geneva: World Health Organization.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/249527/1/WHO-HIS-HGF-Tech.Report-
16.2-eng.pdf?ua=1.




                                         61
Annex to Chapter 5

Table A5.1 Donor Flows for Preparedness (Excluding HIV), US$ million (2015)
      Country            Preparedness                        R&D                               Total
 United States                          1,552                           933                                 2,485
 United Kingdom                           404                           118                                   522
 Germany                                  116                            48                                   164
 Canada                                   132                             3                                   135
 Japan                                    142                            10                                   152
 Australia                                 69                            19                                    88
 Korea                                     18                             0                                    19
 Norway                                    42                             6                                    48
 BMGF                                                                   419                                   419
        Total                           2,475                         1,556                                 4,031




Table A5.2 Donor Flows by Function (excluding HIV), US$ million (2015)
                                                   Germany
                                         Kingdom




                                                                               Australia
                                                             Canada




                                                                                                   Norway

                                                                                                              BMGF
                               United


                                          United
                               States




                                                                       Japan



                                                                                           Korea
          Function
 R&D                            973       187      89          7       10      19           1       6        419
 Capacity Strengthening         657       261      68         90       89      43          14      11          0
 Response                       373         6       2          3       13       3           0       1          0
 Treatment/Case Management       46        46       1          0        0       0           0       5          0
 Governance/Stewardship          24         8       0         19        0       0           0       0          0
 Education& Behavior Change       7         0       0          5        0       0           0       0          0
 Agriculture                      1         7       5          4       16       3           1       0          0
 Unspecified                    404         8       0          6       23      20           2      26          0

            Total             2,485       523 165            134      151      88          18      49 419




                                          62
6. Incentivizing Countries to Prioritize Allocation of
   Funds to Preparedness

A substantial reduction in the threat of pandemics can only happen if
countries choose to invest and strengthen their national preparedness
systems. To make such investments, governments need to be convinced that
the costs associated with strengthening public health systems are a necessary
expenditure in the context of competing demands for social and economic
investment. The current under-preparedness of many countries suggests that
this case has not been well made, despite the well-documented socioeconomic
risks associated with infectious disease outbreaks.

It can be challenging to convince politicians to spend money to help avoid
something and cause it not to happen; after all, it is hard to claim credit for an
investment that is successful only if nothing happens as a result. It is
important, therefore, that Ministers of Finance see and feel the results of
investments in preparedness in the present even as the same investments
contribute to the prevention of ill effects later. One way of doing this is by
developing indices or measures based on preparedness that influence the
inflow of private capital. Another way is by using measures of preparedness to
influence the flows of development assistance, such as from the concessional
financing from the World Bank.

Assessing Economic Vulnerability to Infectious Disease Outbreaks

Infectious disease crises can have substantial effects on the economic stability
and prosperity of countries they affect. Recent experiences demonstrate the
macro-criticality of such outbreaks across a range of economic contexts. The
countries hardest hit by the 2014-15 Ebola outbreak in West Africa suffered
losses of approximately 5 percent of GDP (The World Bank 2015), whilst the
2015 outbreak of MERS in South Korea resulted in over $1bn in lost economic
activity (US Department of State 2016). Similar experiences followed the
outbreaks of H1N1, SARS and Zika, and recent estimates put the expected
global losses resulting from pandemic influenza at US$570 billion each year
this century, about 0.7 percent of global GDP. Of note, none of these
assessments include the substantial costs of failing to contain an outbreak that
subsequently goes on to become endemic in a population, as happened with
HIV, potentially resulting in losses an order of magnitude greater.

Despite the huge economic and financial impact of infectious disease
outbreaks, the scale of these impacts is not well known to decision makers
responsible for prioritizing investment for public good. The World Bank and
others have produced occasional thematic assessments of pandemic risk;
however, these efforts have been sparse and not systematically linked to
country policy and budgeting processes. The prevailing picture around
macroeconomic assessments of risk and pandemic risk is one of neglect. An
analysis of macroeconomic assessments undertaken of fifteen countries
affected by infectious disease crises showed a tendency for economists to


                                       63
overlook a country's vulnerability to infectious disease outbreaks, despite such
assessments frequently recognizing in retrospect the damage caused by such
events (Sands et al 2016).

Several factors may contribute to this ‘blind spot’, including a lack of
awareness amongst macroeconomists of the scale of infectious disease risk, a
tendency to focus on near-term risks of economic stability and a lack of
familiarity with bio-epidemiological inputs that might inform macroeconomic
risk models. Another reason is that pandemics are rare events, making the
prediction of their occurrence relatively difficult. Whatever the causes, the
absence of infectious disease risks in macroeconomic assessments has the
effect of depriving this area of the fiscal and policy attention that it warrants.

For governments, and specifically ministries of finance, to appropriately
prioritize investment in pandemic preparedness, the scale of risk associated
with infectious disease crises must be made visible and salient. Historically,
however, the risk associated with such outbreaks has been misperceived and
mispriced in both national accounts and capital markets, where there have
been notable market failures in risk pricing and transfer. Following the
outbreak of SARS in 2004, for instance, disputes arose between firms and
their insurers as to whether the resulting losses were covered by business
continuity policies. Following legal action, most insurers agreed to cover some
contingent losses; however, many then moved to explicitly exclude losses
arising from infectious disease outbreaks from future cover (Reuters 2016).

Sovereign Credit Rating

The assessment of economic vulnerability to infectious disease outbreaks
could be combined with other financial risks to the economy and be
incorporated into a broader macroeconomic analysis. Credit rating agencies
(see Box 6.1) do consider political instability and other socio-economic factors,
but pay very little attention to a country’s susceptibility to heath emergencies.
Increased government expenditures during infectious disease crises, coupled
with decrease in revenue (from downturns in the economy), potentially affects
the ability of governments to make interest payments on outstanding debt.
Factoring in the overall assessment of country’s economic vulnerability and
policy effectiveness to risk of pandemics (such as indicators of country’s
intrinsic vulnerability to pandemics, state of preparedness, and composition
of industry sector’s vulnerability to pandemics), the country’s credit rating
would more accurately reflect the true hazard associated with purchases of a
country’s debt. Such an approach has been previously used by UNDP in
partnership with S&P to include Human Development Index (HDI) in
devising sovereign ratings.

Credit ratings are of critical importance to governments, as they affect the cost
of borrowing in the marketplace. The World Bank estimates that a ratings
downgrade to sub-investment grade by one major ratings agency increases
Treasury bill yields by approximately 138 basis points on average (The World
Bank 2016). Losing one’s rating or being downgraded thus has a huge effect
on the country's ability to borrow money on the markets. Incorporation of


                                       64
economic vulnerability to the risk of pandemics into assessments of credit
ratings would incentivize governments to invest in health systems and
pandemic preparedness to boost their credit ratings. Further, making the
economic threat posed by infectious diseases more visible to policy-makers
and the private sector will incentivize countries to mobilize the resources to
prevent and mitigate such risks.

Box 6.1 Sovereign Credit-Rating

Credit ratings predate Bretton Woods institutions (Bhatia 2002). Perhaps the first instance of
independent analysis of credit worthiness was the rating, following the 1907 financial crisis, of
railroad bonds by John Moody in 1909. In 1913, the ratings began to use a letter-rating system
and expanded to include industrial firms and utilities (Moody’s). Two other indices – predecessors
of Standards & Poor’s (S&P), and Fitch – were established in 1916 and 1924 respectively. Today,
Moody’s, S&P, and Fitch are known as the “Big Three” and control 95 percent of credit rating
business for rating debt instruments (Alessi 2012).

Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs) assess the default risk associated with a country’s debt (Kronwald
2009). More specifically, the three main agencies – S&P, Moody’s, and Fitch – determine the
extent to which a government will be able to meet its debt payment obligations, and assigns a
rating ranging from investment-grade (low credit risk) to junk-grade (high-credit risk). Since these
ratings provide public information and analysis of the risk level associated with country
investments, countries are motivated to achieve high investment-grade ratings (S&P).

Apart from macroeconomic factors, a country’s risk of default is also affected by socio-economic
and political events such as war, political chaos, and deliberate decisions to hurt creditors
(Moody’s 2008). CRAs vary in the extent to which they measure and incorporate such country-
level risk factors into their credit ratings. However, the three main CRAs consider political
instability, natural catastrophes, security risks and the impact of socio-economic factors in their
assessments of a country’s credit-worthiness. For instance, Fitch incorporates the United Nations
Human Development Index as well as the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business survey and
Governance Indicators to determine the openness of the business environment and the condition
of the human capital in the countries under consideration. Moody’s also incorporates governance
indicators, sovereign country’s debt payment culture, security risks such as war, and effectiveness
and stability of policy making as determinants of its sovereign rating (Tenant 2015)


By providing an intuitive, quantitative metric for a complex and
multidimensional concept, indices can focus public attention, provide
policymakers with additional tools to prioritize countries that require
attention, and identify potential weaknesses in underlying infrastructures and
institutions that would benefit from investment. They can also be used to
identify outliers – countries which overperform (or underperform) relative to
national income or other metrics of interest – and to prioritize investments
and capacity-building efforts accordingly. Lastly, indices can inform private
sector assessments of risk, for example, risk to supply chains and potential for
business interruption. Strong scores may benefit countries via increased
investments, lowered cost of borrowing, or reduced premiums for parametric
or other forms of catastrophe insurance, generating additional returns to
investment in national and global public health. In summary, an index can
assist both the public and private sectors in identifying weak points in global


                                                65
preparedness, strengthen incentives to improve capacity, and help to mitigate
the health and economic impacts of infectious disease outbreaks.

The Downside of Indices

There are several potential downsides to using indices to measure
preparedness. First, data used for constructing the index may not be reliable
and may be difficult to confirm, especially for developing countries. Second,
the index may seem to be very arbitrary to some, especially to those countries
that are likely to score poorly on them. Third, indices may create short-term
adverse effects for poorly scoring countries, for instance if cross-border
investments decline, or companies shift operations and supply chains away
from areas of potential risk. These would need to be offset by donor
commitment to help poorly scoring countries improve capacity and
preparedness. Such a response may occur along a longer timescale, be
financially inadequate, or not occur at all. Fourth, poorly scoring countries
may bring political pressure against groups preparing such indices, leading to
potential distortions or inaccuracies in scoring. This risk may be heightened
in international organizations that lack adequate buffers between member
state boards and operational/analytical functions. And fifth, countries could
lose genuine engagement and goodwill if their poor JEE results are used in
these indices. Therefore, a careful design of the index is essential to avoid
introducing additional distortions or risks to some economies. In what
follows, different aspects of what could be potentially measured in an index
are discussed.

Elements to be Addressed in Assessing Economic Vulnerability to
Infectious Disease Outbreaks

The factors determining a country’s overall economic vulnerability to
infectious disease crises can be thought of as occurring across three distinct
domains: intrinsic vulnerability, preparedness and response capacity, and
industry sector vulnerability. The first two categories (intrinsic vulnerability
and preparedness and response capacity) relate to the vulnerability of
countries to experiencing the emergence and propagation of a pathogen
through their populations. The third category relates to the vulnerability of a
country’s economy to the shocks to labor supply, consumption and trade that
occur following an outbreak. An effective methodology for risk assessment
should identify and evaluate drivers of risk in each of these components and
combine them into a summative assessment of overall risk.

Intrinsic Risk

The first element, intrinsic risk, refers to the risk arising from environmental,
demographic and sociological factors that predispose a country to the
emergence and spread of infectious diseases. Patterns of environmental risk
factors have been previously associated with the emergence of novel infectious
disease agents in ‘hot spots’ of zoonotic transfer (Jones et al 2008). Factors
such as latitude, wildlife biodiversity, co-densification of human and animal
populations because of ecological transition, agricultural practices and land

                                       66
use changes are all associated with increased risk of infectious diseases
emerging in human populations (Morse et al 2012). Substantial academic and
commercial efforts have already been put into developing spatial models of
emerging infectious disease risk, for example, the work funded through
USAID’s PREDICT program along with collaborative efforts between WHO
and academic partners. Such efforts could form the basis of an intrinsic risk
assessment mechanism for priority diseases and could be extended to provide
a more general assessment of intrinsic risk.18

In addition to these physical factors, societal and demographic factors also
affect intrinsic risk through their effects on human susceptibility and disease
transmission dynamics. Agricultural, nutritional and sociological practices
can determine the nature and intensity of interactions at the human-animal
interface that may predispose to zoonotic emergence. For example, hunting,
butchering and consumption of bush meat and some livestock farming
practices can predispose populations to zoonotic infections. Social factors
such as trends in urbanization, migration and cultural practices around burial
can all alter the propensity of infectious disease outbreaks to spread through
a population. Population health factors such as the rates of
immunocompromised, which is secondary to endemic diseases such as HIV,
or adverse health factors such as malnutrition, can also affect susceptibility to
infection, and thus may need to be reflected in assessments of intrinsic risk.
Finally, population behavioral tendencies, relating to trust in governmental
and public health institutions, can substantially influence public responses to
infection control measures and public health communications.

The final component of intrinsic risk is the underlying strength of local health
systems. Strong health systems can improve the chances of routine pathogen
discovery and outbreak suppression as infections may be identified in the
routine course of health care delivery. Additionally, the effectiveness of all
surveillance strategies is bolstered by adequate laboratory and human
resources for health, capable of supporting pathogen discovery, case finding,
treatment and delivery of vaccination interventions. Strong, equitable health
systems can also be associated with higher levels of community engagement
and trust in advance of disease crises, thus response activities can leverage
pre-existing constructive relationships with communities.

Preparedness and Response Capacity

Global pandemic preparedness hinges on national systems capable of
detecting and responding in a timely way to novel and emerging pathogens
and potentially catastrophic outbreaks. The foundational importance of
national institutions to global public health was recognized in the 2005 update
to the IHR, which identified a set of basic requirements and responsibilities
for governments to meet. Assessing how countries measure up is essential for

18Currently such models incorporate historical analysis of specific infectious disease outbreaks to identify
the factors associated with emergence of a specific disease. This understanding is then used to develop
models that associate geographic distribution of relevant risk factors (e.g. presence of a suitable vector)
with a predicted risk of emergence in a location. It may be possible to extend this approach to evaluate
overall (rather than pathogen-specific risk), such that risk assessments reflect better the unknown
unknowns associated with yet-to-emerge threats.

                                                    67
planning and investment at both the national and global levels. But such
assessments have proven challenging in practice.

In part, this reflects the complexity of the task. Epidemic and pandemic
preparedness is demanding and requires a wide range of enabling systems and
capabilities. Disease surveillance – a bedrock element of preparedness –
illustrates the principle. Human and animal surveillance is essential to
identify outbreak “sparks”, which are early cases that might cascade into a
broader outbreak. Once an outbreak is underway, surveillance systems are
critical to monitor disease transmission, identify hotspots and allocate public
health resources. But surveillance systems do not function in isolation. They
require effective primary health systems to screen and recognize potentially
significant cases. They cannot work amidst violence and insecurity that
impede movement and access to populations. And without financial resources
to hire staff and fund field operations, they cannot be sustained.

Sectoral and institutional interdependencies are not just a feature of disease
surveillance. Other vital elements of pandemic preparedness similarly rely on
capacities and factors beyond the scope of the health system. During the 2014-
15 West African Ebola crisis, outbreak response was constrained by weak
infrastructure, which slowed and limited access to rural areas. Health
communications aimed at changing behavioral practices were rejected by
some communities, particularly in areas with weak trust in the state.

These interdependencies receive limited consideration in existing assessment
tools, including the GHSA and JEE, which instead focus detailed attention on
the public health system and its legal and institutional framework. More
holistic frameworks and metrics can help examine the underlying capacities
that support – or constrain – national capacity to detect and mitigate public
health threats.

Several efforts are underway to develop indexes that capture the preparedness
status of countries. The Metabiota Preparedness Index, developed in 2015,
measures national capacity to detect and respond to epidemic and pandemic
outbreaks. The design of the index and selection of indicators was informed
by a multidisciplinary team, with expertise in epidemiology, veterinary and
clinical medicine, political economy, virology, behavioral health, and other
disciplines. The resulting framework is multidimensional, consisting of five
sub-indices measuring factors that influence a country’s overall preparedness:
public health infrastructure, physical and communications infrastructure,
bureaucratic and public management capacities, financial resources to
underwrite disease response, and risk communication. The sub-indices are
weighted and combined into a composite score and rank, measuring the
relative capacity of 188 countries.

The resulting distribution provides a picture of the geography of preparedness
for epidemic and pandemic outbreaks. It identifies countries which are
unprepared to mitigate and contain a public health threat, as well as regions
with weak preparedness where outbreaks are more likely to sustain and
spread across borders. The results of the index show that preparedness is
relatively weaker in West and Central Africa and areas within Southeast Asia

                                      68
(Exhibit 6.1). Preparedness scores are highest among wealthy, industrialized
countries in Western Europe and North America. However, analysis of the
index results also find that GDP and other proxies for national wealth are
imperfect predictors of preparedness, with many countries over-performing
relative to national income.

Exhibit 6.1 Global Distribution of Pandemic Preparedness
(1=most prepared, 5=least prepared)




Source: Metabiota

The Infectious Disease Vulnerability Index, designed in 2016 by Rand
Corporation, helps identify countries that are most vulnerable to disease
outbreaks (Moore et al 2016). Developed initially as a tool for the U.S.
government and international agencies, the index uses data from sources such
as the World Bank, WHO and others to organize the factors that influence
vulnerability into seven broad domains: demographic; health care; public
health; disease dynamics; political-domestic; political-international, and;
economic. The various indicators developed in each domain are weighted and
summed into one composite index. The country scores so computed suggest
that 22 out of the world’s 25 most vulnerable countries are in the Africa region,
the other three being Afghanistan, Yemen and Haiti. Somalia ranked the most
vulnerable country in the world, followed by the Central African Republic,
both of which play host to a dangerous combination of political instability and
compromised health systems.

More recently, the Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI), the Center for Health
Security at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, and The
Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), are developing a Global Health Security
(GHS) Index, which will assess a country’s technical, financial, economic and
political capabilities to prevent, detect, and rapidly respond to epidemic
threats with international implications, whether naturally occurring,
deliberate, or accidental. The GHS Index draws from internationally-accepted
technical assessments, but also incorporates other important factors, such as
countries’ overall health system strength, commitment to global norms, socio-
economic circumstances, and other risk environment factors. The GHS Index
is intended to provide a public benchmarking of global health security
conditions – building on the JEE, modelling many of the lessons learned from
NTI’s successful Nuclear Materials Security Index, and informed by an

                                       69
international expert advisory group. The GHS Index is also designed to
promote dialogue around commitments, public-private partnerships to assist
countries, and independent monitoring and oversight. The pilot phase of the
GHS Index is expected to be completed in 2017.

Economic Vulnerability arising from Industrial Structure
of National Economies

When infectious disease outbreaks occur, they can affect economic activity
through both labor shocks to industrial sectors and through reductions in
consumption and trade. Outbreaks may affect certain industrial sectors more
than others, for example those related to travel, tourism and in the case of
regional outbreaks, those that rely on globalized supply chains. Empirical
study of the effects of previous outbreaks on consumption combined with
structural modelling of national economies can provide insight into the likely
range of industrial and trade effects that may result from an infectious disease
accident. Whilst piecemeal analysis of previous outbreaks has been
undertaken by academics, there is a lack of any systematic assessment to
inform economic models of structural vulnerability. Developing such analyses
is likely to be within the competencies of the World Bank, regional
development banks, the IMF and (where capacity exists), ministries of
finance. Indeed, supporting ministries of finance to develop estimates of
sectoral vulnerability, possibly augmented with simulation exercises that
bring together assessments of intrinsic risk and prevention capacity, could be
of great value. In doing this, the World Bank, regional development banks and
IMF can help build both capacity and awareness of pandemic risk in finance
ministries that may encourage countries to commit to fiscal measures that
reduce their macroeconomic vulnerability to such risk.

IMF Article IV Staff Reports

IMF country surveillance under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of
Agreement—often referred to as Article IV consultations—is an ongoing
process that culminates in regular (usually annual) comprehensive
consultations with individual member countries, with discussions in between
as needed. During an Article IV consultation, an IMF team of economists visits
a country to assess economic and financial developments and discuss the
country's economic and financial policies with government and central bank
officials. IMF staff missions also often meet with parliamentarians and
representatives of business, labor unions, and civil society. The team reports
its findings to IMF management and then presents them for discussion to the
Executive Board, which represents all of the IMF's member countries. A
summary of the Board's views is subsequently transmitted to the country's
government. In this way, the views of the global community and the lessons of
international experience are brought to bear on national policies.

We believe that Article IV consultations provide an excellent opportunity for
the IMF to underscore the salience of the economic impact of pandemics,
where such risks have a critical bearing on the macro-fiscal health of the
economy.

                                        70
The IMF, however, lacks the expertise to assess the risks of infectious disease
outbreaks and thus assessments or indexes, as the one discussed previously in
this chapter, will need to be taken by an official UN agency (or similar) for the
IMF to include them in its Article IV consultations.

Recommendation 10: To reinforce incentives for national governments to invest
in preparedness, the IMF and World Bank should work to facilitate the
incorporation of the economic risks of infectious disease outbreaks into
macroeconomic and market assessments, including: (i) inclusion into Article IV
assessments where such risks are macro-critical; (ii) encouraging the
development of academic and private sector indices and maps of intrinsic risk,
preparedness and economic vulnerability.

Incorporating Assessment of Pandemic Preparedness in Country Policy
and Institutional Assessments

Countries are likely to pay more attention to investing in preparedness if it
increases access to concessional international finance. One way of doing so is
by introducing an assessment of preparedness as a criterion in Country Policy
and Institutional Assessment (CPIA), a tool that the World Bank uses to
determine the allocation of IDA resources to countries (Box 6.2).

The CPIA is carried out over two phases to address fairness in country
comparisons. First, a benchmarking phase is carried out to select a sample of
countries representing each region which allows for normative adjustment in
the rating scale. The intention is to allow for countries to progress with the
indicator to a degree relative to their size or economy. The second stage uses
the established benchmarks in combination with the 16 criteria to assess
country profiles. Each year’s ratings are independent of assessment in
previous years, and focus on policies and performance over intentions and
promises. Each criterion is rated separately on a scale of 1 (lowest) to 6
(highest), and to fully underscore the importance of the CPIA in the IDA
Performance Based Allocations, the overall country score is referred to as the
IDA Resource Allocation Index (IRAI). A consultative process is also carried
out before assessment with IDA-eligible countries.

Box 6.2 The Performance-Based Allocation System for IDA18

The Country Performance Rating (CPR) of IDA countries are assessed annually using the
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) ratings. The CPIA assesses each country’s
policy and institutional framework and consists of 16 criteria grouped into four equally weighted
clusters: (i) economic management; (ii) structural policies; (iii) policies for social inclusion and
equity; and (iv) public sector management and institutions. To ensure that the ratings are
consistent with performance within and across regions: (i) detailed questions and definitions are
provided to country teams for each of the rating levels for each of the 16 criteria; and (ii) a World
Bank-wide process of rating and vetting a dozen “benchmark” countries is carried out to anchor
the ratings in all IDA regions. This is followed by a process of institutional review of all country
ratings before they are finalized.



                                                 71
CPIA Criteria
A. Economic Management
         Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies; Fiscal Policy; Debt Policy and Management
B. Structural Policies
         Trade; Financial Sector; Business Regulatory Environment
C. Policies for Social Inclusion
         Gender Equality; Equity of Public Resource Use; Building Human Resources; Social
         Protection and Labor; Policies and Institutions for Environmental Sustainability
D. Public Sector Management and Institutions
         Property Rights and Rule-based Governance; Quality of Budgetary and Financial
         Management; Efficiency of Revenue Mobilization; Quality of Public Administration;
         Transparency, Accountability and Corruption in the Public Sector

In addition to the CPIA, the IDA Portfolio Performance Rating (PPR), which captures the quality
of management of IDA’s projects and programs, enters the calculation of the CPR. The CPR in
IDA18 will be calculated as:
Country Performance Rating = (0.24 * CPIAA-C + 0.68 * CPIAD + 0.08* PPR)

where CPIAA-C is the average of the ratings of CPIA clusters A to C, and CPIAD is the rating
of CPIA cluster D.

Country performance (with an exponent of 3 in the allocation formula) is the main determinant
of IDA country allocations. Country needs are also considered through population size and GNI
per capita. Population affects allocations positively (with an exponent of 1) while the level of
GNI per capita is negatively related to allocations (with an exponent of -0.125).

Source: Draft of IDA18 Deputies’ Report, October 2016
https://ida.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/ida18-draft-deputies-report.pdf



Health does not have its own distinctive criteria, but is captured to various
degrees in the other indicators. Gender equality assesses access to healthcare
during delivery, family planning, and adolescent fertility rate as one-third of
the component; equity of public resource use contains health as one of many
listed public resources; building human resources allocates half the weight to
health and includes the most detailed and explicit assessment of health
outcomes, especially population and reproductive health, nutrition and
prevention and treatment of communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, and malaria.

For all IDA-eligible countries, the World Bank discloses: (i) the scores for the
16 criteria; (ii) the cluster averages; and (iii) the overall score (IRAI). The
write-ups that provide the rationale for the ratings, and the sub-ratings that
help determine the scores of some of the criteria are, however, not disclosed.
The scores of IBRD countries are not disclosed and are used for Bank’s
internal purposes only.

Introducing an assessment of pandemic preparedness has two benefits. First,
the fact that countries are being assessed – and the results disclosed – on
pandemic preparedness will raise its visibility, profile and importance.
Second, countries that do well on this assessment will be able to increase their
allocations of concessional finance through IDA. The Country Performance
Rating system directs more resources to countries that are performing better.

                                                          72
During IDA15 (ending 2011), for instance, IDA countries in the top
performance quintile received about 2.7 times in allocations per capita than
those in the lowest quintile.

Recommendation 11: The World Bank should include assessment of pandemic
preparedness capacity in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA)
tool and include the rating in the overall country score used as part of the IDA
allocation formula. Other multilateral development banks should consider
introducing equivalent mechanisms to incentivize investment in preparedness.

In 2013 the World Bank adopted a new World Bank Group Strategy focused
on aligning all the institutions work with the twin goals of ending extreme
poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a sustained manner. Shortly after,
the Bank introduced Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD), a diagnostic
exercise to identify key challenges and opportunities for a country to
accelerate progress towards development objectives that are consistent with
the twin goals. This diagnostic is a reference point for client consultations on
priorities for World Bank Group country engagement. As of June 30, 2014,
SCD is required prior to sending a Country Partnership Framework (CPF) to
the World Bank Board for approval and acceptance. Given the CPF timeframe,
the SCD focuses on identifying country development priorities for the next 4-
6 years.

The SCD stimulates an open and forward-looking dialogue between the Bank,
client governments, the private sector, and the broader public. Not only does
it identify priorities through which a country may most effectively and
sustainably achieve the poverty reduction and shared prosperity goals, it also
provides a valuable input into the policy debate and discourse within a country
for the government’s own development planning process. In this way, the SCD
both uses and influences the development vision spelled out by the country
authorities and stakeholders to support the dialogue on reducing extreme
poverty and promoting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner at the
country level.

The content of the SCD is context specific for the country; however, all discuss
the challenges with respect to achieving the country’s development goals,
identify the critical factors driving or constraining economic growth, identify
the critical factors determining the inclusiveness of growth, analyze the
environmental, social and fiscal sustainability of the current pattern of
growth, distribution and poverty reduction, and identify and select a set of
priorities or focus areas for a country, in order to maximize its progress toward
achieving the twin goals. When completed, the SCD feeds into the CPF
process, which eventually influences the areas for which the country can
borrow or get grants from the Bank.

Pandemics directly influence economic growth, poverty reduction, and
longer-term sustainability of these trends. Not only does the impact of a
pandemic represent a significant obstacle to the sustained reduction of
poverty, a country’s pandemic preparedness can have important future
impacts on poverty. Incorporating an assessment of a country’s pandemic
preparedness in the Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostics will emphasize its

                                       73
importance and give the issue greater visibility in the eyes of policy makers.
Further, it will help countries make a strong case for concessional Bank
financing in support of investments in pandemic preparedness.

Recommendation 12: The World Bank should incorporate analysis of pandemic
preparedness in country-specific Systematic Country Diagnostics that identify a
set of priorities through which a country may most effectively and sustainably
achieve the poverty reduction and shared prosperity goals.




                                      74
REFERENCES
Jones KE, Patel NG. Levy MA. Storeygard A. Balk D. Gittleman JL. Daszak P. 2008.
Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature. 2008 Feb 21;451(7181):990-
3. doi:10.1038/nature06536.

Moore M, Gelfeld B, Okunogbe A, Paul, C. 2016. Identifying Future Disease Hot
Spots: Infectious Disease Vulnerability Index. Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation. Accessed at:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1605.html.

Morse SS. Mazet JAK. Woolhouse M. Parrish CR. Carroll D. Karesh WB. Zambrana-
Torrelio C. Lipkin WI. Daszak, P. 2012. Prediction and prevention of the next
pandemic zoonosis. Lancet. 2012;380(9857):1956-1965. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(12) 61684-5.

Reuters. 2016. Still Uninsured for your Latin American Event? Then Expect a Zika
Exclusion. Mar 18, 2016. Accessed at: http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-
zika-insurance-idUSKCN0WK1Q6

Sands P. El Turabi A. Saynisch PA. Dzau VP. 2016. Assessment of Economic
Vulnerability to Infectious Disease Crises. The Lancet, Volume 388, Issue 10058,
2443 – 2448, May 2016. Accessed at:
http://thelancet.com/pdfs/journals/lancet/PIIS0140-6736(16)30594-3.pdf

United States Department of State. 2016. International Security Advisory Board:
Report on International Security and Foreign Policy Implications of Overseas
Disease Outbreaks. Archived Content. Last Updated May 23rd 2016. Accessed at:
https://2009-2017.state.gov/t/avc/isab/258596.htm

World Bank. 2015. The Economic Impact of Ebola on Sub-Saharan Africa: Updated
Estimates for 2015. January 20, 2015. Accessed at:
http://www.preventionweb.net/files/42039_wbebola.pdf

World Bank. 2016. The Ghost of a Rating Downgrade: What Happens to Borrowing
Costs
When a Government Loses its Investment Grade Credit Rating. MFM DISCUSSION
PAPER NO. 13. June 2016. Accessed at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/241491467703596379/pdf/106667-
NWP-MFM-Discussion-Paper-13-SARB-CreditRating-28-Jun-2016-PUBLIC.pdf




                                        75
7. Conclusion: Health Security in Dollars
   and Cents

We know that it is only a matter of time before the next pandemic hits us. We
also know that there is a good chance that it will be severe. It may mean death
on a slow fuse, spreading insidiously through populations, unrecognized for
years, like HIV in the 1980s. Or it may strike people down with stark violence
and lightning speed, plunging national economies abruptly into chaos, like
Ebola in West Africa in 2014-15. Whatever its mode of attack, the next large-
scale, lethal pandemic is at most only decades away.

Even if we escape the terrifying prospect of lethal pandemic of global scope,
the possibility that any of the outbreaks or epidemics that are occurring all the
time might become such a pandemic can still cost many lives and cause huge
disruption to economies and societies. The economic impact of infectious
disease outbreaks is caused by the contagion of fear. And in our 24-hour
media, highly interdependent world, fear spreads extraordinarily rapidly.

This time, though, the world can be better prepared, and communities and
economies can be better protected. In the wake of Ebola and with the
introduction of the JEE mechanism and other initiatives, countries and
development partners are taking steps to improve their readiness to counter
infectious disease outbreaks. There is much still to do, but given the technical
and analytic tools that are being developed, the management frameworks, and
the collaborative structures to facilitate regional cooperation we are better
placed than ever to make universal health security a reality.

The time to act is now, not only for national governments, but also for the
international development partners. Exhibit 7.1 lists a series of actions that
need to be taken by different stakeholders, which – collectively and severally
– will make the world a safer place for everybody.

Of course, the money has to be there, too. Otherwise, unfortunately, none of
the assessments and plans will matter. Between achieving real health security
and aspirational rhetoric, the difference is dollars. This is the challenge the
IWG has sought to address with this report. We are well aware that others
have called for better funding of preparedness before with limited success. Yet
we hope that three differences make this report more likely to have success:
first, the recommendations are specific and time bound: second, they are
practical and supported by tools; and third, the recommendations include
mechanisms to change policy makers’ incentives. Our report confirms the
critical importance of pandemic preparedness for countries’ economic future.
It sets out a step-by-step plan for countries to secure the financing they will
need. Our 12 recommendations define an integrated framework for action by
countries and development partners, with clear timelines. If countries and the
global community adopt the framework, we will see nations at all levels of
income progress towards building universal health security.



                                       76
In a highly mobile, densely interconnected, and warming world, there are
reasons to believe that pandemic threats today are greater than ever. But so
are our knowledge and capabilities for preparedness and response. Not “pie in
the sky,” universal health security is now an achievable goal. However, goals
come at a price. We must break the cycle of panic and neglect. The sums are
not large relative to the risks. The returns on investment are extraordinarily
high. We must secure commitments to sustained financing and monitor that
these are delivered. Otherwise we will continue to see the most vulnerable
countries being afflicted by outbreaks that cause terrible loss of life and knock
them off their development trajectory. Otherwise we put the world at risk of
some highly contagious deadly influenza or other virus that could kill millions
and wipe trillions from the global economy. We all have a stake in global
security. Investing in national preparedness is the most cost-effective way to
protect us all.




                                       77
APPENDIX A – GUIDANCE FOR PLANNING

Following the momentum gained on the JEE assessments in the countries, the
WHO has started to work with countries on the creation of National Action
Plans (NAPHS). A guidance for the completion of NAPHS has been issued
(WHO 2017) and is being refined as the planning exercises continue in more
countries.

This section and the documents linked to it pursue the following objectives:

     (i) Outline some basic guiding principles for the creation of NAPHS that have
         been compiled through interviews with several global and regional entities
         and representatives of the countries
     (ii) Give the countries an example of planning template and actions suggested to
          fill gaps identified in the JEE19


Guiding principles to ensure successful financing and execution of the NAPHS

        Integrate the plan in existing processes, instead of making it a standalone plan
             - The national action plan for health security (NAPHS) should include and
                 coordinate relevant existing national plans related to emergencies, such
                 as pandemic preparedness plans, PIP national plans, plans for national
                 disasters, IHR national plans
             - Planned activities should be integrated into countries’ existing planning
                 and budgeting processes (e.g., national health plan, security plan, human
                 resources development, etc.)
             - Action against antimicrobial resistance is part of the NAPHS and as such
                 synergies between both plans should be highlighted

        Base the plan on best practices and guidelines, but tailor it to the specific country
         needs
            - Activities outlined in the NAPHS should aim at filling the main gaps
                identified in the diagnostic (including the JEE and PVS assessments), but
                prioritization should be given to the gaps that represent the biggest
                vulnerabilities for the country (e.g., there may be a gap in capacities
                related to radiation risk, but also no radiation sources in the country).
                Additionally, not all missing capacities necessarily need to be built in the
                country; in some cases, especially for smaller countries with limited
                resources, the action could be granting access to capacities present at the
                regional level or in a partnering country
            - The NAPHS should draw from existing supporting tools (e.g., planning
                template, costing tools), but it needs to be tailored to the country’s
                specific needs, peculiarities and costs
            - Best practices should be shared across countries; this could mean
                including representatives from countries that already went through the


19The links mentioned in this section will be activated and made available for use with the final publication
of this report.

                                                    78
              planning process (e.g. Tanzania, Pakistan, Eritrea) in the planning process
              or partnering countries with similar characteristics

      Create the plan with the right stakeholder
          - Countries are the owners of the NAPHS and all relevant
               stakeholders/key decision makers from the country leadership should be
               involved in the planning process (e.g., Ministries of health, agriculture,
               defense, finance, prime minister office, etc.)
          - The Ministry of Finance should be involved from the beginning, in order
               to facilitate integration in the budgeting and planning processes and for
               cross-sectoral coordination
          - A few main donors could take part to the planning process in order to
               clarify high level commitments and coordinate efforts (e.g. avoid
               duplication of efforts on certain technical areas and gaps in others)

      Ensure sufficient detail in costing to enable subsequent domestic budgeting and
       donor engagement

Example of planning template

The template (link to be provided) gives an example of a country planning tool,
with suggested actions to fill gaps in each technical area. It has been built
based on existing planning guidelines and other examples of tools and
strategies. These include the WHO Country Planning Guide and Matrix, WHO
Country Planning checklist, CDC Milestones Library, and other relevant
global publications. Regional strategies were also considered in the
development of the country planning template.

This template is designed to also facilitate countries prioritization of their
planned activities and link these to costing, thus enhancing country
ownership, leadership and accountability.

The WHO will continue to review and enhance the template for further
alignment with other key critical indicators and areas such as health systems.
After piloting, WHO should share the final tool with Member States and
partners to support the development of NAPHS.




                                          79
APPENDIX B – INTEGRATION/OVERLAP OF ACTION ON
ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE AND HEALTH EMERGENCIES
PREPAREDNESS
Action on Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and health emergencies preparedness
Infectious disease emergencies and AMR have mutual influence: infectious
diseases preparedness decreases the incidence of infections and therefore
pressure for AMR, while decrease of antimicrobial resistance decreases the
risk of infectious outbreaks and provides better chances to contain upcoming
outbreaks.

Some of the activities described in the JEE and national health plans for health
security and in the AMR national action plans are therefore partly overlapping
and synergistic. These include most prevention and detection activities. Both
health emergencies preparedness and AMR also require specific activities and
capacities (Exhibit B.1).




                                      80
APPENDIX C – REGIONAL LOSS ESTIMATES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE
OUTBREAKS AND AMR

Estimates of the projected economic impact of infectious disease crises have
helped make the case for global action. Although such estimates have been
helpful in focusing the attention of the international community on pandemic
risk, the tendency to present figures at a global scale limits the ability of
national and regional stakeholders to appreciate the implications of these
risks for their local contexts. To support the development of the case for
investment at the regional and national level we have prepared preliminary
estimates of the expected annual economic loss associated with pandemic
disease over the next century.20

Estimation method

We use estimates previously calculated by Fan, Jamison and Summers (2015)
of the expected economic losses arising from pandemic influenza as the basis
for our estimates. The primary advantage of using these estimates (as
compared to others in the literature) is that they include both the direct and
mortality-inclusive costs of pandemic outbreaks and thus better capture the
totality of economic damage arising from pandemics. Additionally, Fan,
Jamison and Summers (2015) not only report estimates of annualized impact
of pandemic influenza at the global level (using 2015 economic and
demographic data), but also disaggregate the expected impact by World Bank
income group (i.e., low, lower middle, upper middle and high income
countries).

This disaggregation allows us to estimate country-level losses by assigning
these losses to countries in proportion to their share of total GDP within a
given income grouping;21 so for example, a low-income country that
accounted for 5 percent of the total GDP for low income countries in 2015
would be allocated 5 percent of the expected economic losses. These country
level estimates are then aggregated to regional estimates by summing the
expected economic losses of all countries making up a defined geographic
region.

Although we report only point estimates for pandemic economic losses at each
level of estimation, it is important to acknowledge the considerable
uncertainty inherent in any estimation approach. Fan and colleagues attempt
to reflect uncertainty around their estimates by applying an estimation range
of ±40 percent around each point estimate. These estimate ranges do not
correspond to estimation intervals as might be classically derived using
statistical or econometric methods, but rather represent the authors’ attempts

20 Expected loss is the average annual economic losses arising from pandemics over an extended period.
For example, if estimates suggest that we would typically expect to see 3 pandemics in the next 100 years
that between them would cause $60 trillion of economic damage, we would calculate the expected
economic loss by dividing the total loss figure by 100 to give us an expected annual loss of $600 billion.
21   All GDP and population data are derived from the World Bank data bank -
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD for                                                 GDP
and http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL for population. Countries with less than
100,000 population or with 4+ missing years of GDP data are excluded from the following analyses.

                                                   81
to communicate a reasonable level of uncertainty around their estimates. We
do not reproduce these ranges around the country-level estimates presented
here, but we would similarly counsel keeping this fundamental uncertainty in
mind.

Advantages and limitations of estimation method

Although our “top down” approach of interpolating from global estimates is
necessarily rough in its approach, it does have the benefit of producing rapid
estimates for the vast number of countries where more detailed ‘bottom up’
estimates are not available. The drawback of such an approach however is that
it will miss much of the local context that might affect country-level estimates
of the economic damage caused by infectious disease outbreaks. As such our
figures should not be taken as definitive but in the absence of more detailed
local assessments might be considered a reasonable base case.

Wherever possible we encourage the development of detailed national and
regional estimates that take into account relevant local factors in their
estimation models, as discussed in the section 6 of the main report. The
estimates below are intended to provide a rough sense of the scale of the threat
posed by pandemic outbreaks at the regional and national levels and should
be thought of as starting points for framing the economic case for investing in
preparedness. They are neither intended to be definitive nor should they be
used as the basis of comparative risk assessment between countries for the
purposes of directing investment or lending.

Another important limitation of our approach is that it is based solely on
estimates of economic losses expected to arise as a result of pandemic
influenza. As such is it does not capture the expected economic impact of other
pathogens that have previously caused significant economic damage, such as
SARS, MERS, Ebola and Zika. It also does not capture the effect of outbreaks
that occur at a smaller scale than full blown pandemics or of the effects of
emerging diseases becoming endemic (as happened with HIV). For these
reasons, the estimates might be viewed as conservative in their relationship to
the true economic costs of infectious disease crises. Clarifying this will be of
particular importance when presenting these figures as part of any efforts to
develop an economic case for investing in pandemic preparedness.

Results

We calculate expected economic loss for six distinct geographic regions shown
in Exhibit C1 and present these regional estimates in Table C1. We also report
national level estimates of expected economic loss in Exhibit C2 and Table C2.

Conclusion

Recent estimates of the potentially extreme economic impacts of infectious
disease crises have undoubtedly bolstered the case for greater investments in
preparedness. However, the consistent focus of these reports on global-level
costs may leave policy-makers within national governments without a clear
sense of regional or country-specific impacts. Given that these actors

                                      82
ultimately bear the responsibility for addressing these risks, it is important to
provide them with the most individually tailored information possible. The
work described here should be treated as only a first step in this process,
primarily highlighting a need for higher-resolution estimates on the impact of
infectious disease crises, rather than settling the issue.



REFERENCES
Fan VY, Jamison DT, Summers LH. 2015. The Inclusive Cost of Pandemic Influenza
Risk. NBER Work Pap Ser. 2015; 22137:24.




                                       83
Exhibit C1   Geographic regions used in developing regional estimates of
pandemic losses
 North America                               Europe and Central Asia




                   Middle East
                  & North Africa




Latin America                                       South
 & Caribbean                                         Asia




                               Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                            East Asia & Pacific




Table C1 Estimated regional vulnerability to economic losses
from pandemics

                                                      Expected      Expected
                         Population 2015 GDP           annual        annual
         Region
                          (billions) (US$ trillion) pandemic loss pandemic loss
                                                     (U$ billion)   (% GDP)

East Asia & Pacific            2.23          21.2           196.9             0.9
Europe & Central Asia          0.89          20.1           110.3             0.5
Latin America &                0.63           5.4            59.4             1.1
Caribbean
Middle  East & North           0.46           3.1            27.8             0.9
Africa America
North                          0.36          19.6            86.5             0.4
South Asia                     1.74           2.7            53.3             2.0
Sub-Saharan Africa             1.02           1.6            27.9             1.7




                                      84
Exhibit C2   Expected annual losses arising from pandemics as a share of national
GDP




                                      85
Table C2 Estimated country level vulnerability to economic losses from pandemics
                                                                                                                   Expected     Expecte
                                                                                                                    annual      d annual
                                                                                              Expected annual
 Country             Region           Income group   2015 Population        2015 GDP ($)                           pandemi      pandemi
                                                                                              pandemic loss ($)
                                                                                                                   c loss per   c loss (%
                                                                                                                   capita ($)      GNI)


Afghanistan        South Asia         Low income       32,526,562         $19,331,286,549          $399,244,953       $12.27        2.06


                                      Upper middle
  Albania     Europe & Central Asia                    2,889,167          $11,398,392,444          $128,538,789      $44.49          1.13
                                        income

              Middle East & North     Upper middle
  Algeria                                              39,666,519        $165,000,000,000        $1,858,200,019      $46.85          1.13
                     Africa             income

                                      Upper middle
  Angola       Sub-Saharan Africa                      25,021,974        $103,000,000,000         $1,157,316,729     $46.25          1.12
                                        income

                Latin America &       Upper middle
 Argentina                                             43,416,755        $585,000,000,000        $6,593,740,655      $151.87         1.13
                   Caribbean            income

                                      Lower middle
 Armenia      Europe & Central Asia                     3,017,712         $10,529,182,498          $209,002,797      $69.26         1.99
                                        income

                Latin America &
  Aruba                               High income       103,889            $2,584,463,687            $11,412,415    $109.85         0.44
                   Caribbean

 Australia     East Asia & Pacific    High income      23,781,169        $1,340,000,000,000      $5,913,343,604     $248.66         0.44


  Austria     Europe & Central Asia   High income      8,611,088         $377,000,000,000        $1,664,527,138     $193.30         0.44

                                      Upper middle
Azerbaijan    Europe & Central Asia                    9,651,349          $53,047,140,347          $598,208,493      $61.98          1.13
                                        income

 Bahamas,       Latin America &
                                      High income       388,019            $8,853,519,100           $39,095,166     $100.76         0.44
   The             Caribbean

              Middle East & North
  Bahrain                             High income       1,377,237         $31,125,851,064          $137,444,817      $99.80         0.44
                     Africa

                                      Lower middle
Bangladesh         South Asia                         160,995,642        $195,000,000,000        $3,872,290,808      $24.05         1.99
                                        income

                Latin America &
 Barbados                             High income       284,215           $4,385,250,000            $19,364,286       $68.13        0.44
                   Caribbean

                                      Upper middle
  Belarus     Europe & Central Asia                    9,513,000          $54,608,962,635          $615,821,042       $64.73         1.13
                                        income

 Belgium      Europe & Central Asia   High income      11,285,721        $455,000,000,000        $2,009,558,289     $178.06         0.44

                Latin America &       Upper middle
  Belize                                                359,287            $1,752,861,128           $19,766,879      $55.02          1.13
                   Caribbean            income

  Benin        Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income       10,879,829         $8,290,986,804           $171,231,989       $15.74        2.07

                                      Lower middle
  Bhutan           South Asia                           774,830            $2,057,947,621           $40,849,972       $52.72        1.98
                                        income

                Latin America &       Lower middle
  Bolivia                                              10,724,705         $32,997,684,515          $654,999,413       $61.07        1.98
                   Caribbean            income

Bosnia and                            Upper middle
              Europe & Central Asia                     3,810,416         $16,191,716,215          $182,592,730      $47.92          1.13
Herzegovina                             income

                                      Upper middle
 Botswana      Sub-Saharan Africa                      2,262,485          $14,389,717,321          $162,271,728       $71.72         1.13
                                        income




                                                                    86
                  Latin America &       Upper middle
   Brazil                                               207,847,528    $1,800,000,000,000    $20,339,621,339     $97.86   1.13
                     Caribbean            income

  Brunei
                 East Asia & Pacific    High income         423,188        $12,930,394,938        $57,097,740   $134.92   0.44
Darussalam

                                        Upper middle
  Bulgaria      Europe & Central Asia                      7,177,991       $50,199,117,547      $566,091,560     $78.86   1.13
                                          income

Burkina Faso     Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income       18,105,570        $10,678,201,939      $220,534,636     $12.18   2.07


  Burundi        Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income        11,178,921        $3,097,324,740       $63,968,390      $5.72   2.06

                                        Lower middle
Cabo Verde       Sub-Saharan Africa                         520,502         $1,603,239,233       $31,824,074     $61.14   1.98
                                          income

                                        Lower middle
 Cambodia        East Asia & Pacific                     15,577,899       $18,049,954,289       $358,289,063     $23.00   1.99
                                          income

                                        Lower middle
 Cameroon        Sub-Saharan Africa                      23,344,179       $28,415,950,981       $564,052,644     $24.16   1.98
                                          income

  Canada           North America        High income       35,851,774    $1,550,000,000,000    $6,856,862,675    $191.26   0.44

  Central
  African        Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income        4,900,274         $1,583,776,760       $32,709,405      $6.68   2.07
  Republic

   Chad          Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income       14,037,472        $10,888,798,114      $224,884,034     $16.02   2.07

                  Latin America &
   Chile                                High income      17,948,141      $241,000,000,000      $1,063,301,437    $59.24   0.44
                     Caribbean

                                        Upper middle
   China         East Asia & Pacific                   1,371,220,000   $11,100,000,000,000   $124,775,764,825    $91.00   1.12
                                          income

                  Latin America &       Upper middle
 Colombia                                                48,228,704      $292,000,000,000      $3,293,763,535   $68.29    1.13
                     Caribbean            income

 Comoros         Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income          788,474          $565,689,764        $11,683,070     $14.82   2.07

Congo, Dem.
                 Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income       77,266,814        $35,237,742,278       $727,757,604     $9.42   2.07
   Rep.

                                        Lower middle
Congo, Rep.      Sub-Saharan Africa                       4,620,330         $8,553,154,506      $169,778,918     $36.75   1.99
                                          income

                  Latin America &       Upper middle
 Costa Rica                                               4,807,850        $54,136,834,091      $610,496,885    $126.98   1.13
                     Caribbean            income

                                        Lower middle
Côte d'Ivoire    Sub-Saharan Africa                      22,701,556        $31,759,248,868      $630,416,639     $27.77   1.99
                                          income

  Croatia       Europe & Central Asia   High income       4,224,404        $48,732,003,674      $215,189,661     $50.94   0.44

                  Latin America &       Upper middle
   Cuba                                                  11,389,562        $87,132,800,000      $982,589,836     $86.27   1.13
                     Caribbean            income

  Cyprus        Europe & Central Asia   High income       1,165,300        $19,559,942,331       $86,372,343     $74.12   0.44

   Czech
                Europe & Central Asia   High income      10,551,219      $185,000,000,000       $817,607,605     $77.49   0.44
  Republic

 Denmark        Europe & Central Asia   High income       5,676,002      $301,000,000,000      $1,330,508,935   $234.41   0.44




                                                                  87
              Middle East & North     Lower middle
  Djibouti                                             887,861        $1,727,000,000      $34,280,708     $38.61   1.98
                     Africa             income

Dominican       Latin America &       Upper middle
                                                     10,528,391      $68,102,618,092     $767,987,949     $72.94   1.13
 Republic          Caribbean            income

                Latin America &       Upper middle
 Ecuador                                             16,144,363    $100,000,000,000    $1,129,688,269     $69.97   1.13
                   Caribbean            income

Egypt, Arab   Middle East & North     Lower middle
                                                     91,508,084     $331,000,000,000    $6,565,916,788    $71.75   1.98
   Rep.              Africa             income

                Latin America &       Lower middle
El Salvador                                           6,126,583     $25,850,200,000       $513,122,847    $83.75   1.98
                   Caribbean            income

 Equatorial                           Upper middle
               Sub-Saharan Africa                      845,060       $12,202,323,684     $137,604,659    $162.83   1.13
  Guinea                                income

  Eritrea      Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      4,789,568       $2,607,739,837       $53,857,097    $11.24   2.06


  Estonia     Europe & Central Asia   High income     1,311,998      $22,459,443,274       $99,175,893    $75.59   0.44


 Ethiopia      Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     99,390,750      $61,539,711,687    $1,270,966,589    $12.79   2.07

                                      Upper middle
    Fiji       East Asia & Pacific                     892,145        $4,425,503,075      $49,906,055     $55.94   1.13
                                        income

  Finland     Europe & Central Asia   High income     5,482,013    $232,000,000,000    $1,026,010,200    $187.16   0.44


  France      Europe & Central Asia   High income    66,808,385   $2,420,000,000,000   $10,681,058,025   $159.88   0.44

                                      Upper middle
  Gabon        Sub-Saharan Africa                     1,725,292      $14,262,032,471      $160,831,835    $93.22   1.13
                                        income

Gambia, The    Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      1,990,924         $938,794,719       $19,388,728     $9.74   2.07

                                      Upper middle
  Georgia     Europe & Central Asia                   3,679,000      $13,965,385,802      $157,486,574    $42.81   1.13
                                        income

 Germany      Europe & Central Asia   High income    81,413,145   $3,360,000,000,000   $14,852,245,132   $182.43   0.44

                                      Lower middle
  Ghana        Sub-Saharan Africa                    27,409,893      $37,543,361,204     $745,230,458     $27.19   1.99
                                        income

  Greece      Europe & Central Asia   High income    10,823,732    $195,000,000,000      $860,418,563     $79.49   0.44

                Latin America &       Upper middle
 Grenada                                               106,825          $984,074,074       $11,097,327   $103.88   1.13
                   Caribbean            income

   Guam        East Asia & Pacific    High income      169,885        $5,734,000,000      $25,320,065    $149.04   0.44

                Latin America &       Lower middle
Guatemala                                            16,342,897      $63,794,152,886    $1,266,304,993    $77.48   1.98
                   Caribbean            income

  Guinea       Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     12,608,590       $6,699,203,543      $138,357,227    $10.97   2.06

  Guinea-
               Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      1,844,325       $1,056,776,883      $21,825,388     $11.83   2.06
  Bissau

                Latin America &       Upper middle
  Guyana                                                767,085       $3,166,029,056       $35,703,064    $46.54   1.13
                   Caribbean            income



                                                             88
                  Latin America &
   Haiti                                Low income       10,711,067        $8,765,329,890     $181,028,496     $16.90   2.07
                     Caribbean

                  Latin America &       Lower middle
 Honduras                                                 8,075,060       $20,420,967,149      $405,353,336    $50.20   1.99
                     Caribbean            income

Hong Kong
                 East Asia & Pacific    High income       7,305,700     $309,000,000,000     $1,365,512,799   $186.91   0.44
SAR, China

 Hungary        Europe & Central Asia   High income       9,844,686     $122,000,000,000      $537,466,297     $54.59   0.44


  Iceland       Europe & Central Asia   High income         330,823       $16,779,598,787      $74,094,966    $223.97   0.44

                                        Lower middle
   India             South Asia                        1,311,050,527   $2,090,000,000,000   $41,463,181,226    $31.63   1.98
                                          income

                                        Lower middle
 Indonesia       East Asia & Pacific                    257,563,815     $862,000,000,000    $17,109,269,091    $66.43   1.98
                                          income

Iran, Islamic   Middle East & North     Upper middle
                                                         79,109,272     $425,000,000,000     $4,796,368,356    $60.63   1.13
    Rep.               Africa             income

                Middle East & North     Upper middle
    Iraq                                                 36,423,395     $180,000,000,000    $2,030,624,165     $55.75   1.13
                       Africa             income

  Ireland       Europe & Central Asia   High income       4,640,703     $284,000,000,000     $1,252,769,181   $269.95   0.44

                Middle East & North
   Israel                               High income       8,380,400     $299,000,000,000     $1,322,154,285   $157.77   0.44
                       Africa

    Italy       Europe & Central Asia   High income      60,802,085    $1,820,000,000,000    $8,043,337,795   $132.29   0.44

                  Latin America &       Upper middle
  Jamaica                                                 2,725,941       $14,262,190,323     $160,833,616     $59.00   1.13
                     Caribbean            income

   Japan         East Asia & Pacific    High income     126,958,472    $4,380,000,000,000   $19,354,703,829   $152.45   0.44

                Middle East & North     Upper middle
  Jordan                                                  7,594,547       $37,517,410,282     $423,080,930     $55.71   1.13
                       Africa             income

                                        Upper middle
Kazakhstan      Europe & Central Asia                    17,544,126     $184,000,000,000     $2,079,329,193   $118.52   1.13
                                          income

                                        Lower middle
   Kenya         Sub-Saharan Africa                      46,050,302       $63,398,041,540   $1,258,442,239     $27.33   1.99
                                          income

                                        Lower middle
  Kiribati       East Asia & Pacific                        112,423          $160,121,929        $3,178,398    $28.27   1.98
                                          income

Korea, Rep.      East Asia & Pacific    High income      50,617,045    $1,380,000,000,000   $6,084,366,647    $120.20   0.44

                Middle East & North
  Kuwait                                High income       3,892,115      $114,000,000,000     $503,579,624    $129.38   0.44
                       Africa

  Kyrgyz                                Lower middle
                Europe & Central Asia                     5,957,000        $6,571,853,849      $130,450,378    $21.90   1.99
 Republic                                 income

                                        Lower middle
 Lao PDR         East Asia & Pacific                      6,802,023       $12,369,080,043     $245,524,505     $36.10   1.99
                                          income

   Latvia       Europe & Central Asia   High income       1,978,440       $27,002,832,428     $119,238,486     $60.27   0.44

                Middle East & North     Upper middle
 Lebanon                                                  5,850,743       $47,084,703,151     $530,970,550     $90.75   1.13
                       Africa             income



                                                                  89
                                      Lower middle
 Lesotho       Sub-Saharan Africa                      2,135,022       $2,278,037,786       $45,218,731    $21.18   1.99
                                        income

  Liberia      Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      4,503,438       $2,053,000,000       $42,400,173      $9.42   2.07

              Middle East & North     Upper middle
  Libya                                               6,278,438      $34,699,395,524      $391,302,396     $62.32   1.13
                     Africa             income

 Lithuania    Europe & Central Asia   High income     2,910,199       $41,400,137,851      $182,813,776    $62.82   0.44


Luxembourg    Europe & Central Asia   High income       569,676      $56,799,626,262      $250,814,483    $440.28   0.44

Macao SAR,
               East Asia & Pacific    High income       587,606       $46,177,532,874     $203,909,687    $347.02   0.44
  China

Macedonia,                            Upper middle
              Europe & Central Asia                    2,078,453     $10,086,021,261       $113,739,280    $54.72   1.13
   FYR                                  income

Madagascar     Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     24,235,390        $9,738,652,322      $201,130,317     $8.30   2.07


  Malawi       Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      17,215,232      $6,403,820,949       $132,256,753     $7.68   2.06

                                      Upper middle
 Malaysia      East Asia & Pacific                    30,331,007    $296,000,000,000     $3,341,160,441   $110.16   1.13
                                        income

                                      Upper middle
 Maldives          South Asia                           409,163        $3,435,244,659      $38,738,988     $94.68   1.13
                                        income

   Mali        Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     17,599,694      $12,746,688,962      $263,254,659     $14.96   2.07

              Middle East & North
  Malta                               High income        431,333       $9,746,478,873       $43,038,277    $99.78   0.44
                     Africa

                                      Lower middle
Mauritania     Sub-Saharan Africa                     4,067,564        $5,442,297,174     $108,028,836     $26.56   1.99
                                        income

                                      Upper middle
 Mauritius     Sub-Saharan Africa                     1,262,605       $11,681,761,261      $131,734,317   $104.34   1.13
                                        income

                Latin America &       Upper middle
  Mexico                                             127,017,224   $1,140,000,000,000   $12,898,431,232   $101.55   1.13
                   Caribbean            income

Micronesia,                           Lower middle
               East Asia & Pacific                      104,460          $314,971,100       $6,252,132     $59.85   1.98
 Fed. Sts.                              income

                                      Lower middle
 Moldova      Europe & Central Asia                    3,554,150      $6,568,288,862       $130,379,613    $36.68   1.98
                                        income

                                      Lower middle
 Mongolia      East Asia & Pacific                    2,959,134       $11,741,338,841     $233,063,930     $78.76   1.98
                                        income

                                      Upper middle
Montenegro    Europe & Central Asia                     622,388        $3,987,061,628      $44,961,785     $72.24   1.13
                                        income

              Middle East & North     Lower middle
 Morocco                                              34,377,511    $101,000,000,000     $1,996,756,951    $58.08   1.98
                     Africa             income

Mozambique     Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      27,977,863      $14,807,075,727     $305,807,389     $10.93   2.07

                                      Lower middle
 Myanmar       East Asia & Pacific                    53,897,154     $62,600,906,116     $1,242,619,212    $23.06   1.99
                                        income

                                      Upper middle
 Namibia       Sub-Saharan Africa                     2,458,830       $11,491,507,356     $129,588,838     $52.70   1.13
                                        income



                                                              90
   Nepal            South Asia         Low income      28,513,700     $21,194,888,048       $437,733,519    $15.35   2.07


Netherlands    Europe & Central Asia   High income     16,936,520    $750,000,000,000     $3,313,086,827   $195.62   0.44


New Zealand     East Asia & Pacific    High income      4,595,700    $174,000,000,000      $767,258,916    $166.95   0.44

                 Latin America &       Lower middle
 Nicaragua                                              6,082,032     $12,692,562,187      $251,945,580     $41.42   1.98
                    Caribbean            income

   Niger        Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      19,899,120       $7,142,951,342      $147,521,856     $7.41   2.06

                                       Lower middle
  Nigeria       Sub-Saharan Africa                    182,201,962    $487,000,000,000     $9,662,772,821    $53.03   1.98
                                         income

  Norway       Europe & Central Asia   High income      5,195,921    $387,000,000,000     $1,707,042,239   $328.54   0.44

               Middle East & North
   Oman                                High income      4,490,541     $69,830,949,285      $308,357,899     $68.67   0.44
                      Africa

                                       Lower middle
 Pakistan           South Asia                        188,924,874    $271,000,000,000     $5,380,304,509   $28.48    1.99
                                         income

                 Latin America &       Upper middle
  Panama                                                3,929,141      $52,132,289,747      $587,891,793   $149.62   1.13
                    Caribbean            income

Papua New                              Lower middle
                East Asia & Pacific                     7,619,321     $16,928,680,397       $336,031,933    $44.10   1.98
  Guinea                                 income

                 Latin America &       Upper middle
 Paraguay                                               6,639,123     $27,093,938,619      $305,536,247    $46.02    1.13
                    Caribbean            income

                 Latin America &       Upper middle
   Peru                                                31,376,670    $189,000,000,000    $2,132,590,098     $67.97   1.13
                    Caribbean            income

                                       Lower middle
Philippines     East Asia & Pacific                   100,699,395    $292,000,000,000     $5,805,111,360    $57.65   1.99
                                         income

  Poland       Europe & Central Asia   High income     37,999,494    $477,000,000,000     $2,106,617,068    $55.44   0.44


 Portugal      Europe & Central Asia   High income     10,348,648    $199,000,000,000      $879,238,605    $84.96    0.44

                 Latin America &
Puerto Rico                            High income      3,474,182    $103,000,000,000      $455,421,160    $131.09   0.44
                    Caribbean

               Middle East & North
   Qatar                               High income      2,235,355    $165,000,000,000       $727,017,940   $325.24   0.44
                      Africa

                                       Upper middle
 Romania       Europe & Central Asia                    2,235,355    $178,000,000,000     $2,006,773,474   $897.74   1.13
                                         income

 Russian                               Upper middle
               Europe & Central Asia                  144,096,812   $1,370,000,000,000   $15,402,810,189   $106.89   1.12
Federation                               income

  Rwanda        Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      11,609,666      $8,095,980,014      $167,204,555     $14.40   2.06

                                       Lower middle
  Samoa         East Asia & Pacific                      193,228          $761,037,916      $15,106,496     $78.18   1.98
                                         income

 São Tomé                              Lower middle
                Sub-Saharan Africa                       190,344          $317,696,179       $6,306,225     $33.13   1.98
and Principe                             income

               Middle East & North
Saudi Arabia                           High income     31,540,372    $646,000,000,000     $2,852,600,770   $90.44    0.44
                      Africa



                                                               91
  Senegal       Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     15,129,273     $13,609,989,582     $281,084,223     $18.58   2.07

                                       Upper middle
  Serbia       Europe & Central Asia                   7,098,247      $37,160,332,465     $419,054,191   $59.04    1.13
                                         income

Sierra Leone    Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      6,453,184       $4,214,779,785      $87,046,951    $13.49   2.07


 Singapore      East Asia & Pacific    High income     5,535,002    $293,000,000,000    $1,292,670,142   $233.54   0.44

  Slovak
               Europe & Central Asia   High income     5,424,050      $87,263,622,047     $385,336,695    $71.04   0.44
 Republic

 Slovenia      Europe & Central Asia   High income     2,063,768      $42,774,769,768    $188,883,844     $91.52   0.44

 Solomon                               Lower middle
                East Asia & Pacific                      583,591       $1,129,164,719      $22,413,761    $38.41   1.99
  Islands                                income

  Somalia       Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     10,787,104      $5,925,000,000      $122,367,766    $11.34   2.06

                                       Upper middle
South Africa    Sub-Saharan Africa                    77,266,814    $315,000,000,000    $3,547,404,077    $45.91   1.13
                                         income

South Sudan     Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     12,339,812       $9,015,221,096    $186,189,446     $15.09   2.07


   Spain       Europe & Central Asia   High income    46,418,269   $1,190,000,000,000   $5,267,580,377   $113.48   0.44

                                       Lower middle
 Sri Lanka          South Asia                        20,966,000      $82,316,172,384   $1,633,964,484    $77.93   1.98
                                         income

                 Latin America &       Upper middle
 St. Lucia                                              184,999        $1,431,135,704      $16,138,806    $87.24   1.13
                    Caribbean            income

St. Vincent      Latin America &       Upper middle
                                                        109,462          $737,683,556       $8,318,800    $76.00   1.13
 and the            Caribbean            income
Grenadines
                                       Lower middle
  Sudan         Sub-Saharan Africa                    40,234,882      $97,156,119,150   $1,928,535,348    $47.93   1.98
                                         income

                 Latin America &       Upper middle
 Suriname                                                542,975       $5,150,291,217      $58,079,435   $106.97   1.13
                    Caribbean            income

                                       Lower middle
 Swaziland      Sub-Saharan Africa                     1,286,970       $4,118,488,059      $81,751,411    $63.52   1.98
                                         income

  Sweden       Europe & Central Asia   High income     9,798,871    $496,000,000,000    $2,188,874,162   $223.38   0.44


Switzerland    Europe & Central Asia   High income     8,286,976    $671,000,000,000    $2,962,059,050   $357.44   0.44

                                       Lower middle
 Tajikistan    Europe & Central Asia                   8,481,855       $7,853,450,374    $155,889,889     $18.38   1.99
                                         income

 Tanzania       Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income     53,470,420     $45,628,247,290     $942,350,496     $17.62   2.06

                                       Upper middle
 Thailand       East Asia & Pacific                   67,959,359    $395,000,000,000    $4,456,278,926    $65.57   1.13
                                         income

   Togo         Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      7,304,578       $4,087,903,913     $84,426,611     $11.56   2.07

                                       Lower middle
  Tonga         East Asia & Pacific                      106,170        $435,142,409        $8,637,516    $81.36   1.99
                                         income



                                                              92
Trinidad and       Latin America &
                                         High income      1,360,088       $23,559,287,484     $104,032,560     $76.49   0.44
   Tobago             Caribbean

                 Middle East & North     Lower middle
   Tunisia                                               11,107,800       $43,015,089,723     $853,843,502     $76.87   1.99
                        Africa             income

                                         Upper middle
   Turkey        Europe & Central Asia                   78,665,830      $718,000,000,000    $8,095,477,153   $102.91   1.13
                                           income

Turkmenista                              Upper middle
                 Europe & Central Asia                    5,373,502       $35,854,571,429     $404,329,225     $75.25   1.13
     n                                     income

  Uganda          Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      39,032,383       $27,529,249,701     $568,555,744     $14.57   2.07

                                         Lower middle
  Ukraine        Europe & Central Asia                  45,198,200        $90,615,023,324    $1,798,695,512   $39.80    1.99
                                           income

United Arab      Middle East & North
                                         High income      9,156,963      $370,000,000,000    $1,635,144,558   $178.57   0.44
 Emirates               Africa

   United
                 Europe & Central Asia   High income     65,138,232   $2,860,000,000,000    $12,633,935,401   $193.96   0.44
  Kingdom

   United
                    North America        High income    321,418,820   $18,000,000,000,000   $79,645,603,339   $247.79   0.44
   States

                   Latin America &
  Uruguay                                High income      3,431,555       $53,442,697,569     $235,991,034     $68.77   0.44
                      Caribbean

                                         Lower middle
 Uzbekistan      Europe & Central Asia                   31,299,500       $66,732,736,498    $1,324,635,466    $42.32   1.98
                                           income

                                         Lower middle
  Vanuatu         East Asia & Pacific                     4,422,143          $742,432,131       $14,737,174     $3.33   1.98
                                           income

 Venezuela,        Latin America &       Upper middle
                                                         31,108,083      $371,000,000,000    $4,187,538,585   $134.61   1.13
    RB                Caribbean            income

                                         Lower middle
  Vietnam         East Asia & Pacific                    91,703,800     $194,000,000,000     $3,842,913,015    $41.91   1.98
                                           income

Virgin Islands     Latin America &
                                         High income        103,574        $3,765,000,000      $16,625,400    $160.52   0.44
    (U.S.)            Caribbean

                 Middle East & North     Lower middle
Yemen, Rep.                                              77,266,814       $37,733,919,936     $749,013,022     $9.69    1.98
                        Africa             income

                                         Lower middle
  Zambia          Sub-Saharan Africa                     16,211,767       $21,154,394,546      $419,911,767   $25.90    1.98
                                           income

 Zimbabwe         Sub-Saharan Africa     Low income      15,602,751       $14,419,185,900     $297,796,382    $19.09    2.07




                                                                 93
APPENDIX D – CHANGE MANAGEMENT AND INVESTMENT CASE




                         94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
