                               Republic of Mozambique

                   Aid Data Management Assessment


April 2017




Public Sector and Governance
AFRICA




Document of the World Bank
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique




Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.



Copyright Statement:



The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Acknowledgements

This assessment was prepared by a team led by Dionísio Nombora and Daniel Nogueira-
Budny (GGODR, co-TTLs). The team included Furqan Saleem, Khuram Farooq, Matt
Geddes, Lily Bunker, and Chambal Chambalson (GGODR). Overall guidance was provided
by Guenter Heidenhof and Chiara Bronchi (Practice Manager, GGO13) and Mark Lundell
(Country Director, AFCS2). The team would like to express its gratitude to Carolin Geginat,
Iolanda Fortes, Shireen Mahdi, Carolina Renteria, Stephen Davenport, Johannes Kiess,
Massimo Mastruzzi, Tiago Peixoto, Kirk Schmidt, Sally Torbert, Arturo Navarro, João
Morgado, Ibrahim El Ghandou, Emerson Siquice, and Claudio Mendonça for their expertise
and support. Preparation of this report greatly benefited from the support of UNDP’s Maputo
office, specifically, Luca Monge Roffarello, Manuel Felipe, and Masaki Mifune.

The team would like to thank the Government of Mozambique for its support with the
assessment. In particular, the team would like to acknowledge the leadership of the
Directorate of Cooperation (DC) on aid data management in Mozambique. This report would
not have been possible without the support and concerted efforts from the Director of
Cooperation, Isabel Sumar, as well as her staff—in particular, Cândido Jeque and Lauzeta
Cossa. The team would also like to acknowledge the assistance and support received from the
National Director of Economic and Financial Studies (DEEF), Vasco Correia Nhabinde;
Deputy Director of Planning and Budgeting (DNPO), Cristina Matusse; Deputy National
Director of Treasury (DNT), Ester dos Santos; and Deputy National Director of Monitoring
and Evaluation (DNMA), Xavier Chavana; as well as Deputy General Director of the
National Institute of Information and Communication Technology (INTIC), Augusto Nunes;
Deputy General Director of the Center for the Development of Financial Information Systems
(CEDSIF), Jacinto Muchine; and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
(MINEC) Officer Januário Sumbana.
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Abbreviations and Acronyms
AfDB                African Development Bank
AIMS                Aid Information Management System
AMP                 Aid Management Platform
BTC                 Belgian Technical Cooperation
CEDSIF              Center for the Development of Financial Information Systems
CNS                 Contas Nacionais de Saúde (National Health Accounts)
CoA                 Chart of Accounts
CS-DRMS             Commonwealth Secretariat Debt Recording and Management System
CSO                 Civil Society Organization
CSV                 Comma Separated Values
CUT                 Conta Única do Tesouro (Single Treasury Account)
DC                  Directorate of Cooperation
DEEF                National Directorate of Economic and Financial Studies
DFID                U.K. Development for International Development
DG                  Development Gateway
DIC                 Directorate of Investment and Cooperation
DNMA                National Directorate of Monitoring and Evaluation
DNPO                National Directorate of Planning and Budgeting
DNT                 National Directorate of the Treasury
DOGSI               Department of Information System Organization and Management
DP                  Development Partner
e-SISTAFE           State Electronic System of Financial Administration (e-Sistema de
                    Administração Financeira do Estado)
EU                  European Union
FAO                 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GBS                 General Budget Support
GoM                 Government of Mozambique
IATI                International Aid Transparency Initiative
IFE                 Inquérito de Fundos Externos (Survey of External Funds)
IFMIS               Integrated Financial Management Information System
IHP+                International Health Partnership
INTIC               National Institute of Information and Communication Technology
MARF                Monitoria e Analise de Recursos Financeiros (Monitoring and Analysis
                    of Financial Resources)
MCTESTP             Ministry of Science and Technology
MDAs                Ministries, Departments, and Agencies
MDG                 Millennium Development Goal
MEF                 Ministry of Economy and Finance
MEGAS               Medição de Gastos em SIDA (Spending in AIDS Measure)
MINEC               Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
MoU                 Memorandum of Understanding
MPD                 Ministry of Planning and Development
MTEF                Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
M&E                 Monitoring and Evaluation
NGO                 Nongovernmental Organization
ODA                 Official Development Assistance
ODAmoz              Mozambique AIMS
OECD                Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development


                                              i
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


OECD DAC            OECD Development Assistance Committee
OECD DAC CRS        OECD DAC Creditor Reporting System
PAAS                Platform As A Service
PAF                 Performance Assessment Framework
PAP                 Program Aid Partner
PIM                 Public Investment Management
SDG                 Sustainable Development Goal
SWG                 Sector Working Group
UN                  United Nations
UNDP                United Nations Development Program
UNICEF              United Nations Children's Fund
UNRCO               UN Resident Coordinator’s Office
WHO                 World Health Organization




                                              ii
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Preface
ODAmoz, Mozambique’s online platform to collect aid data from development partners
(DPs) operated by Mozambique’s Directorate of Cooperation (DC) in the Ministry of
Economy and Finance (MEF), went offline between April and December 2015. The
shutdown interrupted aid data flows and highlighted an urgent need to assess the current
ODAmoz system and weigh alternative options. In February 2016, the Government of
Mozambique (GoM), through DC, requested World Bank support to conduct a functional and
technical assessment of the ODAmoz platform and processes as part of the World Bank’s
broader non-lending technical assistance to the sector.

The assessment was conducted in close collaboration with several key DP stakeholders,
particularly the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). This report summarizes
the results of that assessment, which focused on the system’s ability to capture, manage,
publish, and use aid data, and proposes several options for the future. It aims to inform in-
depth support from the World Bank and other DPs to the GoM in the field of aid data
management, in close coordination with ongoing and planned technical assistance around
public finance management.




                                             iii
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


                                                               Table of Contents

Abbreviations and Acronyms .................................................................................................................. i
Preface ................................................................................................................................................... iii
Abstract ................................................................................................................................................... 1
1.      Aid Data Management in Mozambique .......................................................................................... 2
     1.1.      Functional and Technical Assessment of ODAmoz ............................................................... 2
     1.2.      History and Present Objective of ODAmoz ............................................................................ 3
     1.3.      Aid Data Demand, Supply, and Use ....................................................................................... 5
2.      Existing Issues ................................................................................................................................ 9
     2.1.      Data Collection Issues........................................................................................................... 11
     2.2.      Institutional and Coordination Issues .................................................................................... 13
     2.3.      Technical and IT Issues......................................................................................................... 15
3.      Recommendations ......................................................................................................................... 19
     3.1.      Solutions to Data Workflow and Collection ......................................................................... 22
     3.2.      Solutions to Institutional and Coordination Issues................................................................ 23
     3.3.      Solutions to Technical and IT Issues .................................................................................... 25
     Status Quo: Embrace Multiple Parallel Systems (Shut Down ODAmoz) ....................................... 28
     Option 1: Consolidate Systems and Incorporate ODAmoz-Specific Features................................. 29
     Option 2: Reinstate ODAmoz as the Sole Aid Data Collection System, with Improved Hosting,
     Some Technical Help, and/or Minor Changes .................................................................................. 30
     Option 3: Redesign Mozambique’s AIMS, Preferably Housed within CEDSIF ............................. 34
4.      Next Steps ..................................................................................................................................... 36


                                                         Tables, Figures, and Boxes

     Box 1: Demand for Aid Data ................................................................................................. 6
     Figure 1: Flowchart of Aid Data Management Status Quo .................................................. 10
     Figure 2: Flowchart of Improved Data Management ........................................................... 21
     Table 1: Likely Core Data Fields ......................................................................................... 22
     Table 2: Advantages vs. Disadvantages of ODAmoz Options ............................................ 27
     Table 3: Status Quo - Embrace Multiple Parallel Systems (Shut Down ODAmoz) ............ 28
     Table 4: Option 1 - Consolidate Systems and Incorporate ODAmoz-Specific Features ..... 29
     Table 5: Option 2 - Reinstate ODAmoz as the Sole Aid Data Collection System, with
     Improved Hosting, Some Technical Help, and/or Minor Changes ...................................... 31
     Table 6: Option 3 - Redesign Mozambique’s AIMS, Preferably Housed within CEDSIF.. 35




                                                                              iv
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Abstract
This report is the output of a functional and technical assessment of aid data management in
Mozambique. The objectives of the report are to analyze why aid data management is
suboptimal in Mozambique, weigh the pros and cons of potential alternatives, and propose
policy changes that would allow the Government of Mozambique (GoM) to better capture,
manage, publish, and use aid data for improved development results. Demand for aid data in
Mozambique is high; however, the supply—and therefore use—of this data, is low.

The primary challenge is that the current Aid Information Management System (AIMS) does
not use national budget classification categories, complicating the integration of aid data with
budget data. Secondary critical challenges include unnecessary complexity (there are
currently more than 50 fields), lack of flexibility (no updates to reflect annual changes to the
country’s Chart of Accounts), and inability to accommodate multidonor projects and pooled
funds (leading to double counting). Communication lines between the GoM and development
partners (DPs) are also limited, thus excluding the principal source of feedback on usability.
These challenges have led to a negative cycle whereby more data is being lost or being
captured but not shared.

The report recommends several institutional changes, including allocating sufficient staff for
directing and managing ODAmoz, improving communication by building on existing aid
coordination mechanisms and collaborating better with line ministries, and restarting
engagement with DPs. Most critically, the report also recommends that the GoM redesigns
ODAmoz such that aid data is recorded in a format that can easily be used in the national
planning and budgeting process; this would entail the new platform being housed within the
Center for the Development of Financial Information Systems (CEDSIF) of the Ministry of
Economy and Finance (MEF) and closely linked to the State Electronic System of Financial
Administration (e-SISTAFE), Mozambique’s Integrated Financial Management Information
System (IFMIS).




                                               1
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


1. Aid Data Management in Mozambique
1.1. Functional and Technical Assessment of ODAmoz
1.     This report is the output of a functional and technical assessment on ways to
improve aid data management in Mozambique, requested by the Government of
Mozambique (GoM) in February 2016. This request is part of wider support provided since
2015 from the World Bank’s Governance Global Practice, in conjunction with its Open
Government Global Solutions Group, around improving the GoM’s ability to capture,
manage, and publish aid data. The focus of this assessment is ODAmoz, Mozambique’s Aid
Management Information System (AIMS),1 which is managed by the Directorate of
Cooperation (DC) of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF). The assessment took
place between April and June 2016 and included desk-based research on Mozambique’s aid
data management and ODAmoz, background research on relevant examples from other
countries, followed by individual and small group interviews in Maputo with the GoM and
development partner (DP) stakeholders at the technical and political levels.2

2.       Tracking data on aid contributions from DPs is in the interest of government
because it can enable more effective domestic resource allocation in the national
planning and budgeting processes. An AIMS that is integrated into existing government
systems for expenditure reporting and project management can strengthen national
institutions and ensure the efficient use of national development resources. Government
planning and budget officers can review off-budget data, in addition to data captured in the
budgeting and treasury systems, allowing for greater efficiencies in domestic and foreign
development resource spending.

3.     Aligning and integrating data on aid contributions from DPs is also important as
a critical first step to improving aid effectiveness. Monitoring aid flows through a
country’s AIMS is important for three more key reasons:

             It encourages improved aid cooperation, avoiding duplication of DP efforts and
              ensuring equitable support across sectors and regions.  



1
  Aid information management system (AIMS) is the term used for a number of similar project management and
coordination systems for on- and off-budget aid data. Development Gateway (DG), one of the foremost players
in aid data management, develops and maintains Aid Management Platforms (AMPs); Synergy, a competing
firm, develops Development Assistance Databases (DADs). Mozambique’s ODAmoz was created by a small
firm, ODAdata, which has since been incorporated into DG; DG is now responsible for the two existing
ODAdata platforms—in Mozambique and Nicaragua—and was the firm responsible for developing the current
version (2.0) of ODAmoz, which was launched in 2011.
2
  The team met with stakeholders from the following DPs: African Development Bank (AfDB); U.K.
Department for International Development (DFID); European Union; Korea Eximbank; United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP); UN Resident Coordinator’s Office (UNRCO); United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF); World Health Organization (WHO); and the embassies of Brazil, Canada, Finland, Germany,
Italy, Japan, Portugal, Switzerland, and Sweden. It met with stakeholders from the following MEF units: DC,
National Directorate of Planning and Budgeting (DNPO), National Directorate of Economic and Financial
Studies (DEEF), National Directorate of the Treasury (DNT), National Directorate of Monitoring and
Evaluation (DNMA), Department of Information System Organization and Management (DOGSI), and Center
for the Development of Financial Information Systems (CEDSIF). Finally, it met with stakeholders from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (MINEC) and the National Institute of Information
and Communication Technology (INTIC).


                                                     2
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


             It allows for monitoring and evaluating the implementation of national
              development strategies and international development agendas,3 harmonizing DP
              projects with key policy priorities.

             It facilitates greater transparency and accountability between the Government
              and DPs, including increased oversight by civil society actors.

4.       The objectives of the report are to analyze why aid data management is
suboptimal in Mozambique, weigh the pros and cons of potential alternatives, and
propose policy changes. This analysis covers the entire system of aid data management,
including how to better capture, manage, publish, and use aid data for improved development
results. Mozambique continues to receive substantial support from development partners, and
aid data management is critical for increasing the efficiency of national planning, budgeting,
and alignment of aid support with domestic development resources.

5.      The findings and recommendations of this report are the result of a collaborative
effort with the MEF and DPs—particularly the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). The report has since gone through a series of iterative edits to ensure
that all stakeholder views are reflected. In particular, a workshop held on May 10, 2016,
discussed preliminary results, solicited additional information in a group setting, and built a
shared understanding and consensus among all relevant stakeholders.

6.      This report is structured around the demand for, supply of, and use of aid data
in Mozambique. The rest of this chapter reviews basic facts on the current situation,
including an overview of the original objectives of ODAmoz and why it went offline in 2015.
The next three chapters are thematically structured to identify challenges and suggest
necessary improvements, given the realistic constraints of the context. The report then
identifies several ways forward, discussing trade-offs and alternatives while integrating good
practices and knowledge from other countries addressing similar issues. Finally, the
suggested options are outlined, including the technical specifications, policy reforms, and
procedural changes needed to enact these solutions.

1.2. History and Present Objective of ODAmoz
7.      ODAmoz was developed in 2005 by ODAdata on behalf of the European
Commission and the Embassy of the Netherlands, responding to the needs of traditional
DPs to coordinate and monitor official development assistance (ODA) to Mozambique.
The platform was initially managed by DPs, until 2006, when ODAmoz became the
responsibility of the Directorate of Investment and Cooperation (DIC) under the former
Ministry of Planning and Development (MPD). In 2015, following the government
restructuring, the DIC became the Directorate of Cooperation (DC) in the Ministry of
Economy and Finance (MEF), the successor to the MPD. Following ODAmoz’s change in
management, DPs provided limited technical assistance to the GoM to ensure proper
management of aid data and the platform.

8.     Initially, ODAmoz’s main objective was to provide DPs with a tool, based on
international standards, to fulfill their reporting obligations to the GoM on project
plans and quarterly disbursements (see ODAmoz.mz.org). From 2005 to 2007, ODAmoz

3
 This is limited, however, by the fact that AIMS generally only captures disbursements and not actual
expenditures.


                                                       3
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


captured and managed project information from a majority of European Union (EU) members
and G-19 donors—the Program Aid Partners (PAPs). In 2006, ODAmoz captured an
estimated 80–90 percent of ODA; in 2007, ODAmoz was expanded to include United
Nations (UN) agencies.

9.      Following the establishment of Mozambique’s State Electronic System of
Financial Administration (e-SISTAFE), an upgrade was planned in 2008 to connect
ODAmoz to e-SISTAFE. The upgraded system, ODAmoz Version 2.0, would create an
interface between the two systems and modules for budget elaboration and execution.4 This
new platform was planned to

             Be compatible with ODAmoz 1.0, allowing for full integration of existing data;

             Allow for data access and analysis around key, national-level policies—for
              example, 5-Year Plans, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)—and
              include indicators, goals, sectors, provinces, and districts;

             Link to e-SISTAFE's Budget Preparation Module, with the option to expand to
              other components, such as linking to the public accounting system for budget
              execution;

             Be able to visualize data geographically with maps; and

             Create reports for the diverse needs of DP, government, and public users.

10.     ODAmoz Version 2.0 was completed in 2012, but it only partially fulfilled the
planned mandate due to unforeseen complications. Basic reports and map functions were
added, but the system continued to use the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) sectors—as opposed to
the GoM sector codes, which is widely considered best practice for the AIMS. This gap
suggests that the current data structure in ODAmoz (as it is currently being captured) cannot
integrate with the GoM processes. Nevertheless, the upgraded system is now capable of
accepting basic data on projects and producing project summaries and useful reports by
sector, location, or DP.

11.     ODAmoz’s mandate has expanded since being transferred under the authority of
the GoM and upgraded to the new version. According to DC, ODAmoz now has four main
objectives:



4
  Integration of the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) and AIMS is widely seen as
possible; however, it can be quite difficult to achieve and many development technology firms have been trying
for years to do this. A particularly poignant case is Liberia, where DG has invested hundreds of thousands of
dollars in such a project, with limited success. The difficulty is putting into the government accounting system
projects whose finances are not in fact controlled by government and do not use government systems. What has
proven easier is IFMIS-AIMS compatibility. In Somalia, for instance, where fields for both systems are similar,
the AIMS was restructured to use the same codes (such that, a sector report from the IFMIS will make the same
sectors as one from the AIMS). In Rwanda, the AIMS is currently being linked to the IFMIS for better
integration of off-budget aid into the national budget; along with Rwanda, Kenya and Iraq are seen as good
examples in which aid and budget data are linked. Relatedly, Ghana has not yet linked both systems; however,
its AIMS captures aid and debt figures together, which are extracted, put into Excel, and then fed into the
country’s budget management system.


                                                       4
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


           To support the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) and country
            budget processes

           To make available external finance forecasts and trimester disbursements

           To serve as an instrument to allow for the analysis of the impact of externally
            financed programs and projects

           To improve coordination and harmonization of external finance information
            between sectors, the GoM, and DPs

12.    Up until 2014, ODAmoz collected DP data based on this mandate, but it then
went temporarily offline in 2015. The main cause of the 2015 shutdown was a failure to
coordinate the renewal of the VMware license for the server (explained more in depth later).
In mid-2016, the system came back online and, to date, nine projects have been entered, from
Austria, Belgium, Germany, and Spain.

13.     The 2015 shutdown was symptomatic of larger issues limiting the system’s
relevance and usability. The ODAmoz platform requires advanced technical skills to make
basic system alterations, and technicians with the necessary skills were neither identified
locally, available within a reasonable time frame, nor cost-effective, according to
interviewees. ODAmoz therefore could not be adapted to changing demands for reports or
new data fields. The system was unable to produce the necessary updated reports to inform
the GoM’s planning and budgeting process. When new information became available on
donor results from the PAP’s Performance Assessment Framework (PAP-PAF), new fields
could not be created in ODAmoz to store the data. Then, when the Government restructured
and changed the names of key ministries, system administrators could not update ODAmoz’s
drop-down options available to users. Data entry became harder for users and system data
less accurate, as ODAmoz became increasingly outdated. When the system went offline in
2015, it was already losing relevance for both the suppliers and users of aid data.

1.3. Aid Data Demand, Supply, and Use
Data Demand

14.    Demand for aid data in Mozambique was judged by the assessment team to be
high. Demand comes from the MEF, other government institutions, the DP community, and
the wider public.




                                              5
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique



                                           Box 1: Demand for Aid Data
     The MEF’s DNPO and CEDSIF demand aid data for the planning and budget process, tracking budget
      support commitments and disbursements, and reporting expenditures.
     The MEF’s DC demands aid data for annual aid reporting and coordination processes.
     The MEF’s DNT demands aid data for debt management and macroeconomic forecasting.
     The MEF’s DEEF demands aid data to plan, evaluate, and prioritize public investments.
     The MEF’s DNMA demands aid data to monitor and evaluate donor -funded investment projects.
     MINEC demands aid data when approving DP programs and country strategies.
     Line ministries demand aid data for annual planning and budget processes and for tracking projects.
     DPs and implementing partners demand aid data for project planning and management.
     The PAP-PAF process demands aid data to monitor aid effectiveness and coordinate between DPs and
      government.
     Sector Working Groups (SWGs) demand aid data for coordination between sector stakeholders.
     Provinces and subnational administrations demand aid data to track projects in their areas and regions.
     Civil society organizations (CSOs), journalists, and citizens demand aid data to hold government and
      donors to account.
     The wider public demand aid data to understand what projects are taking place and participate in planning.


15.     While data users differ greatly, the assessment found that most data requested
was the same. In general, interviewed users wanted to know which DP is doing what, where,
and when and how much it costs. Overall, users wanted to receive aid data in formats that are
easy to use, such as Excel spreadsheets with project names for the DNT or A4 printable/PDF
project profiles for civil society. A few users also required specific coding, such as Chart of
Accounts (CoA) codes or loan agreement numbers. Others required additional, unique fields
such as public investment management (PIM) project ID codes or more detailed sector codes.
Regarding the former, a strengthened relationship between aid data management and public
expenditure would lead to broader efficiencies in overall development spending, a topic that
is already under discussion between the GoM and World Bank.

Data Supply

16.      Mozambique uses ODAmoz, a web-based AIMS to collect and supply data. Web-
based systems are a standard platform used in aid recipient countries because ‘flat’ formats,
such as Excel, are too limited in their functionality.5 DC sends quarterly e-mail requests to its
list of DPs’ focal points to enter aid data directly into the ODAmoz website. DPs, which have
individualized accounts to enter data on the backend of the platform, then have 15 days to
complete data entry before the system is locked again.

17.     Data entry is done manually by each DP. Most ODAmoz data is typed, or copied,
from the DPs’ own internal project management systems and then adjusted and analyzed to
fit the platform. DC previously provided regular trainings6 to new DP focal points on using
the system; however, such trainings have become more and more infrequent and are
scheduled on an ad hoc basis.

5
  In particular, multidonor projects are quite hard to capture in ‘flat’ formats, which are often employed in
simpler data collection exercises. Furthermore, online platforms enable large numbers of users to enter —and
access—data simultaneously; this is particularly important as it quickly becomes difficult to manage the process
of compiling and re-sharing spreadsheets with large numbers of individuals.
6
  Besides trainings, there is also an ODAmoz user manual.


                                                          6
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


18.     A small amount of data in ODAmoz is supplied from international databases;
however, not all potential sources have been integrated. International sources that have
been linked include the OECD DAC’s Creditor Reporting System (CRS), DFID Devtracker,
World Bank Client Connection, and World Bank Statements (that is, for loans). No data has
been sourced from the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) Registry, which
houses standardized aid data from 473 DPs and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).7 To
date, no validation efforts have been conducted.

19.     Data was previously only available on donor commitments and disbursements;
however, in recent years, additional expenditure data is becoming available. DPs are
increasingly being asked to report on expenditure in other reporting formats. This data was
not originally captured in ODAmoz, as reporting such data used to be considered too much of
a burden to request from DPs. Given the recent changes in ODAmoz, however, it may be
useful to include the data going forward.

Data Use

20.      ODAmoz has yet to become established as the main source of aid data used by
stakeholders in Mozambique. Most aid data used for reports or planning is gathered instead
through separate, individual requests sent to in-country DP offices and not from ODAmoz.
None of the DP stakeholders interviewed reporting using ODAmoz to obtain aid data. As a
result, DPs are being asked for data multiple times, in multiple formats, and through multiple
staff, including from and through their headquarters. Aid data is requested through separate
spreadsheets, e-mails, or written documents (such as PAP-PAF forms), occasionally in hard
copy. Donor responses to these requests for data are typically tailored to the format of each
request or by sending project documents, such as logframes, that were developed for other
purposes. This system of multiple requests for data is inefficient, with DPs fielding frequent
requests from different departments, which likely causes increased data gaps or human errors.

21.     Ad hoc aid data requests have varied levels of success in getting responses from
DPs, often depending on the strength of the existing relationships between the requestor
and DPs. Coordinating line ministries or ministries with a formal/legal relationship with a
DP (such as the DNT or MINEC) reported finding it easier to obtain data, and the data they
received was of sound quality. Users without any of these relationships, for example, civil
society, the wider public, DNPO, DEEF, and to some extent, DC, found it more difficult to
obtain the data—particularly off-budget data, which is not captured elsewhere.

22.    According to the assessment interviews, users who were able to access data
typically did so using one of three routes:

              By using the contacts they have at DP offices through joint working on projects,
               such as line ministry staff, subnational administrations, and implementers/NGOs

              By leveraging a legal, contractual, or formalized requirement—for example,
               when G-14 DPs submit their general budget support (GBS) or pooled fund
               commitments as part of the PAP process, when MINEC collects country
               strategies, or when the DNT collects data on disbursements made from loans
               (contracts) guaranteed by the GoM

7
 Doing so could save data entry users a lot of effort, as well as allow for data validation; however, IATI data are
generally not granular enough to be of interest for national-level aid data management efforts.


                                                        7
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


          By being part of a DP-led process, for example, SWGs




                                              8
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


2. Existing Issues
23.      Mozambique’s current system of aid data management is fragmented and
inefficient, with many potential sources of data left untapped. Figure 1 presents a
visualization of the current state of aid data management in Mozambique.8 The left-hand side
of the flowchart represents the supply of data from DPs. In the middle, the chart maps the
institutions and systems that collect and transfer the data, using key categorizations of the
different pathways for aid data. The right-hand side of the flowchart represents the core uses
for the data, including the GoM budget and expenditure processes, and SWGs for DPs. Many
other potential uses of the data are possible; however, this flowchart highlights the key
functions.

24.     There is a large degree of potential value added in boosting the GoM’s ability to
capture and manage aid data. The diagram also displays a ‘potential gain’ block toward the
top right, representing the data that is available—and possibly being supplied and captured—
but is not currently connected with other processes, and thus it remains unused.

25.    Addressing these issues will improve efficiency of managing domestic and
foreign development resources. Proper aid data management ensures that aid data is used in
the MTEF and national budget processes.




8
 Figures 1 and 2 are not to scale; nevertheless, the relative size of the bubbles corresponds to the estimated
percentage of the overall category.


                                                         9
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


                                              Figure 1: Flowchart of Aid Data Management Status Quo




                                                                       10
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


2.1. Data Collection Issues
26.     ODAmoz was designed with clear objectives to simplify and centralize aid data
collection and management; however, recent challenges have limited the system’s ability
to deliver on that mandate. The current system, where ODAmoz is not reliably online and
does not produce usable data, has led to DP reluctance to spend time entering data. Without
being linked to other government or DP processes—in particular, with the planning and
budgeting process—ODAmoz data entry quality was reduced, with few incentives to fix
problems when they arose. Instead, many stakeholders developed and used independent aid
data collection systems, such as sector-specific spreadsheets, that were better tailored to their
particular needs. In the health sector alone, six separate aid data exercises arose in parallel to
ODAmoz.9

27.     The most pressing issue is that ODAmoz is not using the national budget
classification categories. Currently, aid data cannot be easily combined with budget data to
analyze all development spending, regardless of the source of funds. For example, although
sector data is currently collected, the data uses the (old) OECD DAC purpose codes and
cannot produce a report with sectors that are recognized by other GoM processes. This
function is essential for ODAmoz to demonstrate relevance and usefulness for DPs and the
Government, especially during the planning and budgeting process, which, in turn, will
incentivize users to supply more and better data for the system.

28.     Current data collection processes are time-consuming and duplicative, and
significant amounts of aid data are not captured at all. These challenges led to a negative
trend where more data is lost—or captured but not shared—which then limits aid data use.
This subsection details the specifics of these issues.

29.     ODAmoz is unnecessarily complex, with over 50 mandatory data fields. Users
who complete all available fields (including optional ones) can fill up to 112 data fields for a
single project. Having too many fields means data entry is time-consuming and tedious,
leading many users to skip fields. Indeed, a review of the data shows that many fields are left
blank, suggesting that either the data is not readily available or DPs skip fields because there
are too many.10

30.     Manual data entry leads to a high risk of human error, especially since many DP
focal points are not trained in using the system. According to the DPs interviewed for this
assessment, typing aid data from internal project management systems into ODAmoz is a
time-consuming process—exacerbated by system-specific issues (developed later in the
report)—with many opportunities for data entry error. DPs reported varying degrees of
difficulty using ODAmoz, with many commenting on the lack of clarity around definitions
and field delineations. DC previously provided regular trainings to new DP focal points on
using the system; however, such trainings have become more and more infrequent and are
scheduled on an ad hoc basis. There is an ODAmoz user manual; however, given the
complexities around aid data fields and definitions, many questions and issues need to be
addressed and resolved by DC staff.
9
  Survey of External Funds (Inquérito de Fundos Externos, IFE); International Health Partnership (IHP+)
Survey; Spending in AIDS Measure (Medição de Gastos em SIDA, MEGAS); the WHO’s National Health
Accounts (Contas Nacionais de Saúde, CNS); World Bank’s Health Expenditure Review; and Monitoring and
Analysis of Financial Resources (Monitoria e Analise de Recursos Financeiros, MARF).
10
   ODAmoz user interviewees claimed that it was generally a bit of both. Regarding the latter reasoning, many
fields do not have any clear users.


                                                      11
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


31.     Project data entry often requires input from several people, organizations, or
groups, further hindering complete data collection. For example, one DP might provide
the basic project details and committed funds; the implementing partner might supply the
current level of expenditure, the final project locations, and the logframe; and the GoM might
supply the conversion to the nation sectors and appropriate CoA codes. As discussed below,
the current system is not designed to allow data entry on a single project from multiple users,
which results in extensive off-line coordination, errors, or data gaps.

32.     Many aid data collection efforts are overlapping and/or duplicative, requesting
information that is already being gathered by another source. Figure 1 clarifies that,
although there is aid data flowing in Mozambique, it is not necessarily flowing through
ODAmoz (that is, a single, centralized platform). Data entry into ODAmoz is not
comprehensive:11 only 36 percent of disbursements from 2014 were correctly reported in
ODAmoz, according to 2014 PAP matrix indicators 12 and 13 (the latest year for which data
is available).12 The assessment team found that with multiple, competing demands for data,
DPs are likely to prioritize other data collection requests from collaborating partners instead
of ODAmoz data entry.

33.     Most requests include the same basic fields (for example, project name, sector,
start date, and end date). This is an inefficient use of the DPs’ and GoM’s time and effort.
Furthermore, DPs may be confused about where to submit data, given the multiple
repositories within various GoM ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs): it is unclear
who is collecting what data and for what purpose. With the confusion caused by multiple
repositories collecting the same data, it is possible that DPs only complete some submissions,
but not all, leaving each repository incomplete and the GoM without any authoritative source
of aid data. As such, significant amounts of aid data (for example, all aid from non-G-14 DPs
not covered by sector aid surveys) are collected independently of an integrated national
planning process, contravening one of the GoM’s primary objectives for ODAmoz.
Independent data collection efforts are rarely consolidated with ODAmoz’s repositories, thus
risking the loss of critical data. Part of this fragmentation is the result of decreasing use of
budget support, fewer DPs in the G-14 group, and increasing aid from China, which does not
engage in DP cooperation measures or disclose its aid data. An additional factor, however, is
that the latest G-14 memorandums of understanding (MoUs) no longer require DPs to report
their on-budget but off-Single Treasury Account (Conta Única do Tesouro, CUT) support.
This is a large—and growing—loss of data.

34.     Collected data is not effectively shared or used, leading to significant missed
opportunities for evidence-based analysis. Given the important role of foreign aid in
Mozambique’s development portfolio, access to—and utilization of—this data during the
national planning and budgeting processes would lead to substantial efficiency gains in both
the allocation and use of domestic development resources. Yet, the various organizations
collecting data are holding on to—not sharing—that data. This is represented visually in
Figure 1 by the lack of connections between data collection tools and recipient ministries or
units. For example,



11
  See http://www.eeas.europa.eu/archives/delegations/mozambique/documents/news/20140704_1_en.pdf.
12
  http://ago.org.mz/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/ANEXO-IV_AM_RA-2015_Cumprimento-da-Mtriz_QAD-
dos-PAPs_
15052015.pdf.


                                                12
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


              All DPs sign new programs and country strategies with MINEC; however, these
               are not then used to identify lists of actors, volumes of aid, or similar projects.
               Furthermore, the documents—many of which are public—are not shared within
               the GoM;

              All G-14 DPs submit data on their GBS and pooled fund commitments to the
               DNPO; however, this is not made available in a sharable format;

              The DNT’s debt department manages precise information on all concessional
               loans in their Commonwealth Secretariat Debt Recording and Management
               System (CS-DRMS) database; however, the data is not shared with other GoM
               units;

              Data in ODAmoz is used solely for an annual report (which was not produced in
               2015). Data is not used in the GoM’s planning and budgeting process, reports for
               line ministries, or packaged for SWGs, leading to significant lost opportunities
               around efficient domestic resource planning; and

              Sectoral data collection exercises are not compiled into a central resource. As an
               example, the MEF does not systematically collect the data captured by line
               ministries.

35.     ODAmoz does not have a data validation process to ensure database accuracy.
According to the analysis of the assessment team, significant inaccuracies can be found in
ODAmoz’s data. In other regional countries, such as Rwanda, potential quality issues are
addressed proactively (weekly or monthly): checking projects for double counting, exchange
rate errors, and missing fields and following up with DPs that entered inaccurate data.13
ODAmoz could produce automated reports that flag the latest changes for DC staff to
validate. For some DPs, (those without country offices, for example) DC staff may need to
directly enter data, similar to a hybrid system used in neighboring Tanzania. Furthermore,
data validation could be built into the management of the AIMS.14 For example, a user should
not be able to enter disbursements that sum to greater than the overall value of the project, an
error noticed by the assessment team on several occasions in existing ODAmoz projects.

2.2. Institutional and Coordination Issues
36.    Two separate institutions manage the ODAmoz platform and house the server,
which leads to miscommunication and a lack of authority to fix problems. Discussions
with DC, the manager of ODAmoz, and the National Institute of Information and
Communication Technology (INTIC) of the Ministry of Science and Technology
(MCTESTP), its host, uncovered a lack of institutionalized channels for communication or a
formal understanding of roles. The institution responsible for the system’s use has no formal

13
   DP provision of data to the AIMS, with subsequent government validation of data is generally the default
delineation of responsibilities. That being said, some countries collect data themselves based on official project
documents and agreements between governments and DPs and then also use this information to manage their
donor community and hold them accountable for what they have promised to deliver. A hybrid of this currently
takes place in Tanzania.
14
   Identification of such features needs to be done by someone familiar with aid management and not left to
developers, as it is the day-to-day experience with aid management that helps identify such issues (for instance,
knowing that disbursements can be negative but commitments cannot or that a project that is on-treasury cannot
be off-budget).


                                                        13
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


control over its usability, much less any formal authority to ensure that the platform is online
and performing.

37.     Communication gaps between the government entity managing ODAmoz (DC)
and the entity housing its server (INTIC) over hosting arrangements forced ODAmoz
offline for almost a year. Communication failures led to delay of the payment of the annual
fee for ODAmoz’s VMware license, effectively shutting down the platform.15

38.     The software on which ODAmoz runs is the property not of the GoM but of an
international nonprofit, Development Gateway (DG). DG is an industry leader that
develops and manages proprietary AIMS called Aid Management Platforms (AMPs), which
are used in many donor recipient countries. DG took ownership of ODAmoz following its
incorporation of the private firm ODAdata, which had developed the original ODAmoz
system. DG also supervised the system upgrade to ODAmoz 2.0. Interviews with DC staff
indicate that they are unclear whether they can modify or update ODAmoz’s software code
without the permission, or assistance, of DG.

39.   ODAmoz has few feedback mechanisms for stakeholders to discuss needed
changes, ask for help, or receive updates on the latest issues. An aid data steering
committee could perform these functions, similar to the former ODAmoz Steering
Committee.

40.     Fragmentation of the GoM’s relationships with DPs contributes to poor aid data
management. The majority of DPs in Mozambique are no longer part of the PAP G-14
group. This means that most DPs have limited aid data relationships with the GoM, beyond
sending MINEC copies of large programs and country strategies. Regular contact for most
projects is through line ministries. Even within the MEF, coordination relationships with DPs
are fragmented, as all MEF units have their own, independent relationships: the DNPO
collects PAP GBS and pooled fund data, while the DNT collects loan data. Many major DPs
are also managed by MINEC, not the MEF.16 Multiple contact points from the MEF for DPs
undermine the central coordinating function of ODAmoz.

41.     DC is not currently proactive regarding following up with non-compliers,
according to the DPs interviewed for this assessment. Successful AIMS teams in
neighboring countries reach out to DPs that do not submit timely data entries, ensure regular
training of DP focal points, and maintain an updated list of DP contacts. DC partially fulfils
this mandate: while e-mailing quarterly calls for data entry, it attaches the list of DP focal
points for review. This method, however, excludes DPs whose focal points have already left
their post (or institution) and may not follow up with their replacement. DC could be more
proactive by sending staff to attend DP coordination meetings, such as the SWGs, quarterly
DP-GoM forums, PAP meetings, and debt negotiations discussions. In this context, DC could
then verify the ODAmoz focal points and update contacts for missing DPs. DC could also be
proactive about supporting DP coordination through identifying how, and when, DPs access
and use ODAmoz data and surveying users as to how the platform might be more useful.



15
   As an aside, given that free alternatives exist, Mozambique’s AIMS need not rely on any paid soft ware
licenses.
16
   While DC and MINEC jointly handle all bilateral and multilateral donor relations, the Ministry of Justice
handles local NGOs (MINEC handles international NGOs); it is unclear who takes care of private implementers.
This leads to yet more fragmentation.


                                                    14
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


42.     Key GoM institutions have limited knowledge of ODAmoz and/or have limited
awareness of its functions or capability. Consistent communication is critical for ODAmoz
to establish standing as a central coordination body and a credible source of data. For
example, even when ODAmoz went offline, DC could have continued to collect data using
alternative methods, such as online surveys or a flat format, which would have allowed DC to
continue producing annual reports. No report was produced in 2015, with no indication that a
retroactive report will be produced either.

43.    DC is currently not providing regular support to DP and GoM staff on using
ODAmoz. In addition to regular training, a core DC function should be troubleshooting and
answering user questions in a timely manner. Many interviewed DP contacts expressed
confusion about data entry, definitions for fields, or data entry responsibilities.

44.     The GoM does not have dedicated staff supporting ODAmoz, which diffuses
responsibility for making the site functional and effective. Currently, many GoM staff, in
several different directorates and departments, officially work on ODAmoz but have less than
10 percent of their time committed to managing the platform. Given the experience of other
countries at similar developmental levels, such as Tanzania, an AIMS requires one to two
full-time staffers to function effectively.

2.3. Technical and IT Issues
45.     ODAmoz is not user-friendly enough for nontechnical staff to perform minor
backend enhancements and fixes. For instance, ministry names should be updated, sectors
changed, or organizations added without staff needing advanced technical skills to perform
these tasks. While many organizations focus on manuals to help improve technical capacity,
experience from other countries suggests that additional manuals rarely resolve technical
capacity issues. An ideal AIMS can be operated without complex manuals;17 this requires
simplification on the user side and higher-capacity hosting.

46.     Relatedly, ODAmoz currently has an inappropriate split between adjustments
that can be made by nontechnical staff and adjustments that require programming
skills. Some field options, such as DP names for drop-down menus or user accounts, can be
administered through the ODAmoz master user account and access portal. However, choices
for the sectors, ministries, locations, and pooled funds are hardcoded into the SQL schema,
which requires IT skills to update.18

47.     ODAmoz does not have functional exports of data that can be readily integrated
with other government systems. Data exports, which can be designed as ‘ready to import’
reports into other databases, can improve the use of ODAmoz data by other GoM institutions.
The DNPO, for instance, needs reports with full CoA codes for on-treasury projects to use
during the budget process. Similarly, sectoral monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems
could benefit from a list of projects with logframes. Central and line ministry budget and
planning officers require off-budget commitment and disbursement data, to complement

17
   For example, ODAmoz’s current manuals require that the user has knowledge of Rub yGems, a skill currently
lacking within the ministry. This issue contributed in part to the shutdown.
18
   As is, technical trainings are carried out in Brazil and even the smallest of changes can require costly missions
from Washington, DC. As the AIMS generally requires regular (every six months) adjustments and tweaks, as
well as emergency fixes within 48 hours, it would behoove DC to procure these skills locally. The success of e-
SISTAFE and the substantial community of developers present in Mozambique suggest that this should not be
difficult to achieve.


                                                        15
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


IFMIS-managed on-budget and on-STA data to plan future activities and investments. For
this to work, however, the AIMS needs to follow the budget programmatic structure,
something which ODAmoz does not do.19

48.     Most users of ODAmoz require not just data but reports; however, the portal
lacks the ability to generate user-friendly reports. Having predefined reports makes
accessing data quick and easy, increasing the use of ODAmoz data, and therefore the
incentive for users to enter data. ODAmoz currently recognizes this need by featuring reports
on the main page—an improvement over many other AIMS layouts. Yet, it could improve the
report templates available for download, including templates that are aligned with the import
requirements from key data users. A few predefined reports are available for download (with
additional suggestions in the next section); however, many are in need of technical fixes.

49.    ODAmoz does not have the flexibility to allow multiple financing instruments for
a single project. This issue was noted by interviewed DPs and confirmed by the assessment
team. Currently, projects can be entered either as a grant or a loan, and thus projects with
both grant and loan funding must be entered twice. In more flexible platforms, such as
Bangladesh’s AIMS, the project value is the total value of all the associated financing
instruments.20 This is important because projects often have multiple funding sources:
perhaps both a grant and a loan instrument, from different funders, or with different start and
end dates.

50.    While Mozambique has many pooled funds and joint funded projects, ODAmoz
lacks a field or marker to flag pooled or jointly funded projects. Currently, its financing
separately, often with a different name from the other components. This makes it difficult and
time-consuming to identify and track joint funded projects. A better practice would be to
allow DPs to append their financing to an existing project shared with another DP. For
example, once the first DP adds the second as a funding agency, the second DP then receives
permission to enter its financing data.

51.    ODAmoz currently does not allow more than one user to edit or update a single
project, leading to an increased risk of data gaps. Increasingly, DPs do not have all the
data requested by ODAmoz in their own systems, with necessary data collected by
implementing organizations. This is particularly the case for World Bank projects. Ideally,
while a DP may enter a new project, name, and value, it should then be able to assign an
implementing partner to then log in and enter additional data on disbursements and locations.

52.    ODAmoz does not currently have safeguards to prevent double counting. Many
suggestions for improvements mentioned in the next section will eliminate some forms of
double counting; however, additional measures can add safeguards against double entry. For
example, when a DP is entering a new project, ODAmoz could show similar projects (similar
19
   A successful international example of this process is seen in Liberia, where the AIMS was successfully
aligned to the program codes from the government’s IFMIS using the same numbering system for the
government’s finances (that is, budget, projects, and expenditures). The AIMS uses a unique project identifier,
or a UPI, to reference projects in IFMIS; this helps prevent double counting and enables the government to then
track individual projects easily across both systems. Furthermore, each AIMS project is also aligned with the
nomenclature used in the government’s MTEF (sector codes, sector names, ministry and agency code, ministry
and agency name, MTEF policy code, and so on). Liberia’s AIMS is updated before the budget preparation
process and its data then prepared for use in national planning. There are ongoing efforts to determine how to
replicate this practice for potential adoption in other country systems in the region.
20
   For example, the system could be configured so that the start and end dates of the project are the start date of
the first financing instrument and the end date of the last instrument, respectively.


                                                        16
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


sector, dates, financing amount, and organizations) for the DP to check, ensuring it is not
reentering a project that has already been entered. In other AIMS, double counting occurs
most often when a project is entered both by a bilateral donor and by the multilateral agency
implementing the project. This could be resolved by allowing roles for ‘funder’ and
‘implementer’, with the flexibility for organizations to add themselves to either list, as some
bilateral DPs both fund and implement parts of a project. Reports can be produced listing
projects by either their funders or by the implementers, removing the incentive to double
report (Kenya’s eProMIS allows for this). This way, both the funder and implementer receive
credit, regardless of who enters project information into the AIMS.

53.     ODAmoz is currently unable to capture unprogrammed funding, that is, funding
that is not yet allocated to a specific project. This means that the forward projections are
highly inaccurate, particularly for DPs with shorter programming cycles. International
experience suggests that the best solution is to allow a category for ‘currently un-
programmed’ support, for example, to a specific sector, to be temporarily added for use
during the planning process.

54.     DPs currently cannot upload documents into ODAmoz. Document storage could
be a useful feature to increase the amount of information available in ODAmoz. For example,
MINEC could upload and store copies of the publicly available bilateral agreements and
related documents they collect;21 DPs could upload mission reports, logframes, and other
documents. The ability to view the data in these documents, without the laborious process of
typing it out into ODAmoz fields, would help establish ODAmoz as a central repository for
data without creating hundreds of sector-specific fields.

55.    ODAmoz does not allow for disaggregated distinctions in budget fields. Few
development projects are 100 percent on-budget: most DPs also have funds for evaluations
and their own technical assistance staff working on the project. Making fields such as ‘on-
off-budget/treasury’ and ‘channel of delivery’ more flexible would allow DPs to more
accurately reflect their projects.

56.     ODAmoz does not have any tables converting between international coding
systems and those of the GoM. Providing such tables could make data entry simpler, as well
as improve consistency. For example, Mozambique-specific sectors are required to make the
data usable in national-level processes, and a table converting the user entry of DAC sector
‘11200 Basic Education’ to Mozambique’s national sector ‘Education’ might make data entry
easier for DPs whose databases are organized by DAC sectors.

57.    Whether it is the server, the way it is programmed, or the Internet connection,
ODAmoz’s Excel reports can only be downloaded with significant delay. A standard
Excel report can be generated in approximately 60 seconds; ODAmoz currently takes over
five minutes to produce a report, regardless of how many DPs’ projects are being queried.
For users with unstable Internet connections, such a low connection speed and subsequent
delays are especially problematic. Adopting a simpler platform with enhanced report
production capabilities and/or a more modern server and server software will likely solve this
issue.



21
  Alternatively, MINEC could also include a clause in all bilateral agreements requiring data disclosure to DC,
a proposal that the assessment team mentioned twice to MINEC representatives.


                                                      17
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


58.     ODAmoz does not have an autosave function, causing many DPs to lose data. An
autosave functionality is a standard component of newer AIMS, allowing users to return to
partially entered projects without difficulty. This is particularly important for countries with
unstable Internet access.

59.     There is no auto-backup functionality. The MEF’s IT team created one backup of
the platform’s server; furthermore, the external hard drive is kept off-site for added
protection. Backups of server data are needed on a regular basis, however, and should be
saved in an easy-to-read format to prevent possible data loss.




                                              18
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


3. Recommendations
60.      A potential reorganization of aid data management to improve sustainability is
shown as a flow chart in Figure 2. Improved data collection procedures could solve
duplication issues and clarify institutional relationships. The demand for this data is already
high, as witnessed from the proliferation of ad hoc parallel data coordination mechanisms.
This flow chart addresses the complexities and overlaps of data collection, which was shown
in Figure 1. The vast majority of data collected by these systems is the same: each piece of
data is therefore supplied and recorded multiple times. A single, centralized repository for aid
data (that is, an AIMS), where all users enter data into one system and which then supplies
everyone with data, is likely to be more efficient. It would also deliver better quality data
with less effort:

             Data has to be entered only once, allowing for more comprehensive data entry.

             Stakeholders only need to learn and operate one system.

             Data links between DPs and the GoM are simpler and clearer, and data is
              requested only once.

             Lines of authority on aid data are clarified, strengthening incentives to complete
              data entry and leading to more consistent data sharing.

             Increased collaboration on data entry will help strengthen validation and
              verification, improving data quality.

61.     Consolidating systems into a single, centralized AIMS would require agreements
from stakeholders to streamline data collection currently done through other systems.
Figure 2shows the potential gains from a centralized AIMS, such as ODAmoz or a successor
platform. However, DPs would need to shift their current data management practices to focus
primarily on ODAmoz to both provide and retrieve data when needed.22 To function
effectively, a single AIMS would need to fulfill four key requirements:

             It has to collect the data everyone needs.

             It needs to share that data with everyone.

             It must be user-friendly.

             It relies on increased coordination with all stakeholders.

62.     The World Bank’s recommendations center on redesigning aid data
management and capturing aid data as an input into the planning and budgeting
process. This can best be done by closely aligning aid data management processes with the
Government’s budget. The AIMS and IFMIS should be integrated, or at least compatible, as
is currently being done in various ways in Liberia, Rwanda, and Somalia. For Mozambique,


22
  Alternatively, one of the other current systems could be chosen to be expanded. However, ODAmoz,
managed by the MEF, is likely to be a good choice as most of the current systems are designed to meet more
specific needs and are MS Excel-based, so they are difficult to extend to either many fields or users.


                                                     19
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


this would require basing ODAmoz—or its replacement—within CEDSIF and the MEF’s
existing budget data management mechanisms and processes.




                                          20
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


                                              Figure 2: Flowchart of Improved Data Management




                                                                    21
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


3.1. Solutions to Data Workflow and Collection
63.     Global experiences with AIMS provide a clear picture: the majority of AIMS
users want fairly simple and standardized aid data. They want to know who is doing
what, where, and when and how much it costs.23 Interviews with ODAmoz stakeholders, as
well as knowledge from aid data management experiences in other countries (particularly in
Somalia, where a similar assessment was recently undertaken by the World Bank), led the
assessment team to develop the following two categories: core fields that are needed by
multiple users and additional fields that are needed by only a few users. This is necessary
because the average time taken to enter a new project and update a project should be
minimized: approximately 20 minutes to enter a new project and 3 minutes to update a
project—the average estimated time it takes for AMP users. Shortening, and simplifying, data
entry will increase DP buy-in and voluntary compliance with data collection requests. Core
fields are likely to include the following:

                                       Table 1: Likely Core Data Fieldsa
                   ‘Core’ Data Needs                                           Relevant AIMS Fields
 Who        Who is providing funding?                             Funders
            Who is involved in implementation?                    Implementers
  What      What is the project name?                             Project title
            What is its objective?                                Project objectives/purpose
            Which sectors does it target?                         Sectors
                                                                  Share of project value by sector
  Where      Which projects are active in Mozambique?             Region
             Which projects target a specific region?             Share of project value by Region
  When       When will the project be implemented?                Start dateb
                                                                  End date
  How        What is the overall budget of the project?           Project value
  much       How much has been spent to date?                     Amount spent to date
             How much was spent last year?                        Amount expected to be spent next year
             How much is expected to be spent next year?  Project reporting currency
                                                                  Exchange rate to MZN/USD
  More       Where can I find out more information?               Document uploads or links
                                                                  Project contact details
Note: a. Linking aid projects to results and SDG reporting would increase the number of data fields.
b. For example, having project planned start date, approval date, effectiveness date, first disbursement date, and
actual start date complicates the data entry process, especially as the definitions for these fields vary
significantly between DPs. Given that use of this field is generally approximate (for example, just locating the
project within a year is generally sufficient), all fi ve fields can be replaced by a simple ‘start date’, for which
any of the above definitions can be used.

64.     To build confidence in the system, it is best to start with a minimal set of fields
and add more after the platform has been demonstrated to be working for several
years. Each additional field increases the effort required to enter the data and reduces the
chance of having a complete dataset. An AIMS such as ODAmoz should not overreach: it
will always be quicker and easier to consult existing contracts in government or donor offices
to obtain the most detailed level of project-specific data. Sector institutions are likely to ask
for additional, sector-specific fields; however, these requests should be rigorously evaluated
as to whether (a) they are needed by multiple users, (b) those users actually have a clear
business need for the field (such as an already running process), and (c) the data exists. Non-

23
  The assessment recorded very little interest in how well aid was being used, no doubt a function of the poor
quality and quantity of aid data currently being recorded.


                                                        22
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


mandatory fields could be added to assess specific data needs; however, this should be
limited to help keep data entry as simple as possible.24 Sectors that want to conduct additional
analysis with ODAmoz data can use downloaded spreadsheets that are expanded using
supplemental data from project documents.25

65.    Improving how fields are captured—and the appropriate structure of the
data/database to capture them—is critical for overcoming current data sharing gaps.
Fixing the database structure is vital to ensure that, by collecting the right data, ODAmoz can
then supply the right data. Three examples are cited:

              To be useful for the DNPO and line ministries, data needs to be coded according
               to the GoM’s CoA, where possible. This means that, for example, ODAmoz
               should use national sectors from the CoA to enable aid data to be easily inserted
               into the GoM processes alongside its financial data.26

              For the DNT to be able to use ODAmoz to track new loans and their
               expenditures, ODAmoz needs to allow multiple financing instruments for each
               project. This involves not just providing a total value for the project but one that
               is an aggregate of the values of the different financing instruments (as a single
               project may comprise both loan and grant financing). Each instrument also needs
               its own start and end dates for projects that are extended by adding new
               financing.

              For compatibility with some GoM systems, it may be useful to include project or
               instrument ID codes (that are shared between systems), as project names can
               vary; this would speed up the process of matching data between systems. An
               example would be PIM ID codes or CS-DRMS ID codes.

3.2. Solutions to Institutional and Coordination Issues
66.     DC needs to clarify the different roles and responsibilities it holds in relation to
ODAmoz. If ODAmoz remains hosted at INTIC, direct lines of communication need to be
established between INTIC and the MEF, ensuring that the platform is online, functioning,
and performing. INTIC must also be accountable for ODAmoz through a clear, formal
agreement between the MEF and MCTESTP. This agreement must clarify whether INTIC is
solely responsible for hosting or also responsible for administration. Alternatively, ODAmoz
could be hosted at CEDSIF—which also manages e-SISTAFE, hosted on commercial server
space rented and managed by DC (similar to existing websites)—or hosted and managed by a
private firm by outsourcing with a service level agreement.27 Suggestions on how to resolve
this institutional issue bleed into technological issues, given the importance of the platform
server; as such, more detailed recommendations for this issue can be found in the next
24
   Exceptions may be where a key data process requires a few core fields. For example, data collection on G-14
annual reporting of GBS and Pooled Fund commitments may be worthwhile to add as core fields.
25
   For example, if the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Ministry of
Agriculture wish to produce analysis on how aid is contributing to rice production, they could export a list of all
the projects in the agriculture sector from ODAmoz to MS Excel and then add additional fields specific to rice
projects with data from project documents. Users could view project documents uploaded into or linked to
ODAmoz and use the contact details to solicit more detailed project information.
26
   It should be noted that the OECD has recently created additional sector codes that make it easier to align aid
with budget sector codes.
27
   The level of Internet connectivity and uptime offered should be factored into this decision (such options are
detailed more in depth in the next subsection).


                                                        23
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


subsection. Nevertheless, it should be noted that hosting and management of ODAmoz within
CEDSIF would have the added benefit of ensuring coordination with e-SISTAFE.

67.    The ODAmoz Steering Committee should be relaunched to improve
communication and allow for feedback mechanisms among stakeholders. Based on the
assessment team’s experience with similar committees in other countries, DC could lead the
committee representing the GoM, with a DP co-chair that is ideally non-G-14 as a way of
promoting inclusiveness beyond the traditional DPs. The committee should meet quarterly
and involve all relevant stakeholders, including all DPs (G-14, UN agencies, and
nontraditional DPs); MEF national directorates; MINEC; key line ministries; and select
CSOs. Such a committee could institutionalize communication channels and ensure that
bottlenecks and other problems are identified and resolved swiftly.

68.    ODAmoz’s aid data collection mandate should be reinforced to address
fragmentation in the GoM’s relationship with DPs. DC should restart engagement with
DPs by updating and circulating the annual ODAmoz data collection and report production
calendars, as well as a flow chart outlining data entry responsibilities and actors. These
documents should also be available from the online ODAmoz portal itself. Mapping and
formalizing the GoM-DP relationships, and establishing the coordinating role of DC through
ODAmoz, could address this issue. Centralized coordination could also facilitate consistency
checks of data collected from the sectors, the DNPO, and ODAmoz.

69.      ODAmoz’s mandate should be expanded to include all DPs. ODAmoz was
initially designed to capture G-14 DPs and then later UN organizations, which also contribute
to budget support. Given the rising share of off-CUT aid from non-G-14 DPs, there is a
growing need to diversify the target users of ODAmoz beyond this original group.28 A key
step to demonstrate this inclusivity might be to remove the ‘ODA’ from ODAmoz and,
therefore, portray a greater openness to non-ODA, South-South coordination providers.
ODAmoz could also be expanded with additional features, useful for a wider range of DPs,
that support macro-forecasting, calculating the Balance of Payments, budget planning by line
ministries, and SWG coordination.

70.     DC could increase awareness of ODAmoz through strengthened
communications, such as e-mailing predefined ODAmoz reports on a monthly or
quarterly basis to a broader listserve. For example, all 22 sectoral groups should be sent
the relevant pre-made sector report each quarter. Similarly, each region should regularly be
sent the relevant report; this public dissemination should also incentivize DPs to improve
their reporting. Documents using ODAmoz data should quote ODAmoz as the source and
include a link, thus helping raise the profile of ODAmoz as an institution as well.

71.     DC should provide a phone and e-mail helpline service to answer queries that
are often straightforward but too specific to include in a user manual, such as on data
entry, field definitions, or data entry responsibilities. Many questions relate to definitions
or categories, such as whether to include a regional project, or how to classify a project
according to national sectors. User manuals are helpful but never comprehensive, and they
are best supplemented by support staff.


28
   There is broad consensus within both the government and DP communities, confirmed during the May
stakeholder workshop held at the World Bank Country Office, that ODAmoz should aim to capture all aid data,
not just that of the ‘traditional donors’.


                                                    24
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


72.     Relatedly, increased staffing within the MEF is needed to ensure effective aid
data management. Sufficient staff are needed for directing and managing the platform, as
well as relaunching regular trainings and providing timely troubleshooting. Ideally, the team
would have one staff member with full-time responsibility and then each other staff member
with part-time sector responsibility, or responsibility for a group of DPs, spending one day a
week checking and following up. Tanzania divvies up responsibilities over DPs among its
five full- and part-time AMP staff (as well as the four full- and part-time staff for Zanzibar).
This is the absolute minimum needed for effective aid data management in an aid dependent
country, but it is significantly more time than DC currently dedicates to aid data collection.29

73.     Outside of maintaining a technical platform, DC staff must build regular
routines around aid data management. This includes updating DP focal point lists,
contacting and following up with DPs for new data, understanding collection fields,
following the annual budget calendar, and maintaining a good filing system. Indeed, only a
fraction of the unit’s capacity focuses on a modern AIMS and IT system, and the main factors
of success are linked to organizational systems.

74.     Despite these technical issues, aid data management capacity still largely
depends on nontechnical incentives and workflow. One way of evaluating an agency’s
AIMS management capacity is whether the same management unit could collect the
necessary aid data in hard copy. 30 Thus, when DC stopped performing its basic aid data
collection and reporting functions when ODAmoz went offline, it suggests that DC’s
management capacity needs to be strengthened in addition to technical and IT solutions.

3.3. Solutions to Technical and IT Issues
75.     DC needs an interface in ODAmoz for nontechnical users to update data fields,
as the fields need to be changed regularly. The national CoA is typically adjusted every
year and, as ODAmoz becomes further integrated with the CoA, it should mirror these annual
changes. Millennium Development Goal (MDG) fields, which are currently hardcoded into
ODAmoz, should be replaced with the SDGs. Lastly, some fields that are not part of the main
project information should be editable—either added or removed—by DC staff without the
oversight of a programmer.

76.     ODAmoz needs additional pre-produced reports that respond to user needs.
ODAmoz currently has a limited number of reports, which are visible and easy to access on
the front page of the website without a login. Currently available pre-made reports include
DP and project profiles and lists of projects by location and sector; however, at least six more
templates are needed to respond to user needs:31

              A report for the budget planning process, which would likely require a list of
               project names and descriptions, by GoM sector and region, summing the value
               expected to be spent in the next three years (in MS Excel and PDF formats).

29
   In comparison, the comparable IFE data collection employs two full-time staff for just one single ministry.
30
   To be sure, addressing technical and data structure AIMS issues is also a priority. ODAmoz is significantly
more complicated and prone to error than other existing AIMS, such as DG’s AMPs, in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda. If ODAmoz cannot easily handle complex data
entry, DPs will not bother to enter data, rendering the database unreliable. Similarly, if ODAmoz is not widely
used by the GoM and DP actors, DPs will not see the point in devoting the necessary time for data entry.
31
   Based on the assessment team’s discussions with users, as well as knowledge of AIMS use elsewhere in the
region.


                                                       25
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


            Standard AIMS reports that give the instrument type, total value, DPs, and
            implementers are typically not very useful.

           A report of CoA-coded comma separated values (CSV) files (with a single row
            per transaction) for CEDSIF for import into e-SISTAFE.

           Sector-specific reports such as a report for the Ministry of Health with a list of
            projects and other data to replicate the IFE format.

           A report listing DPs and aggregating their projects while calculating the
            indicators used at PAP meetings, which would save DPs the time spent in
            preparing these before such meetings.

           Printable (and PDF) reports of province or sector summaries, which are often in
            demand by sector ministers and regional staff.

           A report listing all loans with funder, loan value, currency, loan ID code, and
            sum of disbursements to date, which are required for the DNT to validate loan
            data against the data in the CS-DRMS.

77.     Pre-produced reports need to be user-friendly. The existing maps option should be
able to show more than five projects at a time, which is necessary to view all projects active
in a given region on one page. Pre-made PDF reports should include a hyperlink to the source
so that users can check online for updated information. Report formatting is also problematic
and should be revised: pre-made report options should include filters, for example, by sector
or by project status; this is currently only available through personalized reports (Relatórios
Personalizados). Basic filters are a core feature of other AIMS, for example in Kenya’s
eProMIS, where report templates are easily available for download, including on donor
commitments broken down by budget projections, estimates, implementing ministry, and
source of funds.

78.     For those queries that are not covered by the pre-made reports, a general Excel
export is needed to allow users to do their own analysis. ODAmoz has this feature, but it is
not as user-friendly as it could be: definitions of all the fields are not readily accessible, it
requires a number of clicks to find the required data, and the export can be slow. ODAmoz
does not have a built-in graphing interface; however, users who wish to make custom charts
are more likely to do so in Excel to take advantage of the more advanced and flexible
features. Indeed, a built-in charting interface can never replicate this and so is typically an
unnecessary complication.

79.    There are three potential approaches—not including retaining the status quo—
available for the GoM to choose to address the broader platform issues. Each approach
has separate technical requirements. Table 2 highlights the various options (including
maintenance of the status quo) strengths and weaknesses; the following subsections detail the
options.




                                               26
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


                                                       Table 2: Advantages vs. Disadvantages of ODAmoz Options
Four key       Status quo - Embrace Multiple         Option 1: Consolidate Systems       Option 2: Reinstate ODAmoz as Sole           Option 3: Redesign Mozambique’s
requirements   Parallel Systems (Shut Down           and Incorporate ODAmoz-             Aid Data Collection System, with             AIMS, Preferably Housed within
/challenges    ODAmoz)                               Specific Features                   Improved Hosting, Some Technical Help,       CEDSIF
                                                                                         Minor Changes
Data           Mixed - Individual systems            Poor - Not possible to capture      Mixed - Can adjust existing fields (for      Good - Assuming provider can deliver
collection     collect data relevant to them, but    aid data structure needed for an    example, update ministries) but cannot       Mozambique’s requirements exactly (not
               no system collecting data             AIMS in one of the current          add or remove fields (for example, for       just provide a system designed for other
               relevant for DC (unless one is        Excel/paper-based systems;          better budget integration), so unlikely to   countries), then ODAmoz can collect all
               started in Excel - but likely to be   complexity leading to failure.      be sufficient for ODAmoz to become           data required and become dominant
               too simplistic to meet needs).                                            comprehensive and sustainable.               system.
Using and      Poor - Separate systems make          Poor - System not online,           Mixed - Online/public system, can            Good - Online/public system with all
sharing data   combining data difficult, not         likely Excel based, no pre-made     potentially program some more reports;       reports for all users and formatted
               online, no public access, no pre-     reports, less focus on data for     however, not all required reports            Excel/PDF export
               made reports.                         aid coordination.                   possible; no PDF export.
Usability/     Poor - Manual data entry into         Poor - Manual data entry using      Mixed - May be able to solve some            Good - Can incorporate all requirements
Design/        multiple systems likely leads to      Excel sheets resulting in           issues (for example, removing unused         (for example, checks on data entry, IATI
Technical      lack of data entry.                   complex compilation but works       fields) but not others (for example,         import, multiple reporters per project,
                                                     when time and capacity are          double counting, pooled projects,            pooled fund structure). Can also have
                                                     dedicated; not owned by DC.         multiple financing instruments,              automated backup, autosave, and maps
                                                                                         translation to national sectors).            with more than 5 projects and so on.
                                                                                         Reliability and speed may improve with
                                                                                         better hosting but no autosave, fixed
                                                                                         maps, and so on.
Coordination   Poor - Multiple systems, DC (or       Mixed - stronger link to a          Mixed - Single system with DC                Good - ODAmoz is the central system
               any organization) not in control.     process, but owned by               ownership; however, parallel systems         for all aid data needs and is directly
                                                     budget/line ministries, not DC.     still existing (as unable to adjust          linked to planning and budgeting
                                                                                         sufficiently to meet their needs), meaning   processes, resulting in greater use and
                                                                                         continued problems with sustainability.      buy-in. DC in control and in demand.
Estimated                      0                     Minimal costs                         USD 2,000–40,000, plus related costs                   USD 50,000–500,000
Costs                                                                                                 (hosting, licensing)




                                                                                        27
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Status Quo: Embrace Multiple Parallel Systems (Shut Down ODAmoz)
80.    The status quo means that ODAmoz is back up and running; however, many parallel data capture initiatives are still being
pursued in the sectors. Shutting down ODAmoz and embracing the sector-specific exercises would result in no additional training or funding;
furthermore, there are good incentives for each entity to ensure that their own systems are sustainable. If there were additional funding, this
could be used for a full-time DC staff to travel between DP offices, managing the different parallel systems to collect and share data. Such an
option would require the export of all historical data to Excel, as well as the making of backups and arrangement for the transfer to other
systems. However, even in the best-case scenario, all the disadvantages outlined above of duplicated entry and low access to data would remain.
As such, retaining the status quo is Not Recommendable.

                                           Table 3: Status Quo - Embrace Multiple Parallel Systems (Shut Down ODAmoz)
        Option              Estimated Cost          Developer Options            Licensing         Estimated        Hosting Options       DC Capacity
                                 (USD)                                                            Timeframe                               Requirement
 Retain the status quo   Zero (save for            Excel skills for DC to   None required    1 month to develop   None required       None for ODAmoz
 of multiple parallel    potential additional      maintain spreadsheets                     and test the                             but extensive to
 systems and shut        costs to DC for a full-   of projects                               spreadsheet                              manage the
 down ODAmoz             time staff to oversee                                                                                        spreadsheet that will
                         parallel systems)                                                                                            be needed instead




                                                                                    28
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Option 1: Consolidate Systems and Incorporate ODAmoz-Specific Features
81.     Option 1 would seek to find the most sustainable system that is nearest in scope to ODAmoz and augment it (for example, by
adding fields to the PAP Annual Reports to DNPO or to the sector-level exercises to capture all the ODAmoz fields). There would be
significant additional work to compile all the Excel sheets and share the data, and it is unclear how these would be rolled out either to non-PAP
DPs or to smaller sector ministries to ensure fuller coverage than at present. Again, however, as is the case for the status quo, all the
disadvantages outlined above of duplicated entry and low access to data would remain. This option is likewise Not Recommendable, given the
complexity inherent in compiling and managing the data.

                                       Table 4: Option 1 - Consolidate Systems and Incorporate ODAmoz-Specific Features
       Option             Estimated Cost         Developer Options           Licensing           Estimated             Hosting Options        DC Capacity
                              (USD)                                                              Timeframe                                    Requirement
 Consolidate systems   Minimal, but             Excel skills and        None required      One year to negotiate     None required       Little, as no system
 and incorporate       substantial time input   knowledge of aid                           and test integration of                       but much increased
 ODAmoz-specific                                management process                         former ODAmoz                                 workload to collect
 features into other                            required to lobby for                      fields into other                             data for DC work
 system(s)                                      and add fields from                        system(s) and                                 from other parts of
                                                ODAmoz to other                            process(es)                                   government
                                                system(s)




                                                                                29
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Option 2: Reinstate ODAmoz as the Sole Aid Data Collection System, with Improved Hosting, Some Technical Help, and/or
Minor Changes
82.    Option 2 could range from relatively economical to expensive and is similar to the approach tried with the previous upgrade
from ODAmoz 1.0 to ODAmoz 2.0. While this would likely lead to a substantial improvement (also through renewed effort), the failure to
tackle major issues suggests this would be another short- to medium-term fix, likely working for a few years to a decade and then requiring
another massive intervention after the platform becomes obsolete. For example, ODAmoz would likely still be unable to supply data to the
budget process and therefore parallel systems would continue. Furthermore, the database would still not accept multidonor projects, leading to
double counting. This is Not Recommended: it is not capable of addressing the systemic challenges flagged above nor would it lead to
improvements in data comprehensiveness, a problem that has limited use of this data in the past.

Technical Options

83.    Continuing the ODAmoz platform would not incur any costs, although it is unclear if there is a way around the annual license fee
for the system. The VMware license would likely still be needed and it would remain hosted at INTIC with the same connection and speed.
There would not be an increase in technical capacity to make adjustments. With this solution, ODAmoz would be up and running the majority of
the time, as was the case over the last 10 years.

84.     There are several options to improve the hosting under these approaches. First, if ODAmoz had its own server, VMware (and
license) would not be needed. Alternatively, INTIC could use a free hypervisor (for example, Xen) or virtualization solution on Windows
(VMware Player). Finally, ODAmoz could be run on Windows Server with the right installed components and some assistance. These options
could take place at INTIC, CEDSIF, elsewhere in the MEF, or a commercial supplier and would take perhaps a month to transfer to the new
installation.32 The primary consideration would be the technical capacity of the host, Internet connection, and, if commercial, cost.33 Specific
arrangements between DC and INTIC on hosting and management would need to be clarified, for example, as it relates to INTIC staff time and
the clear delineation of roles.



32
   ODAmoz does not require a complex server. DG’s Technical Manual states that ODAmoz requires 2GB of RA M, 1 processor, and a 20 GB hard disk. This is less than the
specifications of an average laptop and should cost less than USD 750; even if the specifications were doubled, it should only cost up to USD 1,500, including a small UPS
and dual hard drives, power supply, and so on.
33
   A local commercial company with a Service-Level Agreement, or a commercial host abroad, administered by the MEF. A commercial Platform As A Service (PAAS)
would have the advantage of outsourcing all the server maintenance and security arrangements to the provider; the cost should be under USD 2,400 a year.


                                                                                    30
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


85.     None of the options above, however, solve the issue of technical capacity to administer ODAmoz. Hiring technical help, such as
fixing the incorrect sectors and ministries, and overseeing the server transfer, would be a simple solution. Indeed, there are more than sufficient
local developers with the Ruby/Linux experience required, although some minor technical support may be needed to oversee and guide the
programmers.

86.    The cost of implementing minor modifications to ODAmoz—such as autosave of data entry, removing unused fields, and
programming a budget export report with CoA codes—could be significant improvements for a low price. Local programmers would be
far more affordable; however, as the code for ODAmoz is owned by DG, the GoM may not have the right to modify it and would require
permission from DG to employ local developers. Alternatively, DG might insist on doing the work themselves, which would significantly
increase the expense incurred. To avoid another round of changes that do not solve the issues, technical assistance would again be required to
hire and guide the developers. The experience of the previous upgrade, as well as of similar situations elsewhere in the region, is that nonlocal
developers are unable to provide the technical assistance needed.

       Table 5: Option 2 - Reinstate ODAmoz as the Sole Aid Data Collection System, with Improved Hosting, Some Technical Help, and/or Minor Changes
       Option             Estimated Cost        Developer Options          Licensing                Estimated            Hosting Options             DC Capacity
                              (USD)                                                                Timeframe                                         Requirement
Improved hosting -    2,000 if a new server    None required         License for ODAmoz       1 month to reinstall     Clearer understanding    DC has insufficient
INTIC                 is needed; VMware                              from DG. Also            ODAmoz without           of roles, for example,   capacity for system
                      and DG license too, if                         requires VMware          using VMware, add        whose responsibility     administration
                      required                                       license, unless it is    one week if need to      paying for the           (requires Postgre-SQL
                                                                     moved to its own         procure dedicated        VMware license was       and Ruby); this needs
                                                                     server and stops using   server.                  so that last year’s      to be transferred to
                                                                     VMware.a                                          problem is not           the hosting
                                                                                                                       repeated and license     organization. Unclear
                                                                                                                       cost budgeted for.       whether INTIC has
                                                                                                                                                (and can retain) these
                                                                                                                                                skills.
Improved hosting -    2,000 if a new server    None required, save   Commercial. Also         2 months to arrange, 1   CESDIF                   CEDSIF staff have
CEDSIF                is needed; VMware        for CEDSIF’s staff    requires VMware          month to set up                                   the skills to manage
                      and DG license too, if   time                  license, unless it is                                                      the server and app
                      required                                       moved to its own                                                           (Ubuntu, Postgres,
                                                                     server and stops using                                                     Rails), but not the
                                                                     VMware                                                                     ability to edit
                                                                                                                                                PostgreSQL to add
                                                                                                                                                new modalities




                                                                              31
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


       Option              Estimated Cost       Developer Options             Licensing                 Estimated            Hosting Options              DC Capacity
                                (USD)                                                                  Timeframe                                          Requirement
Improved hosting -      5,000 for a server,    None required,           None required            3 months for transfer -   MEF IT. On a              As above, unclear if
MEF IT (dependent       UPS, and so on if      assuming staff time      (installation of         about 3 days’ work        dedicated server (note    the MEF IT has the
on having a server      hosted in the MEF      covered                  Windows license)         and several days for      that the requirements     capacity to manage it
room)                                                                                            training                  are only 2 GB of          (as ODAmoz is a
                                                                                                                           RAM)                      website, and they
                                                                                                                                                     manage other
                                                                                                                                                     websites, this seems
                                                                                                                                                     possible) or the ability
                                                                                                                                                     to edit PostgreSQL to
                                                                                                                                                     add new modalities
Improved hosting -      5,000 for a server,    Reliance upon the        None required            3 months for transfer -   On a dedicated server     Unclear if DC would
MEF DC (dependent       UPS, and so on if      MEF IT or                (installation of         about 3 days’ work        (note that the            rely on the MEF IT
on having a server      hosted in the MEF      contracting of local     Windows license)         and several days for      requirements are only     and if they have the
room)                                          developers                                        training                  2 GB of RAM)              capacity or hire
                                                                                                                                                     contractors.
Improved hosting -      150–250 per month to   None required,           None required            3 months for transfer -   Significant benefits of   MEF/INTIC/CEDSIF
Commercial (arranged    hosting company        assuming staff time      (installation of         about 3 days’ work        simplification by         would still need to
locally)                                       covered                  Windows license)         and several days for      using a Rails PAASb       conduct the
                                                                                                 training                                            administration, unless
                                                                                                                                                     that was also
                                                                                                                                                     outsourced.
Some technical help -   1,000 for local        Local developers with    No additional costs as   1 month to agree to       Not applicable -          Requires capacity to
additional to the       developers, 5,000      Ruby/Linux               not modifying the        changes, implement,       although could            guide changes;
above options to fix    (and up) for           experience               code but changing        and test                  probably assist with      would need technical
the broken reports,     international                                   options following the                              the new hosting           knowledge to hire and
incorrect sectors,      developersc -                                   technical manual                                                             guide developers
ministries, and so on   maximum of 5 days’
                        work
Minor modifications -   From 5,000 for local   Local to international   DG may not allow         6 months to specify,      Not applicable -          Requires capacity to
low-hanging fruit:      developers to 40,000                            modifications to         agree, implement, and     although could            guide the changes;
autosave of data        for OECD developers                             source code or may       test changes              probably assist with      would need technical
entry, removing         (depending on who                               insist on doing (and                               the new hosting           knowledge to hire and
unused fields,          owns the Source                                 billing) the work                                                            guide developers
programming budget      Code)                                           themselves
export report with
CoA codes



                                                                                  32
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Note: a. VMware is a ‘type 1 hypervisor’, a program installed on a hardware server that divides it into several small servers that share resources. INTIC is using one hardware
server to run several platforms in addition to ODAmoz. If ODAmoz had its own server, then it could be installed directly and would not need a VMware license.
b. The provider takes care of all the server and operating system maintenance and security, leaving the user to maintain the application.
c. Rough estimates are USD 100 per day for local or non-OECD freelance developers, USD 250 per day for local or non-OECD company, USD 500 per day for OECD
freelancers, USD 750–1,000 per day for DG or similar OECD company.




                                                                                      33
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


Option 3: Redesign Mozambique’s AIMS, Preferably Housed within CEDSIF
87.     To fully resolve the functional issues identified in this assessment, ODAmoz needs significant changes and/or a newly designed
platform. This last option would likely take the longest—perhaps a year, excluding procurement—but it has the potential to be the most
efficient, sustainable, and—in the long run—cheapest. Weighing the potential pros and cons, this report identifies a redesign of Mozambique’s
AIMS as the Recommended Option. Alternately, ODAmoz could be revised to adopt the major modifications outlined above (for example,
those requiring changes to the data structure), as well as a comprehensive approach to smaller changes. This would take a minimum of six
months and DG would still presumably own the source code, so permission would need to be sought (and paid for).

88.     The final two choices, both variants of Option 3, involve procuring—or developing—a new AIMS; most importantly, this new
platform should be housed within CEDSIF. This would directly address the current disconnect between aid data supply and demand: as is, the
processes responsible for capturing aid data are separate from those responsible for using aid data in the national planning and budgeting
process. Ensuring that an AIMS is housed within CEDSIF, the same institution managing e-SISTAFE, would facilitate the process of better
integrating aid data management into budget data management. One option could even be the development of an aid data module within e-
SISTAFE.

89.     The first possibility would be to procure a commercially pre-made AIMS. The choices are AIMS from DG, Synergy, or Catalpa, the
three major industry providers. All three have high up-front costs, monthly/annual fees, and international support requiring missions to meet face
to face (totaling USD 250,000–500,000). All three would own rights to the code, although Catalpa does make some core code available under an
open source license. It would be expected to take from six months to a year for negotiation and installation, the arrangement of which differs
between providers DG (GoM hosted) and Synergy and Catalpa (they host). These pre-made AIMS are complex and arguably better suited to
higher capacity contexts. Importantly, none are sufficiently modifiable to meet Mozambique’s specific needs and would require crosswalks for
the aid data to be compatible with budget data.

90.     The second possibility would be to procure a customized, commercial AIMS, designed and built by a commercial company to
Mozambique’s needs. It might cost USD 100,000–400,000 and take approximately a year to produce, depending on the company and the
system complexity. Djibouti and Bangladesh recently procured AIMS in this way, both with fairly high degrees of success.34 The GoM would
own the code and the rights to modify it (including with local developers) and could choose to host it either in-house or with a service provider.
It could be built to fit the GoM hosting capacity and, most importantly, could be specifically designed to integrate seamlessly with e-SISTAFE.

34
  Myanmar did as well, with an open-source AIMS. The benefit of open-source software, in which the license specifies that anybody can use it without restriction, is that all
the contributors benefit from the improvements made by the other users. The project could incorporate several already existing open-source components, such as
Bangladesh’s IATI-import module, and if one firm made a geomapping module, it would instantly be made available to all, ready to be customized for each country’s AIMS.


                                                                                     34
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


The capacity to design and specify an AIMS would require significant technical assistance support, including hiring and managing the
developers and provide feedback during the process.

91.     Either possibility would require a rapid data assessment and wireframe to map out the exact steps needed to take in development
of a new AIMS directly linked to e-SISTAFE. Such a study, feasible in one or two months, would determine the exact needs of the client in
terms of final data fields, user ability, auto-generated reports, and interface, for inclusion in the vendor ToR. It would also set forth the processes
needed to collect aid data from DPs, push that data into e-SISTAFE, and pull all donor project data from e-SISTAFE as well; this last step would
allow for public access to data on all aid flows in one place, be it on- or off-budget and -CUT. This study will also inform whether a commercial
off-the-shelf or customized system is preferable.

                                        Table 6: Option 3 - Redesign Mozambique’s AIMS, Preferably Housed within CEDSIF
       Option              Estimated Cost          Developer Options             Licensing               Estimated              Hosting Options           DC Capacity
                                (USD)                                                                    Timeframe                                        Requirement
Big modifications -     From 50,000 for local     Local to international   Unclear who owns               6 months            n.a.                   Requires capacity to
Multiple donors per     freelancers (plus                                  the source code. If it                                                    guide the changes; this
project, multiple       some technical                                     is DG, they may not                                                       would require technical
funding sources per     assistance for                                     allow modifications                                                       assistance (also to
project,                guidance) to 200,000                               (or insist on                                                             manage the
comprehensive           for DG                                             undertaking the                                                           developers).
reporting, working                                                         work)
budget integration,
and so on.
Commercial off-the-     300,000–500,000 for       DG, Synergy, Catalpa     The companies own        9 months to 1 year        DG (GoM hosted),       Negotiation and site
shelf AIMS - Pre-       DG and Synergy.           (none of which allow     all the rights to the    for negotiation and       Synergy and Catalpa    administration, as these
made AIMS based on      Catalpa is free for the   for modifications to     code (although           installation; longer if   (they host)            sites are complex
UNDP long-term          basic version but         meet specific needs)     Catalpa does make        adjustments are
agreement               250,000 for the                                    some core code           needed
                        professional version.                              available but needs
                        All require                                        investigating on the
                        monthly/annual fees                                license)
                        and support.
Commercial Custom       100,000–400,000,          OECD international,      None - The GoM                   1 year            GoM hosting, either    Capacity to design and
AIMS - An AIMS          depending on the          non-OECD                 would own all the                                  in-house (preferably   specify AIMS -
designed and built by   company and               international, local,    code and the rights.                               CEDSIF) or with a      Requires significant
a company to            complexity of the         combinations, open-                                                         commercial service     aid management
Mozambique’s needs      system                    source                                                                      provider               technical assistance



                                                                                      35
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


4. Next Steps
92.     With ODAmoz back online as of mid-2016, the GoM has demonstrated its
commitment to effective aid data coordination and streamlining data collection across
the GoM MDAs and DPs. Yet, despite these efforts, ODAmoz will continue to be
challenged by significant shortcomings in its structure, capabilities, and usability. The
assessment team and all consulted stakeholders strongly recommend that this report, and its
recommendations, be reviewed and discussed as part of the ongoing GoM-DP collaboration.
Once the GoM has decided on a preferred option to manage ODAmoz systems, all
stakeholders should commit to supporting and contributing to the GoM’s approach for
strengthening aid data coordination.

93.    Regardless of the decision on how to proceed on the technical options for
ODAmoz, a number of core constraints should be addressed within DC. These issues are
concentrated in three priority areas:

           Strengthening ODAmoz staffing - All of the proposed solutions for improving
            ODAmoz result in a significant workload for DC. DC should support this
            process by allocating sufficient staff for directing and managing the platform and
            clearly specifying the roles and mandates of part-time staff engaged in
            coordination activities.

           Improving communication - ODAmoz remains challenged by the lack of
            awareness of its functions and mandate. DC can build on existing DP
            coordination mechanisms and collaborate with line ministry staff to ensure that
            all DPs submit accurate data through the current system.

           Reinforcing ODAmoz’s data collection mandate - Following the brief shutdown
            of ODAmoz, DC should restart engagement with DPs by updating and
            circulating the annual ODAmoz data collection and report production calendars,
            as well as a flow chart outlining data entry responsibilities and actors. These
            documents should also be available from the online ODAmoz portal itself.

94.      Regardless of the option chosen, DC should ensure that any new platform be
housed within CEDSIF and integrated to the greatest extent possible into e-SISTAFE.
International experience has shown that for an investment in aid data management to be
worthwhile, the resulting data needs to be utilized; the primary clients for such data are the
institutions responsible for the national planning and budgeting process. The main lesson
learned from this assessment is that to be useful to government and worth the investment in
limited resources, aid data must use national budget classification categories and must be
readily integrated into the national planning and budgeting process.

95.     Given the pros and cons of the three existing options, as well as their various
iterations, the assessment team recommends the following next steps to be taken with
the MEF:

           Convene the relevant stakeholders—MEF, World Bank, and UNDP, but also
            CEDSIF, INTIC, MINEC, Belgian Technical Cooperation (BTC), and others—to
            discuss the costs and benefits of the three possible solutions.




                                             36
Aid Data Management Assessment - Mozambique


          The MEF, in conjunction with other relevant government actors, determines
           which solution best suits the needs of the GoM.

          The World Bank, MEF, and UNDP strategize the way forward and draft terms of
           reference for work, ensuring that all interventions complement existing and
           pipeline World Bank activities around budget and debt reform, as well as
           enhance the public investment management system.




                                          37
