Linking Up: Public-Private
    Partnerships in Power
    Transmission in Africa
Linking Up:
Public-Private
Partnerships
in Power
Transmission
in Africa
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 1818 H Street NW Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000—Website: www.worldbank.org

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of the authors and should not be
attributed in any manner to the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) or to The World Bank Group, to its
affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
 
Neither PPIAF nor The World Bank Group guarantees the accuracy of the data included in this publication or accepts
responsibility for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any
map in this report do not imply on the part of PPIAF or The World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. For questions about this publication or information about
ordering more copies, please refer to the PPP Knowledge Lab.
 
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its knowledge,
this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes, as long as full attribution to this work is
given. Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The
World Bank Group, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: +1-202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Contents

vii	   Acronyms and Abbreviations

xi	Acknowledgments

xiii	Foreword

xv	    Executive Summary

1	     Section 1: Introduction

5	              inancing Power Transmission: Challenges
       Part A: F
               and Opportunities
6	     Section 2: A   frica Needs Transmission Investment
                     and New Approaches to Financing and Delivering It
6	     2.1  Access to Electricity Is Low in Africa
7	     2.2  Increasing Access and Consumption Will Require a Major Expansion of Supply
8	     2.3  Transmission Is Needed to Tie the Electricity System Together
12	    2.4  New Approaches to Finance and Delivery of Transmission Are Needed

15	    Section 3: P   rivate Finance of Transmission Has Worked
                     Well Internationally
16	    3.1  Model 1: Privatizations
18	    3.2  Model 2: Whole-of-Grid Concessions
18	    3.3  Model 3: Independent Power Transmission
19	    3.4  Model 4: Merchant Investments
20	    3.5  Interconnection Projects Can Also Use Some of These Models

25	    Section 4: A  frica Has Little Privately Financed Transmission,
                    but Substantial Private Investment in Generation
25	    4.1  There Has Been Little Private Investment in Transmission
30	    4.2 This Contrasts with Africa’s Success in Attracting Private Investment
            in Generation

33	    Section 5: I    ndependent Power Transmissions Are the Most Broadly
                      Applicable Business Model for Increasing Privately
                      Financed Transmission in Africa
33	    5.1  Applicability of the Model to All Types of Transmission Investment in Africa
35	    5.2  Ability of the Model to Achieve Economies of Scale in African Transmission


                                                                                           iii
iv   Contents




                35	    5.3 Competitive Pressure on Private Providers of Transmission in Africa
                            under the Model
                36	    5.4  Requirements for Investor Confidence in Network Regulation in Africa
                37	    5.5  Consistency of the Model with Directions in Power Sector Reform
                37	    5.6 Extent to Which the Model Can Be Tested While African Governments
                            Maintain Existing Models
                38	    5.7  Evidence That the Model Has Worked Well in Other Low-income Countries

                            How to Scale-up Private Investment
                41	 Part B: 
                            in Transmission in Africa
                42	    Section 6: Steps to Realize the Potential of IPTs for Africa
                42	    6.1	 Develop Policies That Support IPTs
                44	    6.2	 Develop the Legal and Regulatory Frameworks to Support IPTs
                44	    6.3	 Conduct Trials of IPTs Alongside Existing Business Models for Transmission
                45	    6.4	 Introduce New Models for Concessional Lending
                47	    6.5	 Decide the Stage at Which to Tender Transmission Projects
                48	    6.6	 Determine Payments to IPTs Based on Transmission Availability
                49	    6.7	 Ensure Adequate Revenue Flow and Credit Enhancement for Projects
                53	    6.8	 Tailor IPT Projects to Attract International Investors
                53	    6.9	 Prepare to Implement IPT Transactions
                55	    6.10	 Run Competitive Tenders for IPTs
                57	    6.11	 Next Steps

                57	    Section 7:    Toolkit to Introduce Independent Power
                                      Transmission Tenders
                59	    7.1  Validate the Project
                60	    7.2  Evaluate the Suitability for Private Finance
                61	    7.3  Select the Team and Tender Type
                63	    7.4  Prepare the Preliminary Works
                64	    7.5  Design the Transaction
                71	    7.6  Run the Tender

                75	    Appendix A. Case Studies

                93	                 ipeline of IPT Projects in Kenya and the Southern
                       Appendix B. P
                                   African Power Pool

                101	   List of References
                                                                                                   Contents      v



Tables
2.1	    11	   Sample of Ketraco’s planned               6.4	    50	 Comparison of electric supply costs with
              transmission lines                                    cash collected in 2014 (US$/kWh billed)
3.1	    16	 Business models for private investment      6.5	    52	 Financing structure of Azura IPP
            in transmission                                         (Nigeria)
4.1	    26	 Examples of concessions and                 7.1	    58	 Summary of the process
            affermages in Africa                        7.2	    62	 Responsibilities under early-stage
5.1	    34	 Performance of the business models                      tenders and late-stage tenders
            against assessment criteria                 A.1	    76	 Brazil’s power sector main institutions
5.2	    39	 Information of winning bids for             A.2	    78	 Successful and unsuccessful tenders
            transmission lines in Peru (1998–2013)                  (2005–2015)
7.1	    65	 Risk matrix                                 B.1	    95	 Evolution of transmission lines, by
7.2	    66	 Main risks of an IPT project                            voltage (2009–2015)
7.3	    67	 Summary of key provisions to include        B.2	    97	 The SAPP Grid
            in the TSA and associated agreements
7.4	    69	 PPP structures for IPT contracts
                                                        Boxes
A.1	    89	 Transmission lines by region, 2011–2015
            (ct km)                                     2.1	    13	   Funding gap in transmission sector
                                                                      in Kenya
B .1	   96	 Members of SAPP
                                                        3.1	    19	 Summary of outcomes of IPTs
B.2	    99	 Pipeline of potential IPT projects                      internationally
            in Kenya
                                                        4.1	    28	 The only attempt in Africa to tender
B.3	    99	 Pipeline of potential IPT projects                      for IPTs
            in SAPP
                                                        5.1	    36	 IPTs can reduce whole-of-life costs
                                                        5.2	    37	 Merchant transmission faces risks from
Figures                                                             open access, regulated networks
2.1	    7	    Access to electricity and electricity     5.3	    38	 IPTs can bring in new sources of finance
              consumption (percentage of population;    6.1	    43	 Introducing onshore transmission
              kWh per person per year)                              tenders in the United Kingdom
2.2	    8	    Installed capacity (MW per million        6.2	    45	 Peru passed new legislation to maintain
              people)                                               investor interest in transmission
2.3	    9	    Transmission lines per capita (km         6.3	    46	 Developing regulations suitable for IPTs
              transmission lines per million people)
                                                        6.4	    46	 Privately financed transmission in
2.4	    10	 Major potential generation and                          India has been growing
            transmission projects in Africa
                                                        6.5	    47	 Example of concessional lending to IPP
2.5	    11	   Map of Nigeria’s transmission system,
              showing transmission lines being          6.6	    50	 Most African utilities do not collect
              developed and proposed                                enough cash to cover costs
3.1	    21	 Basslink transmission line route            6.7	    51	 The use of escrow accounts to attract
                                                                    IPP investments
3.2	    22	 The SIEPAC interconnection
                                                        6.8	    51	 The role of guarantees in ensuring the
4.1	    27	 Length of transmission and distribution                 Azura IPP (Nigeria) was bankable
            lines in Cameroon (km), 2001–2010
                                                        6.9	    54	 Tariff for IPT contracts in Peru
4.2	    29	 Route of the Cahora Bassa
            interconnection line                        6.10	   55	 The role of government-owned bidders
4.3	    31	   IPPs by year of financial close: Africa   7.1	    61	 Definition of different committees
              (excluding South Africa), 1994–2014       7.2	    62	 Early-stage tenders and late-stage tenders
6.1	    45	 Investments in transmission                 7.3	    70	 One-stage and two-stage tender process
            in Peru (1991–2000)
                                                        7.4	    73	 Contract management
6.2	    46	 Evolution of new transmission lines
            in India, 1985–2017 (ct km of new           B.1	    94	 Main companies in Kenya’s power sector
            transmission lines)                         B.2	    98	 SAPP’s experience shows how regional
6.3	    48	 Responsibilities under late-stage                       power pools can assist transmission
            tenders and early-stage tenders                         planning
Acronyms and Abbreviations

ANEEL	   Agência Nacional de Energia Elétrica
AR	      Annual Revenue
AVI	     Anualidad del Valor de la Inversión
BIA	     Bureau of Indian Affairs
BNDES	   Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social
BOO	     Build, Own, and Operate
BOOT	    Build, Own, Operate, and Transfer
BPC	     Bidding Process Coordinator
CCEE	    Cámara de Comercialização de Energia Elétrica
CDEC	    Centro de Despacho Económico de Carga
CEA	     Central Electricity Authority
CEC	     Copperbelt Energy Corporation
CERC	    Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
CIE	     Compagnie Ivoirienne d’Électricité
CISEN	   Coordinador Independiente del Sistema Eléctrico Nacional
CNE	     Comisión Nacional de Energía
CNPE	    Conselho Nacional de Política Energética
COD	     Commercial Operation Date
COMA	    Costos de Operación, Mantenimiento y Administración
Ct km	   Circuit Kilometer
CTEEP	   Companhia de Transmissâo de Energia Elétrica Paulista
CTM	     Consorcio Transmantario
CTU	     Central Transmission Utility
DAM	     Day Ahead Market
DFI	     Development Finance Institution
DIC	     Designated Inter-State Customer
DoE	     Department of Energy
DRC	     Democratic Republic of the Congo
EAE	     Strategic Environmental Evaluation
EC	      Empowered Committee
EDF	     Électricité de France
EDM	     Electricidade de Moçambique; Électricité du Mali
EIS	     Environmental Impact Statement
EPC	     Engineering, Procurement, and Construction
EPE	     Empresa de Pesquisa Energética
EPIRA	   Electric Power Industry Reform Act
ERC	     Energy Regulatory Commission                               vii
viii   Acronyms and Abbreviations




                     ESIA	    Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                     ESKOM 	  South African electricity supply company
                     FERC	    Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
                     GDC	     Geothermal Development Company
                     GDP	     Gross Domestic Product
                     GW	Gigawatt
                     HCB	     Hidroéletrica de Cahora Bassa
                     HV	      High Voltage
                     HVAC	    High Voltage Alternating Current
                     HVDC	    High Voltage Direct Current
                     IFC	     International Finance Corporation
                     IPP	     Independent Power Producer
                     IPS	     Industrial Promotion Services
                     IPT	     Independent Power Transmission
                     JV	      Joint Venture
                     Ketraco	 Kenya Electricity Transmission Company
                     km	kilometer(s)
                     KPI	     Key Performance Indicator
                     KPLC	    Kenya Power and Lighting Company
                     kV	Kilovolt
                     kWh	Kilowatt-hour
                     LCE	     Ley de Concessiones Eléctricas
                     LCPDP	   Least Cost Power Development Plan
                     LGE	     Ley para Asegurar el Desarrollo Eficiente de la Generación Eléctrica
                     LGSE	    Ley General de Servicios Eléctricos
                     LTI	     Law of Transmission and Interconnection
                     LTTC	    Long Term Transmission Customer
                     LV	      Low Voltage
                     MAR	     Maximum Annual Revenue
                     MEM	     Ministry of Energy and Mining
                     MHI	     Manitoba Hydro International
                     MIGA	    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
                     MME	     Ministry of Mines and Energy
                     MoP	     Ministry of Power
                     MV	      Medium Voltage
                     MVA	     Mega-volt Ampere
                     MW	Megawatt
                     MWh	Megawatt-hour
                     NBET	    Nigerian Bulk Electricity Trader
                     NEM	     National Electricity Market
                     NEP	     National Electricity Plan
                     NGCP	    National Grid Corporation of the Philippines
                     NPC	     National Power Corporation
                     NTP	     National Tariff Policy
                     ODA	     Official Development Assistance
                     OECD	    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
                     Ofgem	   Office of Gas and Electricity Markets
                     O&M	     Operations and Maintenance
                     ONS	     Operator of the National Electricity System
                                                               ﻿ Acronyms and Abbreviations   ix


PCOA	      Put-Call Option Agreement
PEMC	      Philippines Electricity Market Corporation
PGCIL	     Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd
PhP	       Philippine Peso
PIDA	      Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa
PIS	       Performance Incentive Scheme
PPA	       Power Purchase Agreement
PPP	       Public Private Partnership
PRG	       Partial Risk Guarantee
PRI	       Political Risk Insurance
PSA	       Power Supply Agreement
PSALM	     Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Management Corporation
PSP	       Private Sector Participation
RAPP	      Rajasthan Atomic Power Project
REP	       Red de Energía del Peru
RFP	       Request for Proposal
RFQ	       Request for Qualification
ROW	       Right of Way
RTE	       Réseau de Transport d’Electricité
RTO	       Regional Transmission Organization
RTWR	      Rules for Setting Transmission Wheeling Rates
SAPP	      Southern Africa Power Pool
SEB	       State Electricity Board
SEEG	      Société d’Énergie et d’Eau du Gabon
SEIN	      Sistema Eléctrico Interconectado Nacional
SENELEC	   Société National d’Éléctricité du Sénégal
SERC	      State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
SGT	       Sistema Garantizado de Transmision
SIC	       Sistema Interconectado Central
SING	      Sistema Interconectado del Norte Grande
SONEL	     Société Nacionale d’Électricité
SPV	       Special Purpose Vehicle
SSE	       Scottish and Southern Electricity
STE	       Sociedade Nacional de Transporte de Energia
STU	       State Transmission Utility
TBCB	      Tariff-based Competitive Bidding
TCN	       Transmission Company of Nigeria
TDP	       Transmission Development Plan
TSA	       Transmission Service Agreement
TSO	       Transmission System Operator
TSP	       Transmission Service Provider
VATT	      Valor Anual de Transmisión por Tramo
VfM	       Value for Money
VGF	       Viability Gap Funding
WACC	      Weighted Average Cost of Capital
WESM	      Wholesale Electricity Spot Market
ZESCO	     Zambia Electricity Utility
                                                                                             ﻿




Acknowledgments

This study was authored by a team comprising Rahul Kitchlu (Senior Energy Specialist),
Samuel Oguah (Energy Specialist), Emma Grubbstrom (consultant) and John Rennie (con-
sultant) at the World Bank; Jamie Carstairs, Lucila Arboleya, and David Ehrhardt at Castalia
Ltd.; and Ramón Nadira from Lummus Consultants International. The work was carried
out under the guidance of Lucio Monari, Sudeshna Banerjee, Charles Cormier, and Wendy
Hughes.
    Substantive inputs were provided by the speakers at workshops hosted in September
2016 in Nairobi and Abuja, including Pedro Antmann, Pedro Sanchez, Burra Vamsi Rama
Mohan (Deputy General Manager, Power Grid Corp of India), Rafael Ferreira (PSR), and Ajay
Bhardwaj (Sterlite Power).
    The team also engaged with many individuals who have enriched the content and rigor
of this report. We are grateful to the numerous public stakeholders and private investors,
including public utilities, regulators, and transmission companies, who provided invaluable
insights.
    The team is grateful to colleagues in the Global Energy and Extractives Practice, who
contributed insights and recommendations concerning their countries and areas of exper-
tise including the Communications team comprised of Susan Pleming, Anita Rozowska and
Aarthi Sivaraman. The team benefited from discussions with Sudeshna Banerjee, Manuel
Sanchez, Mariano Salto, Kyran O’Sullivan and Muhammad Wakil. The team also benefited
greatly from colleagues across the Bank Group including Robert Schlotterer and Arnaud
Braud in the Financial Solutions group, Anabelle Libeau in MIGA, Xavier Muron and Celine
Payet in PPIAF.
    The team wishes to thank peer reviewers Victor Loksha, Efstratos Tavoulareas, and Pedro
Sanchez who provided valuable comments and constructive insights at various stages of this
work, including all the participants in the Decision Meeting, chaired by Thomas O’Brien.
Highly valued comments have also been provided by Kwawu Mensan Gaba, Teuta Kacaniku
and the country management units (CMUs) for the finalizing of this report.
    Funding for this publication was provided by PPIAF. PPIAF, a multi-donor trust fund
housed in the World Bank Group, provides technical assistance to governments in develop-
ing countries. PPIAF’s main goal is to create enabling environments through high-impact
partnerships that facilitate private investment in infrastructure. For more information, visit
www.ppiaf.org




                                                                                                 xi
                                                                                                ﻿




Foreword

Africa lags other regions in access to electricity: two in three Africans, or about 600 million
people, do not have access to electricity. This is a major drag on growth. Without electricity,
health clinics struggle to provide basic services, children are unable to get a proper edu-
cation, and businesses cannot grow and thrive in today’s global economy. When there is
electricity, the quality of supply is often poor. A majority of countries in the subcontinent are
still experiencing power shortages. If we do not address the underlying reasons preventing
Africans from achieving wider access to reliable and affordable electricity, economic growth
on the continent will remain slow, keeping millions trapped in poverty.
    A primary cause of the poor quality of supply and low electrification rates lies with weak
power networks. Addressing these challenges will require new approaches to development
financing; there is a disproportionately large funding gap affecting Sub-Saharan Africa’s
power sectors which cannot be met by the limited public finances of client countries alone.
Scaling up private participation along the energy value chain is necessary. To move the nee-
dle significantly in the energy sector, we need to help countries attract sufficient levels of
investment.
    Although African governments strive to foster private sector participation, this will not
materialize without deliberate action. Governments demand investments that serve the
public interest and support poverty reduction and growth targets but private capital will
flow where rewards demonstrably outweigh risks.
    Africa is blessed with huge untapped potential for renewable energy, including hydro,
solar, and geothermal but to connect these resources to consumers, Africa will need to
invest in transmission lines. Much of the focus in scaling up investments in the power
sector has been on the upstream generation capacity expansion and corresponding levels
of investments are also required for Sub-Saharan Africa’s transmission segment. Without
these transmission investments, there is a high risk of creating system bottlenecks leaving
generation assets stranded.
    The report ‘Linking up: Public-Private Partnerships in Power Transmission in Africa’
examines the global experience in private sector led investments (e.g. public-private part-
nerships, PPPs) in transmission and their applicability within the Sub-Saharan African
context. Many countries in Latin America and Asia have successfully introduced private
sector participation in their transmission networks and have seen reduced project costs and
expanded coverage. In Africa, the concept of independent power producers has also yielded
good results. The analysis presented draws lessons from these experiences that might be




                                                                                                    xiii
xiv   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA



                      applicable to the African context, highlights the required regulations and recommends
                      options for attracting private sector participation in the power transmission segment.
                         Ultimately, the report aims to help African countries achieve scaled-up and sustainable
                      power sector investment for the benefit of their people and their economies as a whole.




                      Makhtar Diop
                      Vice President, Africa Region
                                                                                               ﻿




Executive Summary

The power sector’s record of delivering services in Sub-Saharan Africa (Africa) has been
suboptimal. Generation capacity remains at 100 gigawatts (GW)—one-third of India’s,
with a similar population—and an average annual per capita consumption of about 500
kilowatt-hours (kWh), one-fifth of the global average. Electricity is consumed almost exclu-
sively by the affluent. Close to two-thirds of Africa’s population–largely rural and poor—are
left out of the service delivery paradigm, with adverse consequences on socioeconomic
welfare and economic productivity. This reality is at odds with the rising aspirations of the
international community and national governments to reach every consumer with reliable,
affordable, and sustainable energy solutions by 2030.
    Bridging the gap between where Africa is and where Africa aspires to be will require
a confluence of new business models, new financiers, and new stakeholders in order to
increase its capacity to generate electricity, and to build distribution networks capable of
delivering it to consumers, as well as transmission lines to link the two ends of the power
supply chain. Generation and distribution, the two ends of the sector value chain, have
received more attention from policy makers and financiers as they experiment with new
ways of procuring generation capacity, as well as more efficient ways of delivering service
to consumers. Independent Power Producers (IPPs) have made investments in generation of
US$25.6 billion, with an installed capacity of 11 GW.1 In distribution, new models of harness-
ing private sector efficiencies have emerged in various forms of private-public partnerships
(PPPs), as well as in concessions, management contracts, operations and maintenance con-
tracts, and so on.
    Transmission, which has traditionally been considered a natural monopoly, and which
contributes a relatively small part of the overall cost of the sector value chain, needs to move
in tandem with additions to generation capacity in order to achieve timely transmission and
final delivery to consumers. Transmission lines reduce overall costs by ensuring economies
of scale in generation; creating access to cost-efficient sources of generation; reducing the
reserves needed to ensure security of supply; and supporting the integration of renewables
into the energy system. Even so, transmission remains a neglected part of the sector value
chain.
    The average annual investment requirement for the transmission sector over the period
from 2015 to 2040 ranges between US$3.2-4.3 billion. Almost all transmission investment
in Africa is financed by state-owned enterprises (SOEs). This was also true for the rest of
the world until the 1990s. However, since then a wave of restructuring across Latin Amer-
ican countries, and many of the member countries of the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD), has led to new business models for financing the
transmission of electricity, with a lower role for public investment and a greater role for
private finance. Global experience in this regard is therefore fairly recent. Starting in the
developed and Latin American countries, it has rapidly spread to Asia. Today, Africa’s gross


                                                                                                   xv
xvi   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




                      domestic product (GDP) is about where these countries were when they opened the sector
                      to private investors. For example, Peru’s GDP per capita in 1998 was US$3,266, and India’s in
                      2006 was US$1,056. In comparison, Kenya’s current GDP per capita is US$1,113 and Nigeria’s
                      is US$2,535.
                          This report, in response to specific client needs, asks if the private sector can play a com-
                      plementary role in scaling up the transmission of electricity in Africa, addressing both its
                      potential advantages and disadvantages. Kenya and Nigeria are actively considering intro-
                      ducing new sources of financing to meet burgeoning investment needs. This report draws
                      from growing global experience in PPP case studies in Brazil, Chile, India, Peru, and the Phil-
                      ippines, and provides a customized account of its applicability to Africa. The preparation of
                      this report benefitted from close collaboration with public and private entities in Africa. At
                      workshops in Nairobi and Abuja, international experts shared their country experiences in
                      attracting private investment with local stakeholders. A third workshop was held in Arusha
                      at the East Africa Power Pool’s (EAPP) Ministerial Conference, where preliminary findings
                      were presented to seven ministers of energy from EAPP countries.
                          Introducing the private sector to electricity transmission is an idea whose time has come
                      in Africa. However, it has to be pursued cautiously and only in selected countries, where
                      conditions are right. This report delves into the implications of such PPP models on the cost
                      of service delivery and efficiency of service provision, and sets forth a toolkit that countries
                      can adapt to their specific local conditions.


                      Why Is the Scaling Up of Private Investment
                      in Transmission Necessary in Africa?
                      More investment in the transmission sector is urgent. Of 38 countries, 9 have no transmis-
                      sion lines above 100 kilovolt (kV). The combined length of transmission in 38 countries in
                      Africa is 112,196 kilometers (km). The country of Brazil has a longer transmission network
                      than Africa, at 125,640 km, and, at 257,000 km, the United States of America (United States)
                      has more than twice the length of the African transmission network. Despite its large land
                      mass, Africa also has fewer kilometers of transmission lines per capita than other regions.
                      The length of transmission lines in Africa is 247 km per million people: excluding South
                      Africa, this indicator drops to 229 km per million people. In contrast, Colombia has 295km of
                      transmission lines per million people, Peru has 339km, Brazil has 610km, Chile has 694km,
                      and the United States has 807km.
                          Building more transmission lines and upgrading transmission capacity will be an essen-
                      tial part of the overall expansion of the electricity sector. As Africa needs transmission both
                      within and between countries, investments are required at both the national and regional
                      levels. Africa needs to invest in long-distance lines, using both alternating current (AC)
                      and direct current (DC) technologies, and to expand in-country transmission networks at
                      a range of voltages. Africa has large low-cost hydrogeneration resources, but the realized
                      potential is far below the load they could serve.
                          Transmission investment, including investment in transmission between countries, is
                      needed to connect these resources to consumers. In-country investments requirements are
                      also large covering various project types. In Kenya, the Kenya Electricity Transmission Com-
                      pany (Ketraco) expects to develop approximately 7,000 km of transmission lines by 2020—
                      including 2,200 km of 132 kV lines; 2,400 km of 220 kV lines; 2,000 km of 400 kV lines; and
                      612 km of 500 kV High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) lines.
                          Public finance is relatively scarce in fiscally constrained environments. The opportunity
                      cost of overwhelming use of public capital in the power sector can be high, especially in
                      countries facing demands to address other socioeconomic deficits.
                          Project finance can allow state-owned utilities to raise additional capital that would
                      otherwise be unavailable, by separating out a portion of cash flows related to particular
                                                                                                                                Executive summary﻿                                      xvii



Figure E.1 Transmission lines per capita (kilometers of transmission lines per million people)

  900

  800

  700

  600

  500

  400

  300

  200

   100

      0

                                                                                               a
              ia



                            a



                                          e



                                                       a



                                                                   e


                                                                                ca




                                                                                                                         ca



                                                                                                                                       il


                                                                                                                                                   ile


                                                                                                                                                               ce



                                                                                                                                                                             es
                                                                                                           ru




                                                                                                                                     az
                          ny




                                                                 bw




                                                                                             bi
                                                     bi
                                       qu
            er




                                                                                                         Pe




                                                                                                                                                                           at
                                                                                                                                                Ch


                                                                                                                                                             an
                                                                               ri




                                                                                                                        ri
                                                                                           m
                                                   m




                                                                                                                                   Br
                       Ke




                                                                            Af




                                                                                                                     Af
          ig




                                     bi




                                                                                                                                                                         St
                                                              ba




                                                                                                                                                           Fr
                                                                                         lo
                                                Za
        N




                                   m




                                                                                                                   h
                                                            m




                                                                                      Co




                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                   a




                                                                                                                 ut




                                                                                                                                                                    ite
                                                           Zi
                                oz




                                                                                                               So




                                                                                                                                                                  Un
                              M




Source: Castalia. Data sourced from Trimble, C. et al., “T&D Data—State-owned national grid T&D data,” 2016, http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/affordable-viable-power-for-
africa (accessed October 30, 2016); Rafael Ferreira, “Private Participation in Transmission Expansion: the Brazilian Model”, Presentation from consultation workshop, Nairobi, Kenya,
September 26, 2016.


investments. Under a project finance structure, the government’s guarantee on payment
does not make the fiscal position worse. Rather, it ensures that a small increase in electricity
tariffs intended to pay for a financially viable project will truly dedicated be to that, and will
not be used for other debt services or expenditures. Private finance allows the state-owned
utility, or the government, to pay competitive and cost-reflective transmission prices. As the
private sector invests in financially viable transmission projects, this can also have spillover
effects. With higher transmission capacity, utilities can increase electricity sales and reduce
generation costs. Finally, private involvement can bring managerial skills, technical know-
how, and performance incentives, and stronger accountability to the sub-sector.

What are the business models of private-public partnerships
in the transmission of electricity?
Several different business models have been used to attract private investment in trans-
mission. The four main models are privatizations, whole-of-grid concessions, independent
power transmissions (IPTs), and merchant investments. Private finance has brought sub-
stantial investment in new transmission to the countries using these models.
   With the restructuring and liberalization of power markets in OECD countries, the
approach to financing transmission investment changed. Private companies now finance a
large share of transmission investment in many countries in North and South America, and
in Europe. Privately financed transmission has also been introduced in some developing
countries. India, for example, has attracted US$5.5 billion of private investment in transmis-
sion since 2002.
   Four main business models have been used:

•	 Indefinite privatizations provide ownership of the transmission network to a pri-
   vate company, usually through a trade sale or public flotation of a government-owned
xviii   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




                           transmission business. The private owner has the exclusive right (and obligation) to
                           develop new transmission in its area of operation.
                        •	 Whole-of-grid concessions provide similar rights and responsibilities to privatizations,
                           but for a shorter period. In most cases, the government implements this business model
                           with a competitive tender of the concession, and enters a concession contract with the
                           winning bidder.
                        •	 Independent Power Transmissions (IPTs) provide the rights and obligations associ-
                           ated with a single transmission line, or a package of a few lines. In most cases the govern-
                           ment implements this business model by tendering a long-term contract, with payment
                           dependent on the availability of the line.
                        •	 Merchant investors build and operate a single transmission line (“merchant line”). In
                           many cases this is a High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) line. The merchant investor
                           benefits from moving power from low-price regions to high-price regions. In most cases,
                           merchant lines are a private initiative, and are not initiated by the government.

                            In some countries more than one business model is used. For example, the United States
                        and the United Kingdom have lifted the exclusivity of private transmission businesses for
                        new transmission investment, allowing governments to also conduct IPT tenders.
                            All of these models can work, but the conditions in which they work best are different.
                        Bolivia’s attempt at privatization, for example, did not last, and experiences with concessions
                        in the African countries have failed to yield significant investment. However, where the con-
                        ditions are right, private finance under these models has brought substantial investment of
                        new electricity transmission to some countries. For example, the three companies involved
                        in privatization in the United Kingdom invested GBP 5.6 billion from 2013–16. And in Peru,
                        IPTs raised US$1.8 billion in 18 tenders, and on average the winning bids yielded 36 percent
                        lower annual costs than those estimated. In India, the share of private investment–including
                        joint ventures with public transmission company—has been growing since the late 2000s.
                        The private sector has invested a total of US$5.5 billion, and there is US$5 billion worth of
                        projects scheduled to follow.
                            Africa’s experience with private sector participation in the transmission sector has been
                        negligible, primarily through whole-of-grid concessions. Though these have not achieved
                        significant investment in transmission, they have brought some operational benefits. Africa
                        has no experience of privately- financed transmission lines through IPTs or merchant lines.
                        Some preliminary steps have been made to prepare for IPT tenders in Nigeria, but no proj-
                        ects have been awarded.
                            IPTs could be the most promising business model to involve the private sector in Africa.
                        They have performed well in other developing countries, including the case-study countries.
                        The per capita income level of some of these countries at the inception of IPTs was similar to
                        the per capita income levels of the African countries that are considering the introduction of
                        IPTs today. IPTs in both middle-income and low-income countries have led to substantial pri-
                        vate investment in transmission, significant cost savings through tenders, and to contractual
                        agreements that are thus far stable. Further, the risks that IPT investors carry are similar to
                        those that IPP investors carry, and the IPP business model has worked well in Africa.
                            There are four main alternatives for structuring the IPT, broadly differentiated depending
                        upon the source of capital expenditure (CAPEX) requirements, whether the private company
                        will own the transmission assets, and whether these will be transferred at the end of the
                        term (Table E2). The selected case-study countries did not have identical structures for their
                        IPTs, but they were all successful in attracting private finance to invest in new transmission
                        assets. There were two distinguishing characteristics. First, the stage at which the asset
                        was transferred: in Brazil, Peru, and India the tenders are for Build, Own, Operate, Trans-
                        fer (BOOT) contracts (Type 1 in Table E2). This transfer condition requires measures such
                                                                                                Executive summary ﻿ ﻿﻿   xix



Table E1 Business models for private investment in transmission

                         Indefinite             Whole-of-grid         Independent Power               Merchant
                        privatization            concession            Transmission (IPT)            investment
 Term               Indefinite               Long term: often         Long term: often          Indefinite
                                             25 years or more         25 years or more
 Coverage           All existing and new     All existing and new     Individual line or        Single major new
                    lines within a country   lines within a country   package of lines.         line, often HVDC
                    or region                or region                New lines only
 Revenues           Annual revenues set      Annual revenues set      Annual revenues           Revenues dependent
                    by the regulator to      by the regulator to      largely or entirely set   on energy (MWh) of
                    ensure a reasonable      ensure a reasonable      by the winning bid        flow along the line
                    return on investment     return on investment                               and price differentials
                    and of capital, and      and of capital, and                                between the two ends
                    subject to periodic      subject to periodic                                of the line
                    regulatory review        regulatory review or
                                             to arbitration clauses
                                             under concession law
 Incentives         Related to whole-of-     Related to whole-of-     Availability for the      Ability to move power
                    grid performance         grid performance         line (typically 98%)      from lower-price
                                                                                                areas to higher-price
                                                                                                areas
 Access             Open access to all       Open access to all       Open access to all        Proprietary access.
                    transmission users on    transmission users on    transmission users on     Access rights used by
                    an equal basis           an equal basis           an equal basis            owner or sold
 Examples—          United Kingdom,          Philippines              Mexico, South             Australia, United
 Global             Germany, parts of                                 America (including        States
                    France, parts of                                  Brazil, Chile,
                    Australia, some South                             Colombia, Peru),
                    American countries                                India, United
                    (including Argentina,                             Kingdom, Canada,
                    Chile)                                            Australia, United
                                                                      States
 Examples—          None                     Cameroon, Mali,          None                      None
 Africa                                      Senegal, Cote
                                             d’Ivoire




as valuation of the asset condition, or requirements for minimum maintenance spending
toward the end of the contract term to ensure that the asset is transferred in good condition.
    In Chile, IPT contracts are Build, Own, Operate (BOO) (Type 2 in Table E2). This type of
contract establishes revenue certainty for an initial period, and is followed by regulatory
determinations later in the life of the asset. This was the only example in the case studies
of indefinite private ownership of the transmission asset financed under an IPT tender.
An alternative is that the private company finances the asset; receives long-term payments
based on operational performance; and transfers the asset ownership at a much earlier
stage. This is a Build, Transfer, Operate (BTO) contract, Type 3 in Table E2). For example, the
asset could be transferred to the government-owned transmission company immediately
after commissioning, while the capital costs would be recovered over a contract term of
30 years. An early transfer of ownership is not a usual approach under project finance. It
may in theory be able to provide similar incentives to traditional IPT contracts. However,
this would require that the transfer of ownership is purely on paper, and does not lead to
any intervention by the new owner that would affect cost or performance. It would also
xx                    LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




Table E2 PPP structures for IPT contracts

                                Who funds
                                the capital         Who bears             Who bears            Who owns
     #     PPP structure       investment?       construction risk?     operation risk?        the assets?            Examples
 1       Build, Own,         Private company     Private company      Private company       Private company      Brazil, Peru, India
         Operate, Transfer
         (BOOT)
 2       Build, Own,         Private company     Private company      Private company       Private company      Chile
         Operate (BOO)
 3       Build, Transfer,    Private company     Private company      Private company       Government/SOE       None identified for
         Operate (BTO)                                                                                           transmission lines
 4       EPC+Finance         Private company     Private company      Government/SOE        Government/SOE       None identified for
                                                                                                                 transmission lines



                                       require that security is provided in some way other than the ultimate security that arises
                                       from ownership of the asset.
                                           Risk allocation under these structures are all similar except for the EPC+Finance option
                                       (Type 4 in Table E2), in which the public sector bears operation risk. Otherwise, all of the
                                       contract forms essentially transfer both construction and operation risk and CAPEX require-
                                       ments away from the government. There are no efficiency gains from the EPC+Finance
                                       approach, as the developer does not bear whole-of-life performance risk.
                                           Despite the success of IPTs in other countries, it should be recognized that the context
                                       for transmission investment in Africa differs from those in most countries with IPTs. These
                                       differences include the financial viability of the power sector, and the industry structure.
                                       Most of the countries using IPTs have sufficient revenue from electricity consumers to
                                       ensure the profitability of generators, network businesses, and distribution businesses. This
                                       is not the case in most African countries. However, India’s experience, where the challenge
                                       of low tariffs and high losses has been overcome, demonstrates that overall power-sector
                                       profitability is not a necessary precondition for IPTs to work well. Another difference is that
                                       most countries using IPTs have already introduced vertical separation between generation,
                                       transmission, and distribution. Some African countries have introduced vertical separation,
                                       but most have not. Finally, using IPT tenders presents disadvantages relative to other busi-
                                       ness models. Procuring transmission infrastructure through the IPT model requires run-
                                       ning frequent tenders. This generates higher transaction costs than other business models.
                                       This is especially true if compared to procuring transmission lines through a whole-of-grid
                                       concession.
                                           Ultimately, global experience shows that the benefits of IPTs outweigh the costs of
                                       implementing them. However, successful experience with IPPs in the generation of electric-
                                       ity, with similar PPP structures, suggests that IPTs could be used to augment investments
                                       in transmission in Africa.

                                       What are the steps to realizing the potential of IPTs for Africa?
                                       Introducing IPTs for electricity transmission in Africa could result in similar benefits to
                                       those achieved by IPTs in other countries, and by IPPs in Africa. To realize these benefits,
                                       African governments will have to take actions to produce a favorable enabling environment
                                       for IPTs. Their approach can draw on the lessons learned from introducing IPPs in Africa,
                                       and international experience in IPTs.
                                          The ten steps required are to:

                                       •	 Develop policies that support IPTs. A clear policy direction on how to introduce IPTs,
                                          adequately consulted, will be important in order to drive investment. Policy development
                                                                                                Executive summary ﻿ ﻿﻿   xxi


     will need to consider the arguments both for and against testing the use of IPTs to meet
     government objectives, and reach a final decision. Development Finance Institutions
     (DFIs) can also assist through dissemination of knowledge products and technical assis-
     tance, including peer-to-peer advice from other developing countries with IPT experience.
•	   Develop the legal and regulatory frameworks to support IPTs. In most countries,
     introducing IPTs will require changes to legislation, regulation, and other documents
     such as grid codes. Governments should draw on the substantial body of international
     experience to identify lessons learned elsewhere. Primary legislation may be required,
     and the legislation may also need to evolve over time.
•	   Conduct trials of IPTs. Moving to a new model that has worked well internationally but
     has not been tried domestically is a risk for African governments. They should start with
     trials of IPTs to better understand the implementation challenges, and revise regulations
     and policies as necessary to improve efficiency. International experience shows that IPT
     tenders can be run while existing frameworks for government-financed transmission are
     kept in place, and this has been the practice in most countries that have used this model.
•	   Introduce new models for concessional lending. Transmission projects are capi-
     tal-intensive. African governments need to engage with DFIs to ensure that concessional
     finance is not tied to delivery by government-owned companies, and to develop models
     for DFI support to transmission projects delivered by IPTs. The low cost of concessional
     lending helps African governments meet their investment targets at a lower cost to con-
     sumers, and any shift to IPTs must safeguard these benefits. African governments can
     also work with DFIs to ensure that DFI lending policies are not biased toward government
     ownership of transmission, and do not impede the use of privately-financed transmission.
•	   Decide the stage at which to tender transmission projects. There are two broad
     choices here. Early-stage tenders allow for more innovation by bidders. However, they
     also expose them to risk on issues such as approvals and permitting, and require a more
     complex evaluation. Late-stage tenders are for projects that are already well developed,
     in which the evaluation can focus on cost. Late-stage tenders are likely to be the best
     approach for starting off trials of IPTs. They are simpler to evaluate, based on the price
     offered by different bidders to build and operate a line according to a single detailed
     design. By contrast, early-stage tenders lead to offers with different designs and require
     more assessment of the viability of the proposed solutions.
•	   Determine payments to IPTs based on availability. International experience shows
     that it is bestto expose IPT bidders to risk on their performance in ensuring high levels
     of availability, but not to expose them to risk on the volume or value of flows along the
     line. The availability targets are typically close to 98 percent and this, together with other
     requirements, needs to be set out in a Transmission Service Agreement (TSA) with the
     IPT. The TSA should include an obligation to commission the line in accordance with the
     technical specifications by a defined date (often referred to as the commercial operation
     date).
•	   Ensure adequate revenue and credit enhancement where needed. IPTs will be imple-
     mented on a project finance basis. Financiers need confidence that the contractual pay-
     ments will be received, for example, through the use of escrow accounts if the sector as a
     whole is not profitable. Where escrow arrangements are not enough to make the project
     bankable, governments may also have to use a government guarantee to back payment
     obligations to IPTs. If the sovereign guarantees are insufficient, multilateral guarantees
     may be needed.
•	   Tailor IPT projects to attract international investors. African governments that want
     to try IPTs should ensure that the tenders offered are of sufficient size; that they face no
     particular environmental or permitting challenges; and that there is a pipeline of future
     projects. The projects should be large enough to justify the transaction costs. In some
     cases, this may mean bundling several projects into a single tender. In Peru for example,
     capital costs ranged between US$52.2 million and US$291.0 million, from a sample of
xxii   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




                          14 transmission projects tendered between 1998 and 2013. On average, capital costs were
                          US$116.2 million.
                       •	 Prepare to implement IPT transactions. Governments will need to seek transaction
                          advisers, prepare TSAs and bid documents, define eligible bidders, and conduct a market
                          sounding. The TSA will include the contract term, payments, performance obligations and
                          incentives, indexation, and force majeure among other things.
                       •	 Run competitive tenders. The final step will be to run a tender, evaluate bids, and award
                          an IPT contract.

                           There is potential to develop IPT programs in Africa that will be attractive to interna-
                       tional bidders. To achieve this, governments should work with international investors
                       and potential providers of loan finance to build detailed business models that will attract
                       international interest, and can be replicated across the African continent. The next key step
                       is to move beyond merely considering how this business model applies within Africa, and
                       piloting a few projects.


                       Note
                        1.	 A. Eberhard et al., “Independent Power Projects in Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from Five
                            Key Countries,” World Bank Publications (2016).
Section 1

Introduction

Africans lack access to electricity.1 Only 35 percent          Government-owned companies almost always
have access, and those who do consume relatively           finance new investment relying on finance from the
little, face frequent outages, and pay high prices.        national governments, Development Finance Insti-
     Reaching Africa’s access and consumption tar-         tutions (DFIs), and other financiers such as China.
gets will require additional investments in gener-         Under these financing models, government-owned
ation. Electricity generation capacity in the region       utilities generally undertake the preparatory work;
is just 98  megawatts (MW) per million people, well        manage the construction using a range of contractors
below the 203 MW per million people in South Asia,         for particular tasks; and operate and maintain the
604  MW in Latin America and the Caribbean, and            transmission line after it is commissioned.
803 MW in Middle East and North Africa.2
     Building more transmission infrastructure will        New approaches to financing transmission
also be key to closing the generation and distribution     are needed
gaps. Africa needs generation capacity to create elec-     Historic investment in the power sector in Africa is
tricity, distribution networks to deliver it to consum-    below the forecast investment needs. The average
ers, and transmission lines to link the two ends of the    annual spending in the past decade in the African
power supply chain. Investments in transmission will       power sector has been about US$12 billion, or 2
also allow access to low-cost generation capacity and      percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This
increase security of supply.                               accounts for 19 percent to 36 percent of the estimated
     Government-owned companies finance most               investments needs.
transmission investment in Africa                             Given this trend, Africa’s traditional approach to
Government-ownership was the dominant model                financing transmission needs to be supplemented. In
around the world until the 1990s. However, many            most countries in Africa the utilities are not profitable
countries have replaced, or complemented, the              and their borrowing requires government support.
government-owned model with privately financed             This financing model is hitting constraints on the
transmission.                                              total level of government borrowing.
     In most countries in Africa, government-owned            A major role for government finance is likely to
companies still finance most or all transmission           continue. However, public funding will not be enough
investment. In most cases these companies also have        to meet the investment needs in the transmission
exclusivity over the transmission grid and finance all     sector. Introducing some degree of private finance
transmission investments.                                  would help to meet the access targets.
     In some countries legislation establishes an exclu-      New sources of private finance for expanding
sive franchise for transmission, effectively prohib-       the transmission network can be raised provided the
iting privately financed transmission models. One          business model is right. In the generation sector in
such country is Senegal. A few countries have two          Africa, investors in IPPs carry the risk for the cost,
transmission networks. Examples include Mozam-             timely completion, and performance of their plant.
bique, where the vertically integrated utility, Electri-   IPPs have made investments of US$25.6 billion, with
cidade de Moçambique (EDM), and the Mozambique             an installed capacity of 11 gigawatts (GW).3
Transmission Company (MOTRACO) both own and                   Internationally a similar business model for inde-
operate transmission lines.                                pendent power transmission (IPTs) has raised large
2   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




    amounts of capital for transmission investments.4            presented to seven Ministers of Energy from EAPP
    Under this business model individual lines are put           countries. Private developers and transmission com-
    out to tender. The winning bidder carries the risk           panies also provided inputs on the topic.
    on timely commissioning, and capital and operating
    costs, and performance. Revenues are largely set by          Objective and structure of the report
    the bid and the main performance indicator is the            The objective of the study is to support the mobiliza-
    availability of the transmission line. Repayment is          tion of private capital for greenfield IPTs in Africa. To
    over a contract term varying from 20 years to 45 years.      do this, the report analyzes different business models,
        The use of IPTs in Brazil, Peru, Chile, and India col-   frameworks, and underlying ecosystems for scaling
    lectively raised over US$24.5 billion of private invest-     up IPTs in Africa, and provides recommendations on
    ment between 1998 and 2015. It also enabled close to         specific pipeline transactions.
    100,000 km of new transmission lines.5                          This report is divided into two parts. Part A is
        Just as private finance has expanded transmission        structured as follows:
    infrastructure in other countries, and generation in
    Africa, it can also expand transmission in Africa.           •	 Section 2 sets out the main facts and data about the
        Implementing IPTs in Africa, or other models to             power sector in Africa, describes the investments
    attract private investment, presents serious chal-              needs, the benefits from increasing transmission
    lenges. Privately financed transmission in Africa will          infrastructure in Africa, and the rationale for
    only happen if governments adopt policies supportive            using new approaches to financing and delivering
    of this, and establish the right business, regulatory,          transmission
    and legal environment to attract investors. Develop-         •	 Section 3 defines the four main business mod-
    ing such policies and the enabling environment will             els used for financing transmission investment
    require building consensus among various entities               globally
    including Ministries, regulators, and utilities. Some        •	 Section 4 looks at experience to date in attracting
    stakeholders may resist private ownership of trans-             private investment in generation and transmission
    mission, particularly given the role of transmission in         in Africa
    tying the power system together, and the traditional         •	 Section 5 explains why the IPT business model is
    link with other central functions such as system plan-          the most broadly applicable, and most promising,
    ning and operations.                                            model to increase privately financed transmission
        However, this report describes why IPTs are                 investment in Africa
    the most appropriate business model for privately
    financed transmission in Africa and sets out practical          Part B looks at how to scale-up private participa-
    steps to introduce IPTs in Africa to scale up transmis-      tion in transmission in Africa:
    sion investments.
                                                                 •	 Section 6 looks at the steps needed to implement
    The report was developed in response to                         IPTs in Africa, and potentially realize benefits simi-
    requests from interested African countries,                     lar to those achieved by IPTs in other countries, and
    and through consultation with various                           by IPPs in Africa
    stakeholders                                                 •	 Section 7 includes a Toolkit for government offi-
    Some African countries—mainly Nigeria and Kenya—                cials and policymakers in Africa to implement an
    have started to develop policy frameworks for private           IPT transaction
    sector participation in transmission. During this
    process, they have been evaluating the right business,          Appendix A provides case studies of private invest-
    regulatory, and legal environment to attract investors.      ment in transmission in Brazil, Chile, India, Peru, and
        The report benefitted from close collaboration           the Philippines.
    with public entities in Africa. Preparing the report            Appendix B provides a pipeline of transmission
    involved three workshops and several consultations.          projects in Kenya and the South African Power Pool
    The first two were hosted in Nairobi and Abuja, where        that could be privately financed through the IPT busi-
    international experts shared their experiences in            ness model.
    attracting private investment in transmission with
    local stakeholders. A third workshop was held in             Methodology
    Arusha at the East Africa Power Pool’s (EAPP) Minis-         A significant amount of data on transmission proj-
    terial Conference, where preliminary findings were           ects and power sector figures has been collected and
                                                                                                        INTRODUCTION        3


analyzed for this report. Sources include a series of        by legislation; unbundled transmission; and started
World Bank databases, including the Private Par-             by attracting private investment into generation
ticipation in Infrastructure database, data collected        before transmission—often IPPs selling to incumbent
through the study “Making power affordable in Africa         power utilities under long term PPAs. In the five case
and viable for its utilities,” data from the International   studies in this report, private sector participation in
Energy Statistics, and others. The authors also con-         transmission came after the development of private
ducted interviews with different stakeholders and            finance in generation through IPPs.
primary and secondary research on new privately
financed transmission projects.
    The report includes five case studies, of Brazil,
                                                             Notes
Chile, India, Peru, and the Philippines. Four of the case     1.	 Africa in this report refers to Sub-Saharan Africa
studies look at experiences with IPTs, and the case               and excludes North Africa and Djibouti.
study of the Philippines looks at the performance of          2.	 Castalia. Electricity capacity (million kW a year).
long-term concessions for the whole of the grid rather            Data sourced from International Energy Statistics,
                                                                  “Total Electricity Installed Capacity 2014,” IEA, 2014,
than individual lines.
                                                                  https://tinyurl.com/hqe2nys (accessed December 2,
    The five case study countries were selected
                                                                  2016); data sourced from Trimble, C. et al., “Total
because they present successful examples of private               installed capacity—calculated excluding regional
sector participation in transmission. Three coun-                 projects,” 2016, http://data.worldbank.org/data-
tries are from South America as the region accounts               catalog/affordable-viable-power-for-africa (accessed
for “more than one-third of the global power sector               October 30, 2016).
project investment with private sector participation          3.	 A. Eberhard et al., “Independent Power Projects in
in developing countries.”6 Brazil, Chile, and Peru also           Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from Five Key Coun-
stand out in attracting privately financed transmis-              tries,” World Bank Publications (2016).
sion through IPTs.                                            4.	 This report uses the term IPT for a privately
    The per capita income levels of some of the selected          financed transmission line (independent power
                                                                  transmission project) to compare with generation
countries when they introduced IPTs was similar to
                                                                  privately financed by IPPs (independent power
the per capita income levels of the African countries
                                                                  projects).
considering the introduction of IPTs today. For exam-         5.	 PPI Project Database, World Bank and PPIAF,
ple, Peru’s GDP per capita in 1998 was US$3,266 and               ppi.worldbank.org (accessed September 9, 2016).
India’s GDP per capita in 2006 was US$1,056. In com-              Total investment is defined as the sum of invest-
parison, Kenya’s current GDP per capita is US$1,113               ment in physical assets and payments to the
and Nigeria’s is US$2,535.7                                       government. Investments are recorded in millions
    The selected countries also had vertically inte-              of US$. From this investment, 87 percent was done
grated and majorly state-owned power sectors until                after 2006. Data includes only greenfield projects.
three or four decades ago, similar to most African            6.	 ESMAP, “Private Sector Participation in Electricity
countries today. Electricity utilities were mainly                Transmission and Distribution: Experiences from
                                                                  Brazil, Peru, the Philippines, and Turkey,” Knowl-
vertically integrated and there was little role for com-
                                                                  edge series,no. 023/15, 2015.
petition. Investments were mainly decided through
                                                              7.	 World Development Indicators, GDP per capita
central planning, and financed by government-owned                (constant 2010 US$), World Bank national accounts
businesses.                                                       data, and OECD National Accounts data files, http://
    However, all the selected countries undertook                 data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.KD,
major power sector reforms. These were underpinned                (accessed May 10, 2017).
part A
Financing
power
Transmission:
Challenges
and
Opportunities
Section 2

Africa needs transmission
investment and new approaches
to financing and delivering it

Across Africa, access to electricity is low. Those with      in all other regions of the world is above 96 percent.
electricity use relatively little and face an unreliable     The left side of Figure 2.1 shows the level of access to
supply. Low electricity access also hinders economic         electricity by world region. Africa is at the top, and the
growth. Productivity is lower, fewer jobs are created,       chart includes the world percentage for comparison.
the provision of education and health suffers, and               Those with access to electricity use relatively lit-
fewer people have access to communication.                   tle. Per capita consumption of electricity in Africa is
    Increasing access to, and use of, electricity will       estimated at 488 kilowatt hours (kWh) per year—the
require substantial investment throughout the power          lowest in the world, as shown in the right side of Fig-
sector. Building more transmission infrastructure            ure 2.1. It compares to 673  kWh per capita in South
will be essential to expanding the power sector.             Asia, the region with the second lowest level of access
Investment in transmission will be necessary to link         to electricity. As Figure 2.1 shows, more industrialized
generation and distribution infrastructure, to allow         regions like North America consume 10 times the
access to low-cost generation capacity, benefit from         level of electricity consumed by Africa.
economies of scale, and increase security of supply.             Consumers in a number of countries in Africa who
    In most African countries, government-owned              access the grid also pay high prices and face frequent
utilities finance all transmission investments. Given        power shortages. Planned blackouts and unexpected
the scale of investment required, private finance can        power interruptions result in economic losses esti-
play a role in meeting the energy requirements in            mated at between 1 percent and 5 percent of the GDP
Africa.                                                      of the countries they live in.1
    This section sets out the facts and data about elec-         Low access to electricity and unreliable supply
tricity access, consumption, generation, distribution,       of power hinders the region’s development. The low
and transmission adequacy in Africa, and reports on          access “result[s] in a loss of significant benefits—such
the amount of investment needed across the power             as productivity gains in business, the creation of new
supply chain. This section also describes why trans-         jobs, opportunities to study at home, improvements
mission is an essential part of that overall expansion,      in health, and better communication via television
and explains the rationale to pursue private finance.        and radio.”2 Providing more access to electricity is key
                                                             to reversing this situation.
                                                                 International organizations and governments
    Access to electricity
2.1                                                         in Africa are aiming for people in Africa to have sig-
    is low in Africa                                         nificantly greater access to electricity by 2030. Yet,
Access to electricity in Africa is low. Only 35 percent of   reaching these people will be a challenge and require
people in Africa have access to electricity. This is well    significant investment. The ‘Sustainable Energy
below the 78  percent in South Asia, the region with         for All’ program—a United Nations and World Bank
the second-lowest level of access to electricity. Access     initiative—targets universal access to modern energy
           AFRICA NEEDS TRANSMISSION INVESTMENT AND NEW APPROACHES TO FINANCING AND DELIVERING IT                                                                                     7



Figure 2.1 Access to electricity and electricity consumption (percentage of population;
kWh per person per year)

                                                       Access                                                            Consumption per capita

                                           Africa                        35                                                 488

                                    South Asia                                                78                            673

                                           World                                                 85                              2,118


                        East Asia & Paciﬁc                                                            96                           2,880

         Middle East and North Africa                                                                 96                            3,104

            Latin America & Caribbean                                                                 96                              3,568


                              North America                                                             100                                 5,429


                   Europe & Central Asia                                                                100                                                          13,241

Source: Castalia. Access to electricity and electricity consumption (Percentage of population; kWh per person per year). Data sourced from World Bank, “Access to electricity (% of
population),” SE4ALL, 2012, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.ZS (accessed November 17, 2016); data from World Bank, “Electric power consumption (kWh per capita),”
OEDC/IEA, 2013, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.USE.ELEC.KH.PC (accessed January 10, 2017).



by 2030. Under this program, Nigeria targets 75 per-                           generation capacity is 98  megawatts (MW) per
cent access by 2020 and 90 percent by 2030. To meet                            million people, well below the 203  MW per million
this target, the Government of Nigeria needs to                                people in South Asia, 604 MW in Latin America and
almost triple the country’s on-grid supply by 2030.3                           the Caribbean, and 803 MW in Middle East and North
                                                                               Africa. More industrialized regions like Europe and
                                                                               Central Asia and North America have much higher
2.2 Increasing access                                                         levels of installed generation capacity per capita.
     and consumption                                                               To reach consumption targets, Africa needs to
    will require a major                                                       install 292 gigawatts (GW) of new additional generat-
                                                                               ing capacity by 2040, at an estimated cost of US$19.6
    expansion of supply                                                        billion a year between 2015 and 2040.5
Where generation is scarce, people cannot use much
electricity. So Africa needs generation capacity to                            Invest in, and expand, the distribution
create electricity, distribution networks to deliver                           network
it to consumers, and transmission lines to link the                            Building new generation capacity will not be enough;
two ends of the power supply chain. Estimates of the                           Africa also needs to expand its distribution network
annual investments required for generation, distribu-                          to connect people to electricity. Achieving this will
tion, and transmission from 2015 to 2040 range from                            require major investment.
US$33.4 billion to US$63.0 billion.4                                              In Africa, access to electricity averages 35 percent,
                                                                               and two of three households are not connected.
Increase generation to achieve access                                          This means that more than 600 million people have
and consumption targets                                                        no access to electricity. For countries such as South
Africa has much lower installed generation capacity                            Sudan, Chad, and Burundi, access to electricity aver-
than other regions. Africa will need to substantially                          ages only 10 percent. Estimates of the annual invest-
increase that capacity to achieve its access and con-                          ments for distribution from 2015 to 2040 range from
sumption targets. Figure 2.2 shows the installed                               US$10.6 billion to US$14.2 billion a year.6
generation capacity per person. In Africa, installed
8   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




    Figure 2.2 Installed capacity (MW per million people)

                                                                                                                                                       3,418




                                                                                                                                1,654



                                                                                                          937
                                                                                   803
                                                            604

                                     203
               98

      Sub-Saharan                  South          Latin America &             Middle                East Asia &             Europe &                  North
         Africa                     Asia             Caribbean                East &                  Paciﬁc               Central Asia              America
                                                                            North Africa

    Source: Castalia. Electricity capacity (million kW per year). Data sourced from International Energy Statistics, “Total Electricity Installed Capacity 2014,” IEA,
    2014, https://tinyurl.com/hqe2nys (accessed December 2, 2016); data sourced from Trimble, C. et al., “Total installed capacity - calculated excluding regional
    projects,” 2016, http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/affordable-viable-power-for-africa (accessed October 30, 2016).



        Transmission is needed
    2.3                                                                                 generation capacity, benefiting from economies of
                                                                                         scale, and increasing security of supply.
        to tie the electricity                                                              Economies of scale on the supply side mean that
        system together                                                                  generation costs decrease the larger the scale of the
                                                                                         power plant. Transmission enables this large-scale
    Africa also lacks transmission capacity. Of 38  coun-
                                                                                         generation to connect to load. This is particularly
    tries, 9 have no transmission lines above 100 kV lines.
                                                                                         important in Africa, as the region has major hydro-
    The combined length of transmission in 38  coun-
                                                                                         power resources. Economies of scale in transmis-
    tries in Africa is 112,196  km.7 By comparison, Brazil
                                                                                         sion also reduce overall costs; as transmission costs
    has a longer transmission network than Africa at
                                                                                         decrease, the larger the scale and the higher the
    125,640  km. And, at 257,000  km, the United States
                                                                                         voltage. Higher voltages also generate lower trans-
    of America (United States) has more than twice the
                                                                                         mission losses. In addition, by connecting multiple
    length of the African transmission network.8
                                                                                         generators, transmission lines also provide resilience
        Africa has fewer kilometers of transmission lines
                                                                                         and backup to any generation at the distribution or
    per capita than other regions, as Figure 2.3 shows.9
                                                                                         household level.
    The length of transmission lines in Africa is 247 km
                                                                                            Building more transmission lines and upgrading
    per million people. Excluding South Africa,10 this indi-
                                                                                         the transmission capacity will be an essential part
    cator drops to 229 km per million people. In contrast,
                                                                                         of the overall expansion of the electricity sector.
    Colombia has 295 km of transmission lines per mil-
                                                                                         As Africa needs transmission within and between
    lion people, Peru has 339 km, Brazil has 610 km, Chile
                                                                                         countries, investments are required at a national and
    has 694 km, and the United States has 807 km.
                                                                                         regional level.
        Estimates of annual investments required for
    transmission in Africa, between 2015 and 2040, range
                                                                                         Africa needs to invest in very diverse
    from US$3.2 billion to US$4.3 billion.11
                                                                                         types of transmission lines
        Investment in the transmission sector is needed to
                                                                                         Africa needs to invest in long distance lines, using
    connect the generation capacity and distribution net-
                                                                                         both alternating current (AC) and direct current (DC)
    work. This connection will allow access to low-cost
            AFRICA NEEDS TRANSMISSION INVESTMENT AND NEW APPROACHES TO FINANCING AND DELIVERING IT                                                                                      9



Figure 2.3 Transmission lines per capita (km transmission lines per million people)

  900

  800

  700

  600

  500

  400

  300

  200

   100

      0

                                                                                               a
              ia



                            a



                                          e



                                                       a



                                                                   e


                                                                                ca




                                                                                                                         ca



                                                                                                                                        il


                                                                                                                                                    ile


                                                                                                                                                                ce



                                                                                                                                                                             es
                                                                                                           ru




                                                                                                                                     az
                          ny




                                                                 bw




                                                                                             bi
                                                     bi
                                       qu
            er




                                                                                                         Pe




                                                                                                                                                                           at
                                                                                                                                                 Ch


                                                                                                                                                             an
                                                                                ri




                                                                                                                         ri
                                                                                           m
                                                   m




                                                                                                                                   Br
                       Ke




                                                                             Af




                                                                                                                      Af
          ig




                                     bi




                                                                                                                                                                         St
                                                               ba




                                                                                                                                                           Fr
                                                                                         lo
                                                Za
        N




                                   m




                                                                                                                    h
                                                             m




                                                                                       Co




                                                                                                                                                                        d
                                   a




                                                                                                                  ut




                                                                                                                                                                     ite
                                                           Zi
                                oz




                                                                                                               So




                                                                                                                                                                  Un
                              M




Source: Castalia. Data sourced from Trimble, C. et al., “T&D Data – State owned national grid T&D data,” 2016, http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/affordable-viable-power-for-
africa (accessed October 30, 2016); Rafael Ferreira, “Private Participation in Transmission Expansion: the Brazilian Model”, Presentation from consultation workshop, Nairobi, Kenya,
September 26, 2016.




technologies, and to expand in-country transmission                               2,000  km. Reaching from Nigeria to Guinea, the
networks at a range of voltages. Africa has large,                                project is expected to have a transfer capacity of
low-cost, hydro-generation resources, but these are                               1,000  MW and cost about US$1.2 billion. In con-
mostly far from the load they could serve. Transmis-                              trast, the Central Africa interconnection will cover a
sion investment is needed to connect these resources                              3,800  km line. Reaching from Chad to South Africa,
to consumers, including investment in transmission                                the project is expected to have a transmission capac-
connections between countries. As an illustration,                                ity of 17,000 MW and cost about US$10.5 billion.
the transmission investment needed for the Grand                                      Investments in transmission are also needed
INGA hydro project (of more than 40 GW) to supply                                 to reduce costs by connecting large generators to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and the                                consumers within countries, stabilize national
wider region is estimated at US$40 billion.12                                     transmission systems, and meet growing demand.
    Figure 2.4 locates potential large-scale, hydro-­                             For example, in 2014 the Transmission Company of
generation plants and major transmission inter-                                   Nigeria (TCN) estimated that the country needed
connections to be developed in Africa by 2020 and                                 to expand its transmission capacity from 7  GW to
2040.13 The figure shows almost twenty generation                                 10  GW by 2017, and to 20  GW by 2020. Expanding
projects (hydro dams), and four major transmission                                the transmission capacity will require an expan-
projects that will connect the dams to the load, and                              sion of the transmission network. TCN prepared an
so help foster regional trade. The four projects are                              expansion plan that specifies transmission lines to be
West Africa Power Transmission Corridor, the Cen-                                 installed by 2017 and by 2020. Figure 2.5 shows a map
tral Africa Transmission interconnection, the North                               of Nigeria’s transmission system in 2014. It includes
South Transmission Corridor, and the North Africa                                 transmission lines being developed in 2014 and the
Transmission interconnection.                                                     transmission lines included TCN’s expansion plan (to
    The projects range in length, transmission capac-                             be installed by 2017). These lines are divided between
ity, and estimated cost, but all require substantial                              132  kV and 330  kV lines. The existing transmission
investment. For example, the estimated length of                                  lines were removed from the map, reflecting how
the West Africa Power Transmission Corridor is                                    important the transmission in Nigeria needs are.
10                        LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




Figure 2.4 Major potential generation and transmission projects in Africa




Source: Figures sourced from African Development Bank (2013), Annex 1.




                              In-country investments are also of diverse types.     2,000 km of 400 kV lines, and 612 km of 500 kV High
                          Projects range in length, voltage, and estimated          Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) lines. Some of these
                          costs. In Kenya, the Kenya Electricity Transmission       lines are being developed; others are yet to be imple-
                          Company (Ketraco) expects to develop approximately        mented. Table 2.1 shows a sample of the transmission
                          7,000  km of transmission lines by 2020—including         lines planned for 2020 but not yet being developed,
                          2,200  km of 132  kV lines, 2,400  km of 220  kV lines,   including the estimated cost of each line.
           AFRICA NEEDS TRANSMISSION INVESTMENT AND NEW APPROACHES TO FINANCING AND DELIVERING IT                                                   11



Figure 2.5 Map of Nigeria’s transmission system, showing transmission lines being developed
and proposed




Source: Transmission Company of Nigeria, “Appraisal of Transmission Projects,” (2014), (pers. comm. with Patricia Mong, November 17, 2016).

Table 2.1 Sample of Ketraco’s planned transmission lines

                                                                                                                                  Estimated costs
                      Project                                                         Scope                                        (US$ million)
 Gilgil-Thika-Nairobi East and                          205 km 400 kV Line with Substations in Longonot,                                128.7
 associated substations                                 Thika, Kangundo and Konza
 Isinya-Konza-Nairobi East                              105 km of 400 kV double circuit line and Konza                                    41.9
                                                        400/132 kV Substation
 Nyahururu-Maralal and associated                       148 km 132 kV Line and 1 No. 7.5 MVA                                              25.3
 substation                                             Substation at Maralal
 Garsen-Hola-Garissa and associated                     240 km 220 kV or 132 kV single circuit Line and 1                                 90.6
 substations                                            No. 7.5 MVA Substation at Hola
 Garissa-Wajir and associated                           330 km 132 kV single circuit Line and 1 No. 23                                    92.6
 substations                                            MVA Substation at Wajir

Source: Kenya Electricity Transmission Company (Ketraco), “Transmission System Planning and Implementation: Planned Projects and Financing Gap,”
Presentation from consultation workshop, Nairobi, Kenya, September 26, 2016.
12   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Transmission can also increase security                    very weak performance are a mix of high costs and
     of supply and enable integration of                        low revenues. Costs are high because of small size,
     intermittent renewables                                    weaknesses in operational efficiency, and the share
     Transmission infrastructure also allows consumers          of high-cost oil generators. Revenues are low due to
     to connect to diverse sources of power generation          underpricing and poor recovery.
     that draw on a range of fuels. This reduces the risks          In part, these financial problems are caused by
     to power supply. For example, the central region of        high costs. African countries have a high share of
     Mozambique has important hydropower and coal               expensive oil-fired generation and a range of other
     reserves. These reserves give it the potential to gener-   cost inefficiencies. A move to best practice could help
     ate high amounts of electricity that the south region      to reduce costs.
     could also benefit from. But the transmission system           But this will not be sufficient to move most
     in the central region and the transmission system in       African utilities to financial viability. Those utilities
     the south region are not connected to each other. If       would continue to make a loss even if efficiency were
     consumers in the south region are to benefit from the      raised to international benchmarks. The study looked
     additional diverse generation sources, a transmission      at how the finances of African utilities would improve
     line is required. The Government of Mozambique has         if the cash collection was 100 percent, network losses
     had plans to develop this line for several years—under     were reduced to 10 percent or lower, and staffing lev-
     a project known as Sociedade Nacional de Transporte        els were the same as well-performing utilities in Latin
     de Energia (STE)—but the project has not progressed        America. If these assumptions became reality, the
     further. This project would be one key way to improve      change would be sufficient to move another 11  Afri-
     Mozambique’s security of supply.14                         can utilities to viability.16 Even so, most utilities would
         Transmission also enables the integration of inter-    still fail to recover costs—even after the ambitious
     mittent renewables (such as wind power and solar           improvements in efficiency.
     power). Transmission ensures that the power system             In addition, African governments cannot provide
     remains in balance, by keeping reserves to offset          funds for the utilities to reach financial viability. Gov-
     power fluctuations from such renewables. Providing         ernments are constrained by fiscal limitations originat-
     reserves to support the integration of renewables has      ing outside the power sector, and market perceptions
     substantial economies of scale: the costs are lower        based on their overall fiscal position and on aggregate
     for larger regions. Transmission achieves these cost       indicators, such as the ratio of annual deficits or total
     reductions and ensures that the costs of integrating       debt to GDP. This means that they may not be able to
     renewables are minimized.                                  borrow to invest, even on financially viable projects
                                                                that could eventually improve their fiscal position.

         New approaches to
     2.4                                                       Private sector participation can help
         finance and delivery of                                unleash the financing constraints
         transmission are needed                                A greater role of private finance could help ease the
                                                                financing constraints and overcome the transmission
     In most countries in Africa the government-owned           deficit.
     companies finance all transmission investments.                Project finance can allow state-owned utilities
     Africa has much lower installed transmission capac-        to raise additional finance that would otherwise
     ity than other regions and needs to substantially          be unavailable. Project finance separates out a por-
     increase that capacity to meet the access and con-         tion of cash flows (and risks) related to particular
     sumption targets.                                          investments. For example, if a government increases
         Historic investment in the power sector under this     electricity tariffs slightly to finance a transmission
     model has been well below the forecast investment          project, it will not be able to raise additional finance if
     needs. Estimates of annual investments required for        the borrowing entity (the state-owned company or the
     the power sector between 2015 and 2040 range from          government) remains non-creditworthy. However,
     US$33.4 billion to 63.0 billion. The average annual        if a government increases electricity tariffs slightly,
     spending in the past decade in the African power sec-      and credibly dedicates the increase to servicing the
     tor has been about US$12 billion.                          finance of a viable transmission project developed
         A recent World Bank study15 shows that only 2 of       under a project finance structure, then that increase
     39 utilities in Africa collected enough cash to recover    in revenue will secure additional financing. These
     their operational and capital costs. The causes of this
         AFRICA NEEDS TRANSMISSION INVESTMENT AND NEW APPROACHES TO FINANCING AND DELIVERING IT                                 13


increases are likely to be minor given the contribu-              these companies have to transfer knowledge and
tion transmission tariffs in the cost buildup.17                  skills, and to develop in-country management and
    Under a project finance structure, the govern-                technical capability.
ment’s guarantee on payment does not make the                        Private investments can also bring stronger
fiscal position worse. Rather, it makes it credible               accountability. The contract between the government
that a small increase in electricity tariffs that was             and the private company will include performance
intended to pay for a financially viable project is               obligations. These are specific outputs defined in the
really dedicated to that, and not to other debt service           contract (project timeline, quality, and quantity). If
or expenditure.                                                   the private company does not meet these obligations,
    This approach can bring costs down in the medium              the government will reduce the payments to the pri-
term. This is possible by achieving cost recovery                 vate sector.
through cost reflective transmission tariffs. Private                Given these conditions, utilities in Africa are already
finance would allow the state-owned utility, or the               looking to the private sector to finance transmission
government, to pay competitive and cost-­     reflective          investments. Ketraco, the transmission utility owned
transmission prices. For example, in all the case stud-           by the Kenyan Government, estimates a financing
ies the use of transmission tenders led to strong com-            gap of at least US$5.9  billion between 2013 and 2030.
petitive tension and downward pressure on prices. As              This represents a financing gap of at least 90 percent.
described in the Brazilian and Peruvian case studies,             Ketraco is interested in exploring how Public Private
the winning bid was often well under the price cap.               Partnerships (PPPs) could assist in financing the trans-
Box 5.1 also discusses how IPTs can reduce whole of               mission projects included in its 2013–2030 Least Cost
life costs.                                                       Power Development Plan (see Box 2.1).
    As the private sector invests in financially viable              Public finance will likely continue to play a role in
transmission projects, this can also have spillover               funding the transmission sector, but its funding will
effects. With higher transmission capacity, utilities             not meet the energy targets and private finance can
can also increase electricity sales and reduce gener-             help bridge the gap.
ation costs.                                                         African governments could develop an approach
    Private involvement can also bring managerial                 to increase private investment in power transmis-
skills, technical knowhow, and performance incen-                 sion, based on international experience and African
tives. Tenders to finance transmission investments                experience in generation. In other countries, privately
will attract international bidders. Several firms are             financed transmission has achieved efficiency gains,
already monitoring possible opportunities for IPT                 reduced costs, and opened up access to new sources of
tenders in Africa, a project finance model. Interna-              finance. African countries would benefit from intro-
tional investors would have an equity exposure to the             ducing at least some degree of private finance in the
performance of the transmission lines they develop.               transmission sector, following their successful experi-
African countries will benefit from the incentives                ence attracting private investment in generation.




   Box 2.1 Funding gap in transmission sector in Kenya

   Ketraco is the government-owned transmission company of            By September 2016 Ketraco had completed 13 trans-
   Kenya, incorporated in December 2008.                           mission projects (1,099  km), and more than 4,200  km of
      Ketraco’s mandate is to plan, design, build, own, oper-      transmission lines were being built. Ketraco also plans to
   ate, and maintain HV electricity transmission grid and          build about 7,000 km of transmission lines and associated
   regional power interconnectors (132 kV, 220 kV, 400 kV and      substations from 2015/16 to 2019/20. These lines include:
   500 kV HVDC lines).
      Ketraco estimates that their Least Cost Power Devel-         •	   2,200 km of 132 kV lines,
   opment Plan 2013–2030 requires US$6.5  billion in invest-       •	   2,400 km of 220 kV lines,
   ments in transmission. The committed funds amount to            •	   2,000 km of 400 kV lines, and
   about US$615 million, leading to a financing gap of at least    •	   612 km of 500 kV HVDC lines.
   US$5.9 billion.

   Source: Ketraco, (2016).
14   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Notes                                                          8.	 “Energy Transmission in the United states,” Tribal
                                                                         Energy and Environmental Information https://
     1.	 N. Ouedraogo, “Modeling sustainable long-term                   teeic.indianaffairs.gov/er/transmission/restech/
         electricity supply-demand in Africa,” Applied Energy            dist/index.htm (accessed March 13, 2017).
         190, (2017): 1047–1067, http://www.sciencedirect.           9.	 The indicator is based on kilometers of transmis-
         com/science/article/pii/S0306261916319420                       sion lines (excluding lines below 200 kV). This
         (accessed March 11, 2017).                                      provides some indication of comparative transfer
     2.	 R. Golumbeanu and D. Barnes, “Connection                        capacity, but it should be recognized that the share
         Charges and Electricity Access in Sub-Saharan                   of transmission by voltage—and so the ability of
         Africa,” World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper              these networks to provide transmission services—
         6511, (2013), https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/              varies greatly between these countries.
         bitstream/handle/10986/15871/WPS6511.pdf?                 10.	 South Africa has 31,107 km of transmission lines.
         sequence=1&isAllowed=y (accessed March 11, 2017).          11.	 A. CASTELLANO ET AL. (2015); A. MIKETA AND N.
     3.	 Federal Republic of Nigeria, “Sustainable Energy                SAADI (2015).
         for All Action Agenda (SE4ALL-AA),” July 2016,            12.	 A. Castellano et al. (2015).
         http://www.se4all.org/sites/default/files/NIGERIA_        13.	 These projects are those included in the project
         SE4ALL_ACTION_AGENDA_FINAL.pdf (accessed                        investment portfolio of the Programme for Infra-
         March 11, 2017).                                                structure Development in Africa (PIDA) Priority
     4.	 A. Castellano et al. (2015).                                    Action Plan (PIDA-PAP) up to 2020, and up to 2040,
     5.	 A. Castellano et al. (2015).                                    in Sub-Saharan Africa and North Africa. Data from
     6.	 A. Castellano et al. (2015); A. Miketa and N. Saadi             African Development Bank, “Interconnecting, inte-
         (2015). Estimates of transmission and distribution              grating and transforming a continent,” Programme
         needs are bundled in Miketa and N. Saadi (2015).                for Infrastructure Development in Africa, 2013,
         The range included in the report assumes that                   https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/
         the allocation of transmission and distribution                 Documents/Project-and-Operations/PIDA%20
         investment needs (as a share of the bundled figure              note%20English%20for%20web%200208.pdf
         included in the A. Miketa and N. Saadi, (2015)) is              (accessed March 11, 2017).
         equal to the allocation in A. Castellano et al. (2015).   14.	 M. Hussain, “Republic of Mozambique—Energy
     7.	 Data sourced from Trimble, C. et al., “State owned              Sector Policy Note” (World Bank), November
         national grid T&D data,” 2014, http://data.worldbank            2015, http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
         .org/data-catalog/affordable-viable-power-for-africa            en/135711468180536987/pdf/ACS17091-REVISED-
         (accessed October 30, 2016). Data available for the             PUBLIC-Mozambique-Energy-Sector-Policy-Note
         following countries: Angola, Benin, Botswana,                   .pdf (accessed March 11, 2017).
         Burkina Faso, Burundi (x), Cameroon, Congo, Dem.          15.	 M. Kojima and C. Trimble, “Making Power Afford-
         Rep., Congo, Rep., Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Gabon,              able for Africa and Viable for Its Utilities,” World
         Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau (x), Kenya, Lesotho,               Bank Group, 2016, https://openknowledge
         Liberia (x), Madagascar (x), Malawi, Mali, Mauritius            .worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25091/
         (x), Mozambique, Namibia, Niger (x), Nigeria,                   108555.pdf?sequence=7 (accessed March 17, 2017).
         Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe (x), Senegal,               16.	 Excluding the costs of making the improvements.
         Seychelles (x), Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan,        17.	 In Vietnam for example, the transmission charge is
         Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo (x), Uganda, Zambia, and              5.5%–6% of the end-use tariff.
         Zimbabwe. The nine countries marked with an (x)
         have no transmission lines above 100 kV.
Section 3

Private finance of transmission
has worked well internationally

Private companies finance all or a large share of new        Merchant investments have been relatively
transmission investment in many countries.               common in the United States, the European Union,
    Several different business models have been used     and Australia. Neptune Transmission Line—a 104 km
to attract private investment in transmission. The       line between the states of New Jersey and New York
four main business models are privatizations, whole-     in the United States—had an estimated cost of over
of-grid concessions, IPTs, and merchant investments.     US$600 million. The estimated investment cost of
Private finance under these models has brought           three transmission lines financed on a merchant
substantial investment of new transmission to the        basis in Australia was US$1,094 million.4
countries using these models.                                All these models can work, but they work best
    Many member countries of the Organisation for        under different conditions. International experience
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)             provides lessons on the preconditions necessary for
have privatized over the last two decades. The United    different business models to work well. These lessons
Kingdom privatized three transmission companies          can help policymakers in Africa decide which busi-
in 1991: National Grid, Scottish Power, and Scottish     ness models are most appropriate and how best to
and Southern Energy (SSE). The three companies           implement them.
invested GBP5.6 billion between 2013 and 2016. The           The main characteristics of these different busi-
forecasted investment for the 2013–2021 period is        ness models are summarized in Table 3.1. The follow-
GBP 16.6 billion.1                                       ing sections describe each business model in detail,
    The Philippines currently applies the whole-of-      including information about the term and coverage
grid concession model. The concession was awarded        under each model, the way revenues are set, how
to the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines      incentives are defined, and whether the model pro-
(NGCP) in 2009. Since then, NGCP has invested over       vides open access or proprietary access. Examples of
US$1.9 billion in transmission.                          countries that have attracted private investment in
    IPTs have also enabled major investment in trans-    transmission under each model are also provided.
mission. IPT tenders in Brazil, Peru, Chile, and India       The term concession is used to refer to different
mobilized over US$24.5 billion from the private sector   types of contracts in different countries. The liter-
between 1998 and 2015, enabling close to 100,000 km      ature on PPPs often uses the term loosely. In some
of new transmission lines. IPTs are also increasingly    cases the term concession is used to refer to O&M
being used in countries that previously provided         contracts, where the concessionaire is not obliged to
exclusivity to a private transmission company—           finance new assets.
including the United Kingdom, the United States,             In this report, and as described in Section 3.2, the
Canada, and Australia. Canada has awarded 400 km         term “whole-of-grid” refers to a contract where the
of 230  kV transmission lines, for a total of US$452     private company is responsible for operating and
million.2 The United States has also awarded more        managing the existing transmission network and
than sixty IPTs, and more are expected in the coming     for financing and building all new transmission
years.3                                                  investment.
16   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Table 3.1 Business models for private investment in transmission

                             Indefinite             Whole-of-grid         Independent Power               Merchant
                            privatization            concession            Transmission (IPT)            investment
      Term              Indefinite               Long term: often         Long term: often          Indefinite
                                                 25 years or more         25 years or more
      Coverage          All existing and new     All existing and new     Individual line or        Single major line,
                        lines within a country   lines within a country   package of lines.         often HVDC
                        or region                or region                New lines only
      Revenues          Annual revenues set      Annual revenues set      Annual revenues           Revenues dependent
                        by the regulator to      by the regulator to      largely or entirely set   on MWh of flow
                        ensure a reasonable      ensure a reasonable      by the winning bid        along the line and
                        return on and of         return on and                                      price differentials
                        capital, and subject     of capital, and                                    between the two ends
                        to periodic regulatory   subject to periodic                                of the line
                        review                   regulatory review or
                                                 to arbitration clauses
                                                 under concession law
      Incentives        Related to whole-of-     Related to whole-of-     Availability for the      Ability to move power
                        grid performance         grid performance         line (typically 98%)      from lower-price
                                                                                                    areas to higher-price
                                                                                                    areas
      Access            Open access to all       Open access to all       Open access to all        Proprietary access.
                        transmission users on    transmission users on    transmission users on     Access rights used by
                        an equal basis           an equal basis           an equal basis            owner or on-sold



         Model 1: Privatizations
     3.1                                                           Scotland through a wholly owned subsidiary, SHE
                                                                    Transmission. The transmission company is sub-
     Privatizations provide ownership of the transmis-              ject to general license conditions that apply to all
     sion network in a defined area to a private com-               transmission companies in the United Kingdom
     pany. In most cases the government implements                  and special license conditions that only apply to
     this business model by privatizing all or a part of a          the company. The first special license condition
     ­
     government-owned transmission company. This can                (Condition AA) defines the company’s transmis-
     be done through a trade sale or a public flotation.            sion area in northern Scotland. The second special
        Once privatized, the private transmission owner is          license condition (Condition B) states that the
     responsible for operating and managing the existing            licensee shall not make transmission assets avail-
     network and for financing and carrying out all new             able outside this area.6 The license also defines the
     transmission investment.                                       connection between SSE’s region and the region of
        The main characteristics of this model are:                 the neighboring transmission company, Scottish
                                                                    Power.
     •	 Term: The private transmission company owns the          •	 Revenues: Transmission systems are considered
        transmission assets they have acquired and new              a natural monopoly and are subject to economic
        transmission assets they finance. They own both             regulation. The private transmission owner
        for an unlimited time.                                      plans require investment. The regulator confirms
     •	 Coverage: The private transmission company has              the prudence of the investment proposals. The
        obligations and rights within a defined geographic          approved investment costs are included in the
        area. This may be a whole country or a region               regulatory asset base for the private transmission
        within a country.                                           company and are recovered through transmission
           Many countries have a single transmission com-           charges.
        pany. The geographic nature of these rights and                The application of this approach varies greatly
        obligations is clearer when the transmission com-           between countries, but has shared characteristics:
        pany covers a region rather than the whole country.         •	 Transmission companies are subject to a cap on
        The United Kingdom provides an example.5                       overall revenues rather than on the price they
           Two transmission companies operate in Scot-                 charge per MWh that they transfer. A revenue
        land. SSE is the transmission owner in northern
                                     PRIVATE FINANCE OF TRANSMISSION HAS WORKED WELL INTERNATIONALLY                   17


     cap is typically used because their costs do not            in 1991. National Grid now owns and oper-
     vary in relation to changes in the MWh flowing              ates 7,200  km of overhead lines, 1,400  km of
     across the system. A price cap would expose the             underground cable, and 329 grid substations.7
     transmission companies to risk on the demand                The three companies invested GBP5.6 billion
     for transmission network services, but they are             between 2013 and 2016. The forecasted invest-
     unable to manage this demand,                               ment for the 2013–2021 period is GBP16.6 billion.
   •	 The revenue cap is set at a level that provides a          National Grid and SSE are currently investing in
      reasonable return on capital and return of cap-            the first bi-directional subsea interconnector—
      ital. “Return on capital” means that the returns           Western Link—to transport renewable energy
      are sufficiently high for the company to finance           from Scotland to consumers in Wales and
      its investments; “return of capital” means that            England. The project is valued at GBP1 billion
      the revenues cover the depreciation of the                 and will be operational by the end of 2017,8
      assets, and                                             •	 The Government of Victoria privatized genera-
   •	 Regulatory independence is important to avoid              tion, transmission, and distribution during 1995-
      political pressure to keep down electricity prices.        1999.9 The privatizations in the electricity sector
      Regulatory independence is secured through                 raised A$22.5 billion,10
      legislation and governance arrangements for             •	 The privatization of electricity transmission in
      the regulatory body (such as protection from               the State of South Australia in 2000, and
      dismissal).                                             •	 The progressive sale of government interests
•	 Incentives: The regulatory regime establishes                 in German transmission companies during the
   incentives for the privatized transmission com-               1990s.11
   panies. The use of a revenue cap means that the
   transmission company has incentives to minimize              Examples of mixed ownership also exist. For
   costs, while meeting the required quality of service.    example, the Réseau de Transport d’Électricité (RTE)
      The privatized transmission company typically         is a wholly owned subsidiary of Électricité de France
   owns the whole transmission grid for a defined           (EDF). EDF is 85 percent owned by the Government of
   area. As a result, the regulatory incentives can         France, with the remaining 15 percent traded on the
   relate to the overall performance of the grid.           Paris stock exchange.
      One example is the reliability incentive for trans-       Full privatization of the transmission network
   mission companies in the United Kingdom. This            has been less common in low-income countries.
   gives the companies incentives to maintain the net-      Some countries in South America privatized part or
   works well and avoid disruptions to supply caused        the entire transmission sector in the 1990s. However,
   by the transmission network. For each of the three       the focus of this report is on financing greenfield
   transmission companies in the United Kingdom,            transmission. The private transmission companies in
   a reward or penalty is calculated each year based        South America do not have exclusivity for financing
   on the total volume of energy not supplied during        new transmission investment, like the case of Argen-
   loss-of-supply events on their networks.                 tina and Chile, or did not last long, like the case of
•	 Access: All users of the transmission networks           Bolivia.
   have to get access on a consistent and nondiscrim-           In 1993, the Government of Argentina granted a
   inatory basis to ensure that the wholesale compet-       95-year concession (in effect privatizing) to operate
   itive markets work well. This is typically achieved      the national transmission grid (Transener). The con-
   by requiring the transmission companies to pub-          tract is to operate and maintain the transmission
   lish tariffs and minimum terms and conditions for        networks, and the private company is not responsible
   access to, and use of, the networks that apply to all    for the expansion of the system.12 New transmission
   potential users.                                         investments in Argentina are publicly and compet-
•	 Examples: Many member countries of the OECD              itively tendered by the Government. Transener can
   have privatized transmission and have since relied       bid in the tender.
   purely on private finance for new investment.                The Government of Bolivia privatized Ende13
   Examples include:                                        Transmisión, the country’s largest transmission
   •	 The three private transmission companies in           company, in 1997. In this case, the private company
      the United Kingdom (National Grid, Scottish           had the obligation to invest in new assets. However,
      Power, and SSE) following the privatizations          Ende Transmisión was nationalized in 2012, as part of
18   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     a broad program, which also included nationalizing             companies. These incentives also relate to the over-
     generation and distribution companies.                         all performance of the grid.
                                                                       The transmission concession in the Philippines
                                                                    concession provides an example. The performance
         Model 2: Whole-of-grid
     3.2                                                           incentive scheme (PIS) is based on availability, fre-
         concessions                                                quency and severity of interruptions, compliance
     Whole-of-grid concessions provide similar rights               with frequency and voltage limits, and customer
     and responsibilities to privatizations, but for a shorter      satisfaction. The regulatory approved payment
     period. In most cases, the government implements               (under the PIS) of 609 million Philippine Peso (PhP)
     this business model by the competitive tender of the           in 2012. This compares with a maximum annual
     concession and enters a concession contract with the           revenue of around PhP45 billion. The PIS is low in
     winning bidder.                                                relation to total revenues, but significant enough to
        Once the concession contract is awarded, the                affect the equity returns and to provide an incen-
     private concession company (the winning bidder) is             tive to the concessionaire to act.
     responsible for operating and managing the existing         •	 Access: All users of the transmission networks get
     network and for financing and carrying out all new             access to the transmission network on a consistent
     transmission investment.                                       and nondiscriminatory basis.
        The main characteristics of this model are:              •	 Examples: The transmission concession in the
                                                                    Philippines provides an example of significant
     •	 Term: The concession term is defined in the con-            investment under this model. Total investment
        tract. The typical duration is 20–30 years. Some            in transmission in the Philippines was close to
        contracts include an option to extend the time for          US$4.2 billion. Over US$1.9 billion was invested in
        a further period.                                           physical assets.14 NGCP has also reached perfor-
     •	 Coverage: The concessionaire has obligations and            mance targets. NGCP has consistently exceeded
        rights within a defined geographic area. In most            grid loss thresholds and reduced losses through
        cases this covers the whole country. The conces-            reducing tripping frequency and improving avail-
        sion may be limited to the main grid and exclude            ability. For example, availability for the regions of
        small, isolated grids.                                      Visayas, Mindanao, and Luzon was between 99.6
     •	 Revenues: The revenues for the concessionaire are           and 99.8 percent in 2016.15
        set through a regulatory process. This may be an               Whole-of-grid concessions have also been used
        independent economic regulator. Alternatively, the          in Africa, including in Cameroon, Mali, and Sene-
        concession contract may define processes for mod-           gal (see Section 4.1). In these cases, the government
        ifying the concessionaire’s revenues as the cost            has retained a considerable share of ownership. In
        base changes and may define processes for arbi-             the case of Mali, the Mali Government granted a
        tration of any disputes between the concessionaire          concession in July 2000, retaining 40 of the shares.
        and the government.                                         However, in October 2005, one of the private con-
           The Philippines transmission concession pro-             cessionaires sold its shares and the Government
        vides an example of the revenues being set by an            kept 66 percent of the shares, and has been the
        independent economic regulator. The Electricity             majority owner of EDM since then.
        Power Industry Reform Act 2001 authorizes the
        Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) to estab-                 Model 3: Independent
                                                                 3.3 
        lish and enforce a methodology for setting trans-
        mission wheeling rates. The rates must allow the
                                                                     power transmission
        recovery of just and reasonable costs and a reason-      IPTs provide rights and obligations associated with a
        able return on the rate base to enable the entity to     single transmission line or a package of a few lines. In
        operate viably. The ERC has developed rules for set-     most cases the government implements this business
        ting a cap on the maximum annual revenues that           model by tendering the contract. In some cases the
        the concession company can earn from wheeling            contract is directly awarded.
        charges.                                                    Once the contract is awarded, the IPT (the win-
     •	 Incentives: The regulatory regime establishes            ning bidder) is responsible for building and operating
        incentives for the concession company in a similar       the line or package of lines defined in the contract.
        way to the incentives for privatized transmission        The IPT has no rights or responsibilities for the
                                        PRIVATE FINANCE OF TRANSMISSION HAS WORKED WELL INTERNATIONALLY                             19




   Box 3.1 Summary of outcomes of IPTs internationally

   IPTs have led to successful results in various countries:          2002–2007 Electricity Plan, and 6.1 percent of the total
                                                                      network
   •	 Brazil organized 38  tenders of multiple lots from 1999      •	 Canada has awarded 400  km of 230  kV transmission
      to 2015. These resulted in the award of 211 concessions         lines, for a total of US$452 million. In 2014, the Alberta
      and 69,811 km of transmission lines designed, built, and        Electric System Operator also awarded a 500 km 500 kV
      operated under BOOT contracts                                   transmission line for US$1.4 billion.16 The estimated oper-
   •	 Peru has organized 18 transmission tenders since 1998.          ations start date is 2019
      These have resulted in more than 6,000 km of transmis-       •	 The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) of
      sion lines (and associated substations) designed, built,        the United States removed automatic rights of incum-
      and operated by the private sector under BOOT contracts         bent transmission companies in 2011. Since then, over
   •	 Chile has organized 7  tenders since 2006. Ten proj-            sixty IPTs have been awarded, and more are expected in
      ects were awarded for a total of almost 1,200 km. This          the coming years, and
      includes a recently awarded 140 km, 500 kV line to inter-    •	 Australia recently tendered a contract to upgrade the
      connect their two main systems                                  Heywood Interconnector (a transmission line between
   •	 In India, the private sector has developed over 21,000ct        South Australia and Victoria) for an estimated cost of
      km of lines between 2006 and 2016. This is equivalent           close to US$80 million.17
      to 10.4 percent of new lines built since the start of the



existing network or to new transmission investment                •	 Examples: IPTs are widely used around the world,
other than the rights or responsibilities defined in the             including Mexico, South America (Brazil, Chile,
contract.                                                            Colombia, and Peru) and India. An IPT for Pakistan
   The main characteristics of this model are:                       is also being negotiated.
                                                                        IPTs are also increasingly being used in coun-
•	 Term: The term ranges from 25 years to 45 years.                  tries that previously provided exclusivity to a
   Some contracts include an option to extend the                    private transmission company. The United King-
   term for a further period.                                        dom, Canada, Australia, and the United States
•	 Coverage: The IPT provides a single line or pack-                 have introduced IPTs alongside existing private
   age of lines. It has no other obligations in the region           or ­government-financed transmission companies
   or country concerned.                                             that previously had regional exclusivity.
•	 Revenues: The required annual payment is a bid                       Box 3.1 provides a summary of the outcomes of
   parameter. The winning bid largely establishes the                IPTs in several countries around the world.
   payments to be received over the contract term. As
   discussed in Section 6.6, there may also be limited
   scope for regulatory review of some aspects of the
                                                                      Model 4: Merchant
                                                                  3.4 
   payment.                                                           investments
•	 Incentives: The contract establishes incentives                Merchant investors build and operate a single trans-
   for the IPT. The IPT has incentives to reach timely            mission line (“merchant line”). In many cases this is
   commissioning of the transmission line and to                  an HVDC line. The merchant investor will build the
   minimize the whole-of-life costs. The main perfor-             convertor stations at either end of the line. These
   mance incentive is to ensure high availability for             stations will convert the current from AC to DC and
   the transmission line over the contract term.                  back again. In most cases, merchant lines are a private
      The IPT is not responsible for how the integrated           initiative and not initiated by the government.
   transmission grid performs, other than ensuring
   the transmission line, or lines that it owns, is               •	 Term: The term depends on the life of the mer-
   available.                                                        chant line and of any associated agreements.
•	 Access: All users of the transmission networks get             •	 Coverage: The merchant investor provides a
   access to the transmission network on a consistent                single line and has no wider rights or obligations
   and nondiscriminatory basis.
20   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




          for developing transmission within the region or              Australia, and Tasmania). Merchant investments
          country.                                                      are possible between these five regions but not
     •	   Revenues: Under a “pure” merchant model, the                  within them
          owner of the merchant line uses or sells the rights              An example of a merchant line in Australia
          to flow power along the line, and the revenues for            is Basslink, a 370  km HVDC interconnection,
          the merchant line depend on the MWh of energy                 connecting Tasmania to the NEM. The rationale
          that flows along the line and the price differences           for the project was to enable Hydro Tasmania to
          between the two ends of the line. As described                earn higher revenues for its energy by exporting
          below, regulatory intervention may affect the reve-           energy during peak periods when prices are
          nues and also how the owner sells the transmission            higher and importing off-peak. Hydro Tasma-
          capacity.                                                     nia retains the rights to use the line. Figure 3.1
     •	   Incentives: The merchant investor has incentives              shows Basslink’s route from the island of Tas-
          to maximize revenues. They can mostly achieve                 mania to the mainland in Australia. The project
          this by ensuring high availability of the transmis-           required 290 km of subsea HVDC cable (then the
          sion line during periods when there are large price           longest HVDC cable in the world), 13 km of AC
          differentials between the two ends of the line.               line in Tasmania and 63 km in Victoria. The line
     •	   Access: Under a “pure” merchant model, the owner              has a rated continuous power of 500 MW and a
          of the line sets the price and the terms and condi-           dynamic power capacity of 630 MW for shorter
          tions for its access. The regulator does not establish        periods.
          regulated terms for access by a third party. Possible            The regulatory framework also has a bearing
          variations to these arrangements are discussed in             on the approach taken to merchant investments:
          the examples below.                                        •	 In the United States, the owners of merchant
     •	   Examples: The scope for merchant links is                     lines need authority from the Federal Energy
          strongly influenced by the effect of market design            Regulatory Commission (FERC) to enter into
          on locational price signals and by the regulatory             negotiated transmission rates with users of
          arrangements.                                                 the line. FERC has established four factors to
             Merchant investments are based on the price                determine whether it will approve the rates.
          differentials between the two ends of the line. The           These are the justness and reasonableness of
          case for merchant lines depends on the nature                 rates; the potential for undue discrimination;
          and strength of locational price differences in the           the potential for undue preference, including
          market:                                                       affiliate preference; and regional reliability and
          •	 Many markets in the United States have                     operational efficiency requirements. At first,
             locational marginal pricing—that is, different             FERC required merchant transmission to allo-
             wholesale prices at each transmission node. This           cate capacity using an open season, but it now
             strengthens the case for merchant investments.             allows up to 100 percent to be allocated through
                Examples of merchant lines in the United                direct agreement.
             States include: The Cross-Sound Cable, a 39 km          •	 In the European Union, regulation favors devel-
             submarine cable that connects New England to               opment of regulated transmission by the Trans-
             Long Island, New York, acquired by a private               mission System Operators (TSOs). However, the
             firm in 2006 for US$213  million;18 Neptune                European Commission can exempt merchant
             Transmission Line, a 104  km undersea and                  investments from regulations under defined
             underground transmission link between Long                 circumstances.
             Island and Sayreville, New Jersey (with an esti-
             mated cost of over US$600 million19); and Path
             15, a transmission line constructed in the mid-
                                                                   3.5 Interconnection projects
             1980s that connects the northern and southern              can also use some
             sections of the California power grid,20 and              of these models
          •	 The Australian National Electricity Market
             (NEM) establishes prices for five regions (these      This report focuses on in-country transmission
             regions coincide with the five members of the         investments. That is, investments within one single
             NEM: Queensland, New South Wales (including           jurisdiction. However, transmission investments can
             the Australian Capital Territory), Victoria, South    also provide interconnection between two or more
                                                                   countries.
                                                PRIVATE FINANCE OF TRANSMISSION HAS WORKED WELL INTERNATIONALLY                          21



Figure 3.1 Basslink transmission line route




                                           Tasmania




Source: Basslink webpage, “Maps,” http://www.basslink.com.au/basslink-interconnector/maps/ (accessed March 15, 2017).




    Government-ownership is also the dominant                                    (South Africa), EDM (Mozambique), and SEC (Swa-
approach to financing interconnection projects, par-                             ziland). MOTRACO owns the assests and the three
ticularly in Africa. However, as the project requires                            utilities each own a third of the shares. Other Afri-
investment in two or more countries it is no longer                              can countries are also exploring similar approaches
feasible for a single government-owned company                                   to financing regional interconnection lines—
to undertake the project. At least two companies                                 including the Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone,
are involved. There are two main options for how                                 and Guinée (CLSG) interconnection, a 225 kV and
the two or more companies involved manage the                                    1,300  km transmission line; or the Organisation
interconnection:                                                                 pour la Mise en Valeur du fleuve Gambie (the
                                                                                 Gambia River Basin Development Organization,
•	 Government-owned companies in each country                                    OMVG) interconnection project, a 1,677 km line of
   can finance their side of the transmission line.                              225 kV capable of handling 800 MW.
   This is the model used for the Cahora Bassa line
   between Mozambique and South Africa, and for                                  However, some of the four business models
   the Ethiopia-Kenya interconnector.                                         described above can also be used for interconnec-
•	 The utilities can establish an SPV to invest in the                        tions. International experience shows examples of
   interconnection. An example is MOTRACO, an SPV                             privately financed interconnection projects using
   formed by three state-owned utilities—ESKOM                                merchant investment or the IPT models.
22   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




         Most interconnection projects have used the mer-                            •	 Channel Fixed Link, a 1,000 MW line linking Brit-
     chant investment model. There are various examples                                 ain and France via the Channel Tunnel.
     in Europe. Most European countries have a single
     wholesale price across the country. The price differen-                             Interconnection projects can also use IPT con-
     tials that drive merchant investments can only arise                            tracts. There are two possible models to using IPT ten-
     for connection between two countries. To date, five                             ders for an interconnection investment. One, running
     transmission lines connecting countries in Europe                               an IPT tender on at least one side of the frontier, and
     have achieved some level of exemption from regula-                              the other, running a joint IPT tender.
     tory requirements and can be considered merchant                                    In the first case at least one country uses the IPT
     investments. Several more are being developed.                                  model for the investment on their side of the fron-
         Examples of merchant lines in Europe include:                               tier. This is the case of the 1,200 km HVDC Tala line
                                                                                     connecting Bhutan to the Indian grid. The line runs
     •	 EastLink, a 105  km submarine HVDC merchant                                  from a substation at Siliguri, close to the border, to
        link that enables transfer of power from Estonia to                          a substation close to Delhi. The Tala line enables the
        Finland                                                                      export of power from the Tata-owned hydro plant in
     •	 BritNed, a 260 km submarine HVDC line connect-                               Bhutan. The line is owned by Powerlinks, which in
        ing the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The                              turn is majority owned by Tata Power Company.
        line has a capacity of 1,000 MW, and was developed                               The second case is possible, but has not been com-
        in 2011 for €600 million                                                     pleted yet. There is no evidence of two or more coun-
     •	 East-West Interconnector, an HVDC interconnec-                               tries granting an interconnection through a joint IPT
        tion linking the United Kingdom and Ireland. The                             tender.
        700 MW line was developed in 2012 and cost €600                                  Countries cannot use the privatization or whole-
        million, and                                                                 of-grid concession model to finance interconnections.
                                                                                     These generally apply to an exclusive obligation to



     Figure 3.2 The SIEPAC interconnection




     Source: Comision Regional de Interconexion Electrica, “Mapa con línea SIEPAC,” http://crie.org.gt/wp/mapa-con-linea-siepac/, (accessed May 10, 2017).
                                      PRIVATE FINANCE OF TRANSMISSION HAS WORKED WELL INTERNATIONALLY                      23


finance new transmission within a country rather                   Bid_Transmission_Investments_in_the_U.S._and_
than between countries                                             Abroad.pdf?1408140050 (accessed March 16, 2017).
    An alternative approach is a hybrid business             3.	   NERA Economic Consulting, “US Transmission
model between government-owned and private                         Planning Arrangements—Competitive Procurement
                                                                   and Independent Planner Model. A report for Grid
companies. The utilities can set up an SPV and
                                                                   Australia,” November 2012, http://www.nera.com/
involve third party equity participation. An example
                                                                   content/dam/nera/publications/archive2/PUB_
is the Empresa Propietaria de la Red (EPR), formed
                                                                   GridAustralia_1112.pdf (accessed March 16, 2017).
to design, engineer, construct, and own 1,793  km of         4.	   Australian Energy Regulator, “Electricity trans-
a 230  kV interconnector that links the power grids                mission,” State of the energy market, 2009, https://
of Panama, Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua, El Sal-                www.aer.gov.au/system/files/Chapter%205%20%20
vador, and Guatemala. The line is called the Sistema               Electricity%20transmission%202009.pdf (accessed
de Interconexión Eléctrica de los Países de América                March 15, 2017).
Central (SIEPAC) interconnection.                            5.	   This report uses the United Kingdom to refer to
    Figure 3.2 shows the route of the interconnection              power sector and transmission arrangements under
line in the different countries.                                   UK legislation, including both UK-wide arrange-
                                                                   ments and those that only apply in Great Britain,
    EPR is an SPV owned by:21
                                                                   excluding Northern Ireland.
                                                             6.	   The general license conditions and the special
•	 The government-owned transmission companies
                                                                   license conditions in the Scottish Hydro-Electric
   or utilities of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras,               Transmission Limited Transmission Licence are
   Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Panama.                              available on Ofgem’s electronic public register
•	 A private company: ENDESA (Spain).                              at https://epr.ofgem.gov.uk/Document (accessed
•	 Two other regional government-owned trans-                      March 17, 2017).
   mission companies: ISA (Colombia), and CFE                7.	   National Grid, Our UK Profile, http://investors
   (Mexico).22                                                     .nationalgrid.com/about-us/our-markets/uk-profile
                                                                   .aspx (accessed March 17, 2017).
   Each of the nine shareholders has an equal own-           8.	   Western Link Project, “Welcome page,” http://www
                                                                   .westernhvdclink.co.uk/ and http://www
ership stake.
                                                                   .scottishpower.com/pages/our_major_projects.aspx
   EPR obtains revenues from regulated transmission
                                                                   (accessed March 15, 2017).
charges set by the Regional Electric Interconnection
                                                             9.	   R. Nepal and J. Foster, “Electricity Networks Privat-
Commission (CRIE), the regional regulator.23 CRIE is               ization in Australia: An Overview of the Debate,”
the regulating entity of the Central American market.              School of Economics, University of Queensland,
CRIE consists of one Commissioner drawn from the                   http://www.uq.edu.au/economics/abstract/541.pdf
electricity regulatory agency of each country. This                (accessed March 16, 2017).
was intended to minimize the scope for inconsistency        10.	   CEDA, “Privatisation: A Review of the Australian
between national and regional regulatory approaches                Experience,” December 2002, http://adminpanel.
and encourage the standardization of technical and                 ceda.com.au/FOLDERS/Service/Files/Documents/
operating standards and procedures.                                15230~growth50.pdf (accessed March 17, 2017).
                                                            11.	   M. Heddenhausen, “Privatisations in Europe’s liber-
                                                                   alized electricity markets – the cases of the United
Notes                                                              Kingdom, Sweden, Germany, and France,” Research
                                                                   Unit EU Integration (2007), https://www.swp-berlin
 1.	 Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, “RIIO-ET1.
                                                                   .org/fileadmin/contents/products/projekt_papiere/
     Annual Report 2015–2016,” February 2017, https://
                                                                   Electricity_paper_KS_IIformatiert.pdf (accessed
     www.ofgem.gov.uk/system/files/docs/2017/02/
                                                                   March 10, 2017).
     riio-et1_annual_report_2015-16.pdf (accessed
                                                            12.	   “El sector eléctrico de Argentina,” Pampa Energía,
     March 16, 2017). The allowed total expenditure is
                                                                   http://ri.pampaenergia.com/pampaenergia/web/
     intended to give incentives to seek the most effi-
                                                                   conteudo_es.asp?idioma=2&conta=47&tipo=24234
     cient solutions and avoid any regulatory incentives
                                                                   (accessed May 11, 2017).
     to prefer capital expenditure over other solutions.
                                                            13.	   “Nuestra historia,” Empresa Nacional de Elec-
 2.	 J. Pfeifenberger et al., “Contrasting Competitively-
                                                                   tricidad, http://www.ende.bo/historia (accessed
     Bid Transmission Investments in the U.S. and
                                                                   May 11, 2017).
     Abroad,” Presented at UBS conference call, May
                                                            14.	   PPI Project Database, World Bank and PPIAF,
     2014, http://www.brattle.com/system/news/pdfs/
                                                                   ppi.worldbank.org
     000/000/719/original/Contrasting_Competitively-
24   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     15.	 “NGCP exceeds performance targets for 7th           19.	 Starwood Energy Group, “Neptune transmission
          straight year,” NGCP, September 2016, http://ngcp        system, financed by energy investors funds and
          .ph/article-view.asp?ContentID=8360 (accessed 26         Starwood Energy Group, begins delivering power
          September, 2016).                                        to Long Island,” July 2, 2007, http://starwoodenergy
     16.	 Alberta Electric System Operator, “AESO Awards           group.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/6_
          Alberta PowerLine Limited Partnership with Fort          NeptuneAnnouncement.pdf (accessed March 15,
          McMurray West 500 kV Transmission Project,”              2017).
          December 2014, http://www.marketwired               20.	 Line was upgraded in 2002, adding a 500 kV
          .com/press-release/aeso-awards-alberta-powerline-        transmission line, and approximately 1,500 MW of
          limited-partnership-with-fort-mcmurray west-500-         capacity, to the 135 km Los Banos-Gates link.
          kv-transmission-1978463.htm (accessed March 16,     21.	 Empresa Propietaria de la web, “Accionistas,” http://
          2017).                                                   www.eprsiepac.com/contenido/accionistas/,
     17.	 Australian Energy Market Operator, “South                (accessed May 10, 2017).
          Australia—Victoria (Heywood) Interconnector         22.	 The Government of Colombia is a majority owner
          Upgrade,” January 2013, http://www.aemo.com.au/          of ISA and CFE is Mexico’s government-owned and
          media/Files/Other/planning/RITTs/SA_VIC_                 vertically integrated utility.
          Heywood_Interconnector_Upgrade_RIT_T_PACR           23.	 Economic Consulting Associates, “The Potential of
          .pdf (accessed March 16, 2017).                          Regional Power Sector Integration. Central Amer-
     18.	 Babcock & Brown Infrastructure, “ASX Announce-           ican Electric Interconnection System (SIEPAC),
          ment. Completion of Acquisition: New England–            Transmission & Trading Case Study,” Submitted
          New York Cross Sound Cable,” February 28, 2006,          to ESMAP, 2010, http://documents.worldbank.org/
          http://www.crosssoundcable.com/doc/Acquisition           curated/en/117791468337281999/pdf/773070v100
          .pdf (accessed March 15, 2017).                          ESMA0297B00PUBLIC00SIEPAC.pdf, (accessed
                                                                   May 10, 2017).
Section 4

Africa has little privately financed
transmission, but substantial
private investment in generation

The experience of private investment in the African       transmission, though they have brought operational
power sector also provides guidance on the business       benefits.
models that can work in the continent.                        Africa has no experience of privately financed
   Africa has attracted little private investment in      transmission lines through IPTs or merchant lines.
transmission under whole-of-grid concessions and a        Some preliminary steps have been made to prepare
small number of transmission lines connecting gen-        for IPT tenders, but no projects have been awarded.
erators and the main grid, financed by IPP developers.
This has brought operational benefits—like expan-         African experience with whole-of-grid
sion of access and investments in generation—but          concessions
only a low level of investment. No African countries      This report describes the experience of three coun-
have introduced private finance in transmission           tries that have introduced PSP in transmission
through IPTs or merchant investments.                     through whole-of-grid concessions in recent years.
   By contrast, Africa has attracted over US$25 billion   The countries are:
in private investment in IPPs since 1994, creating
installed generation capacity of over 11 GW.              •	 Cameroon, from 2001 to 2021,
   This section first summarizes Africa’s experience      •	 Mali, from 2000 to 2020, and
with private finance of transmission. It then draws on    •	 Senegal, from 1999 to 2001.
the relative success in the generation sector to show
how investment can be attracted into the African              Table 4.1 summarizes these three cases, with infor-
transmission sector.                                      mation on the period and date of the concession, the
                                                          scope of the concession, the name of the utility under
                                                          concession, the parties involved, and their shares in
    There has been little
4.1                                                      the concession.
    private investment                                        The Governments of Mali and Senegal each
    in transmission                                       granted a concession for the vertically integrated util-
                                                          ity, including the transmission activities. In the case
In most countries in Africa the government-owned          of Cameroon the Government granted four separate
utilities have exclusivity over the transmission grid     concessions to a single concessionaire, including one
and finance all transmission investments. In some         for the state-owned transmission company.
cases, this is required in legislation.                       Other countries in Africa have also introduced pri-
    Since 1999 three countries in Africa have intro-      vate sector participation in transmission, but not as
duced private sector participation (PSP) in the trans-    whole-of-grid concessions. For example, the utilities
mission sector, through whole-of-grid concessions.        in Gabon and Cote d’Ivoire signed an affermage1 with
These have not achieved significant investment in
26                         LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




Table 4.1 Examples of concessions and affermages in Africa

                                                                                               Name of utility under
     Country                    Period                   Scope of concession                      concession                                    Parties and shares
 Cameroon              20 years                      Concession for generation,               SONEL (Société                        •	 AES SONEL (United States): 51%
                       (2001–2021)                   transmission, and                        Nacionale d’Électricité)              •	 Government: 44%
                                                     distribution. However, the
                                                                                                                                    •	 Company’s personnel: 5%
                                                     transmission concession
                                                     ended in August 2015                                                           •	 In 2014, AES sold its stake in AES
                                                                                                                                       SONEL to Actis. The company was
                                                                                                                                       renamed ENEO
 Mali                  20 years                      Concession for generation,               EDM (Électricité du Mali)             •	 SAUR/IPS-WA(France/Canada):
                       (2000–2020)                   transmission, distribution,                                                       34%
                                                     and supply of electricity                                                      •	 Government: 66%
                                                     and water
                                                                                                                                    SAUR and IPS-WA had 39% and
                                                                                                                                    21% of the concession, respectively,
                                                                                                                                    until 2005
 Senegal               2 years                       Concession for generation,               SENELEC (Société                      •	 Elyo (France) and Hydro-Québec
                       (1999–2001)                   transmission, distribution,              National d’Éléctricité du                (Canada): 34%
                                                     and sale of electricity                  Sénégal)                              •	 Government: 66%
     Country                    Period                   Scope of affermage                          Related utility                            Parties and shares
 Gabon                 25 years                      O&M contract                             SEEG (Société d’Énergie               •	 Veolia2 (France): 51%
                       (1997–2021)                                                            et d’Eau du Gabon)                    •	 Government: 49%
 Cote d’Ivoire         20 years                      O&M contract                             CIE (Compagnie                        •	 SAUR (France/Canada): 51%
                       (1990–2020)                                                            Ivoirienne d’Électricité)             •	 Government: 49%

Source: Developed by Castalia. Table contains examples of African countries that introduced concessions (including transmission) and affermage contracts since 1990.



                          private parties. In these cases, the private investors                            supported by the Multilateral Investment Guarantee
                          had a contract to operate and maintain the transmis-                              Agency (MIGA) which provided Political Risk Insur-
                          sion lines, but were not obliged to finance transmis-                             ance (PRI) coverage to Actis through its subsidiary
                          sion assets. The last two rows of Table 4.1 summarize                             Energy Cameroon Cooperatief B.A. The company was
                          these two cases.                                                                  renamed ENEO.
                              The Government of Cameroon granted a conces-                                      The concessionaire in Cameron has increased
                          sion for the government-owned and vertically inte-                                customer numbers by over 340,000,5 investing in
                          grated utility, Société Nacionale d’Électricité (SONEL),                          more than 304  MW of new generation capacity,6
                          as part of a larger power sector reform introduced                                and increasing low-voltage (LV) and medium-voltage
                          in the end of the 1990s. The International Finance                                (MV) lines by 37 and 21 percent respectively (between
                          Corporation (IFC) supported the Government of                                     2001 and 2010), as Figure 4.1 shows. However, there
                          Cameroon with the bidding process to grant a 20-year                              was minimal expansion of the transmission network.
                          concession to generate, transmit, and distribute elec-                            In 2001, the network in Cameroon had 480  km of
                          tricity in Cameroon.                                                              225 kV lines and 337 km of 110 kV lines. By 2010, the
                              Five bidders were prequalified; one submitted a                               network had only 3 km more of 225 kV lines.
                          bid. The prequalification was based on technical and                                  ENEO operates under separate production, trans-
                          financial requirements. AES Corporation from the                                  mission, and distribution concession contracts, and
                          United States was the only bidder. AES signed the                                 an electricity sales license. A contract renegotiation
                          concession agreement in 2001, paying US$71 million3                               in August 2015 led to the transfer of the transmission
                          to acquire 56  percent of the company.4 The Govern-                               assets to a new public corporation. ENEO will con-
                          ment of Cameroon kept the remaining 44  percent.                                  tinue to carry out generation, distribution, and sales.7
                          The utility became AES SONEL. AES sold its stake                                      The Mali Government also granted a concession
                          in AES SONEL to British group Actis at the end of                                 for the government-owned and vertically integrated
                          2013. Actis’ equity investment in AES SONEL was                                   utility, Électricité du Mali (EDM), in July 2000. SAUR
AFRICA HAS LITTLE PRIVATELY FINANCED TRANSMISSION, BUT SUBSTANTIAL PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN GENERATION                                                                27



  Figure 4.1 Length of transmission and distribution lines in Cameroon (km),
  2001–2010

                                                                                                                                                      21%
        14,000                                                                                                                                        37%

        12,000

       10,000

         8,000

         6,000

         4,000

         2,000
                                                                                                                                                      1%
                0
                        2001         2002          2003         2004         2005         2006          2007         2008          2009          2010

                                         High voltage                          Medium voltage                              Low voltage

  Source: Castalia. Data sourced from G. Tchatat, “Raport Final Cameroun,” (Contribution à la préparation du rapport national pour la formulation du livre blanc
  régional sur l’accès universel aux services énergétiques intégrants le développement des énergies renouvelables et de l’efficacité énergétique, PNUD), 2014,
  http://www.se4all.org/sites/default/files/Cameroon_RAGA_FR_Released.pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).



  International acquired 39  percent of the shares                                      In July 2001 the Government started the tender
  of EDM, and Industrial Promotion Services (IPS)                                    process to re-concession SENELEC. The Government
  acquired 21  percent. The Ministry of Mines, Energy                                launched a Request for Proposals (RFP) and selected
  and Water Resources retained the remaining 40 per-                                 a preferred bidder (Vivendi), but did not complete the
  cent. The private consortium entered a concession to                               negotiation process.
  generate, transmit, distribute, and supply electricity
  and water.                                                                         CEC in Zambia: Indefinite ownership
      In October 2005 SAUR International sold its                                    of share of the transmission grid
  shares to the Government of Mali and IPS. The sale                                 The transmission sector in Zambia is owned and
  increased the Government’s shares to 66 percent and                                operated by the state-owned power utility, ZESCO,
  IPS’ shares to 34  percent. The Government of Mali                                 and the private company Copperbelt Energy Corpora-
  has been the majority owner of EDM since then. At                                  tion (CEC). CEC has exclusive rights over, and owns a
  the same time the concession was converted to an                                   share of, the transmission grid in Zambia.
  affermage. Transmission received little investment                                     The origins of this alternative model lie in historic
  during the period of the concession.8                                              contracts for supply of electricity to the mining sec-
      The Government of Senegal let a concession for                                 tor, located mostly in the Copperbelt region. Through
  the electric utility, Société National d’Éléctricité du                            several changes of ownership, described below, the
  Sénégal (SENELEC) in 1999. The Government kept                                     company has ended up owning transmission assets
  66 percent of SENELEC’s shares. The concessionaire,                                in the mining region and combining this with supply
  a consortium between Hydro-Québec (Canada) and                                     of power to the mines under long-term agreements.
  Elyo (France) acquired 34 percent.9 The concession                                     The supply to the mines includes charges for
  lasted less than 2  years (18 months). At the end of                               wheeling power across CEC’s grid. The company
  2000 the private consortium and the Government                                     earns additional revenue from wheeling charges
  decided to end the agreement as the objectives of the                              in two ways: when ZESCO wheels power to supply
  concession had not been achieved. Little investment                                non-mining customers connected to CEC’s grid, and
  was done during the concession period.10                                           when third parties wheel across CEC’s grid to connect
                                                                                     with the South Africa Power Pool (SAPP). CEC owns
28   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     80  MW of generation capacity, though ZESCO gen-                 •	 International wheeling: CEC wheels power
     erates most of the energy that CEC supplies. CEC’s                  traded within the SAPP through its share in the
     business model is described more fully in this section.             ­
                                                                         Zambia-DRC interconnector and earns revenue
         CEC’s shareholders are divided into four groups:                from these wheeling services.
                                                                      •	 Domestic wheeling: CEC wheels transports power
     •	 Zambian Energy Corporation (Irish company):                      on behalf of ZESCO to the latter’s substations.
        52.0 percent,                                                    ZESCO receives the power for onward supply to
     •	 Private individuals and institutions (listed shares):            mostly non-mine customers.
        21.4 percent,
     •	 ZCCM Investments Holdings PLC (Government of                      CEC is of interest. Its private ownership of a
        Zambia): 20.0 percent, and                                    regional transmission grid is unique in Africa,
     •	 African Life Financial Services (employee share               although consistent with private ownership in other
        scheme): 6.6 percent.                                         continents. This experience makes it an important
                                                                      example as Africa explores greater private financing
        ZESCO owns and operates the main transmission                 of transmission.
     network in Zambia. CEC owns and operates a regional                  However, CEC is distinctive in bundling its owner-
     transmission and distribution network in the Cop-                ship of transmission networks with supply to mining
     perbelt region. CEC’s network consists of 246 km of              customers only, and no other customers, within its
     220  kV lines (7.5  percent of Zambia’s HV network),             region. This is for historical reasons, and it is unlikely
     678 km of 66 kV lines, and 41 substations.                       this model would be fully duplicated elsewhere.
        CEC’s network assets in Zambia include 36 percent
     of the 142  km 220  kV line that connects the grid in            Africa has no investments in transmission
     Zambia to the DRC border. ZESCO owns the remain-                 infrastructure through an IPT or merchant
     ing 64 percent. This line has operated since 1956 and            investment model
     has a transmission capacity of 250 MW.                           No African countries have introduced private finance
        CEC’s business in Zambia is divided into three                in transmission through IPTs. However, Nigeria
     main services:                                                   undertook preliminary steps for tendering transmis-
                                                                      sion projects, as described in Box 4.1.
     •	 Power sales to mines: CEC sources power from                     No African countries have introduced merchant
        ZESCO under Bulk Supply Agreements, and sells                 investments in transmission. As illustrated in Sec-
        it on to several mines located in the Copperbelt              tion 3, other countries have developed HVDC lines
        area under Power Supply Agreements (PSAs). This               connecting hydro generators to markets using a
        is CEC’s largest source of revenue. The charges for           merchant investment model. In Africa, these types
        this service include charges for using CEC’s trans-           of investments have been publicly funded—like the
        mission assets.11                                             Cahora Bassa HVDC line.




     Box 4.1 The only attempt in Africa to tender for IPTs

     The Transmission Company of Nigeria (TCN) requested            moved to the next stage (commercial stage). The respon-
     bids for prequalification of a group of projects in November   dents to the request for prequalification were from Nigeria
     2014, under a privately financed business model similar to     and elsewhere, including Australia, Brazil, China, France,
     the IPT. The bids were to rehabilitate, repair, replace, and   India, Italy, Lebanon, South Africa, South Korea, Spain,
     expand 330 kV and 132 kV lines, as well as the 330/132 kV      Switzerland, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, and the
     and 132/33  kV substations and transformers. The projects      United States.
     were based on recommendations from a study prepared by             TCN did not take this shortlist or the bidding process
     Manitoba Hydro International (MHI) published in 2013.12        further. Two reasons were the weak financial viability of
         TCN received 73  applications for prequalification. TCN    the power sector in Nigeria, and the lack of clarity over the
     evaluated the technical and financial capability on a pass/    transmission business model.
     fail basis. Twenty-nine applications were prequalified and
AFRICA HAS LITTLE PRIVATELY FINANCED TRANSMISSION, BUT SUBSTANTIAL PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN GENERATION                  29


      The Cahora Bassa interconnection is a HVDC          revenues from transmission charges collected by
  transmission line (533 kV) from the 2,075 MW Cahora     ESKOM and EDM.
  Bassa hydropower plant to the Apollo converter             The green line in Figure 4.2 illustrates the route of
  station near Johannesburg. The total length of the      the transmission line. The figure also shows the three
  interconnector is 1,420 km and it can transport up to   separate grid systems (northern, central, and south-
  1,920 MW.                                               ern). The Cahora Bassa interconnection connects
      The transmission line on the Mozambican part        with the northern and central system, but not with
  of the frontier is owned by Hidroélectrica de Cahora    the southern system.
  Bassa (HCB) while the line inside South Africa is
  owned by the South African government-owned util-       Independent Power Producers have
  ity ESKOM. HCB also owns the Cahora Bassa hydro-        invested in short transmission lines
  power plant. HCB was originally majority owned by       to connect to the grid
  the Government of Portugal, but the Government          A small number of transmission lines connecting
  of Mozambique has been the majority shareholder         generators (IPPs) to the grid have been privately
  (85 percent) since 2007.13                              financed. These investments are always attached to
      The interconnection was built mainly to export      generation projects and are most likely a small por-
  energy from HCB to South Africa (backed by a            tion of the overall investment in the project.
  supply agreement between ESKOM and HCB).                   Figures vary by project and are generally bundled
  However, 500  MW of power stay available to the         with the IPP investment. The private investor financ-
  government-owned utility EDM.14 The line earns
  ­                                                       ing the connection line is the same IPP developer


  Figure 4.2 Route of the Cahora Bassa interconnection line




  Source: M. Hussain (2015).
30   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     (generally a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)) that builds
                                                                     This contrasts with
                                                                 4.2 
     and finances the generation plant. The IPP developer
     may own and operate the transmission line under a               Africa’s success in
     long-term contract, or transfer the line to the system          attracting private
     operator or government-owned transmission utility
                                                                     investment in generation
     once the line is commissioned.
         In cases where the IPP continues to own and oper-       Between 1994 and 2014 the region has attracted
     ate the connecting line, costs are generally factored in    US$25.6  billion into more than 126  IPPs, with a
     the price set in the Power Purchase Agreement (PPA).        combined capacity of 11GW. IPPs have been devel-
     One example of a connection line under long-term            oped in 18 countries in Africa.20 While 43 percent of
     private ownership in Africa is the 18 km, 225 kV line       the investment was in South Africa, this still leaves
     that forms part of the Azito project in Cote d’Ivoire.      US$11.1  billion in private finance of generation
     The line evacuates power from the 300 MW gas-fired          outside South Africa, for a total of 59  projects with
     generation plant (upgraded in 2015 to 430 MW) to a          a combined capacity of 6.8GW.21 IPP investments
     substation. Cinergy, the SPV developing the project,        have occurred across a wide range of technologies
     has a 24-year build, own, operate and transfer (BOOT)       and scale, including Azito in Cote d’Ivoire (300 MW
     agreement with the Government of Cote d’Ivoire              gas-fired IPP); OrPower4 (100  MW geothermal IPP)
     for the generation plant and transmission line.15 The       and Lake Turkana (300 MW wind IPP) in Kenya; and
     SPV also signed a 15-year agreement—with a private          Bujagali in Uganda (250 MW hydro power IPP).22
     company owned by two of the SPV shareholders—to                 Figure 4.3 shows the MW capacity of IPPs by year
     operate and maintain the plant and line.16 The value        of financial close, between 1994 and 2014, excluding
     of generation plant and connection line combined            South Africa. The figure shows that the additional MW
     was US$223  million. The transmission portion was           per year under IPPs has been quite volatile. The invest-
     14 percent.                                                 ments can be grouped into three periods: 1990–2002,
         The Kabompo Gorge project in Zambia, once               2008, and 2011–2014. The spike in the first two periods
     completed, would also include a 35 km, 132 kV line.17       was due to a few large IPPs reaching financial close.
     The line would connect the 40  MW hydro power               The increase in investment in the third period was
     plant to the grid, at Kalumbila mine substation. The        because IPP investments started to emerge.23
     combined generation and transmission investment                 Between 1990 and 2013, almost a quarter of new
     is US$210 million. The private company CEC (the IPP         generation capacity (excluding South Africa) was pri-
     developer) would own and operate the line. However,         vately financed through IPPs, from near zero in 1990.
     the project is still being discussed.                       African governments and utilities have financed just
         An alternative approach is for the IPP to finance       over 50  percent of total investment in generation.
     the line and transfer it to the system operator or the      Other forms cumulatively contributed 27 percent.24
     power utility once the line is commissioned. An exam-           IPPs are generally contracted under long-term
     ple is a 1 km, 330 kV line connecting the Azura 459MW       PPAs, structured as two-part contracts, with fixed
     gas-fired plant to a substation (Benin North)18 in Nige-    payments for availability (per MW) and variable
     ria. The project has reached financial close with the       payments for energy (per MWh). Under this business
     support of the World Bank Group, including Partial          model, investors carry the risks they are well placed to
     Risk Guarantees from the World Bank, PRI coverage           manage. Investors face four risks: the costs of build-
     from MIGA, and senior and mezzanine debt from               ing the generation plant; its timely commissioning;
     IFC (for further details please see Box 6.8). The project   its availability after commissioning; and its operating
     is currently under construction. The SPV that owns          costs. But they do not carry risks they cannot manage,
     Azura will transfer the line and substation once built.     such as demand or how many hours the power station
     Senegal has several examples of IPPs developing and         must run. Investors will be profitable provided they
     then transferring the connection line to SENELEC,           manage costs well and ensure the plant is available
     the government-owned utility. In Senegal, the law           and performs efficiently.
     governing the electricity sector states that SENELEC            The risk allocation for IPTs is similar to that for
     will have exclusivity over electricity transmission         IPPs. The implementation of IPTs in Africa could
     during the concession period—though this aspect of          build on Africa’s largely successful experience with
     the law is being reviewed.19                                IPPs.
AFRICA HAS LITTLE PRIVATELY FINANCED TRANSMISSION, BUT SUBSTANTIAL PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN GENERATION                                                                                           31



   Figure 4.3 IPPs by year of financial close: Africa (excluding South Africa), 1994–2014

             1,000

              900

              800

              700

              600
 Megawatts




              500

              400

              300

              200

              100

                0




                                                                                                                                                  10


                                                                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                                                                                     12

                                                                                                                                                                              13

                                                                                                                                                                                         14
                     94

                          96

                                   97

                                             98

                                                      99


                                                               01

                                                                        02

                                                                                  03

                                                                                              04

                                                                                                    05

                                                                                                             06

                                                                                                                       07

                                                                                                                                08

                                                                                                                                         09




                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                20
                                 19

                                          19




                                                                                                                    20
                          19




                                                    19




                                                                      20
                 19




                                                                               20




                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                        20




   Source: A. Eberhard et al. (2016). Years 1995 and 2000 are missing from the figure because, as noted in the original document, no projects reached financial close in 1995 or 2000.




   Notes                                                                                      les expériences: colloques 1998-2005,” Collection
                                                                                              Actes 5 (2005): 236 at page 160. http://toolkits.reeep
      1.	 An affermage is a form of lease used widely in                                      .org/file_upload/296_tmpphpRZPikL.pdf (accessed
          France. A private entity (the concessionaire) is                                    March 10, 2017).
          granted a long-term right to operate and manage                              9.	    P. Plane, “Privatisation et réseaux d’électricités en
          the government’s assets, and “the government still                                  Afrique de l’Ouest”, CERDI-CNRS, Université
          maintains responsibility for investment and thus                                    d’Auvergne (2004). http://publi.cerdi.org/ed/
          bears investment risk.” M. Kerf et al. (1998).                                      2003/2003.22.pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).
      2.	 Originally Groupe Générale des Eaux.                                        10.	    Institut de l’énergie et de l’environnement de la
      3.	 IFC, “Public-Private Partnership Stories. Cameroon:                                 Francophonie, (2005), page 200.
          SONEL,” 2012, http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/                                    11.	   “Overview of CEC business,” Media Briefing, http://
          connect/577489804a5b844a93e59f8969adcc27/                                           www.slideshare.net/AfricanisCool/overview-of-
          PPPStories_Cameroon_SONEL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES                                           cec-presentation-to-the-media (accessed January 10,
          (accessed March 10, 2017).                                                          2017).
      4.	 The concessionaire had to transfer 5 percent of its                         12.	    MHI is a private company that entered into a man-
          shares to SONEL’s employees.                                                        agement contract with TCN in July 2012 that lasted
      5.	 IFC, “Public-Private Partnership Stories. Cameroon:                                 four years.
          SONEL” (2012). By 2011, connections had risen to                            13.	    Economic Consulting Associates, “The potential
          792,000 from 452,000 in the late 1990s.                                             of power sector integration,” (Cahora Bassa.
      6.	 Two thermal plants were developed: Dibamba                                          Generation case study, ESMAP), June 2010,
          Power Development Corporation (DPDC; 88 MW,                                         https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
          commissioned in 2009) and Kribi Power Develop-                                      handle/10986/17518/773070v30ESMAP0ora0
          ment Corporation (KPDC; 216 MW, commissioned                                        Bassa0Generation.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed
          in 2012).                                                                           March 10, 2017).
      7.	 “Electricity concession agreement: More horizons                            14.	    M. Hussain (2015).
          opened to investors,” CRTV, http://crtv.cm/fr/                              15.	    World Bank, “Sub-Saharan Africa Benefits from the
          latest-news/top-news-24/electricity-concession-                                     first IDA Guarantee for Azito,” (Project Finance and
          agreement-more-horizons-opened-to-investors-                                        Guarantees), June 1999, http://siteresources
          15286.htm (accessed December 10, 2016).                                             .worldbank.org/INTGUARANTEES/Resources/
      8.	 Institut de l’énergie et de l’environnement de la                                   Azito_PFG_Note.pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).
          Francophonie, “Vers de nouvelles organisations                              16.	    World Bank, “Project appraisal document on a
          du secteur électrique : les réformes, les acteurs et                                proposed IDA guarantee of up to US$35 million
32   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




          of a syndicated commercial bank loan to Cinergy                 ci-après. Pendant la période visée au présent alinéa,
          for the Azito power project in the Republic de                  la SENELEC a la qualité d’acheteur unique.”
          Cote d’Ivoire,” (Report No: 1 8580-IVC), November        20.	   Includes greenfield, grid-connected IPPs above
          1998, http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/                   5 MW.
          en/990051468749754026/pdf/multi-page.pdf                 21.	   A. Eberhard et al. (2016).
          (accessed March 10, 2017).                               22.	   In 2011 MIGA provided PRI coverage to Ormat
     17.	 Copperbelt Energy Corporation Plc webpage,                      Holding Corp. for its equity investment in the
          https://cecinvestor.com/kabompo-hydro-power/                    OrPower4 geothermal IPP. In 2012 MIGA provided
          (accessed March 10, 2017).                                      PRI coverage to Globeleq through its subsidiary
     18.	 “Azura says Nigeria must expand grid to boost                   Globeleq Holdings (Azito) limited for its equity
          power supply,” Bloomberg, http://www.bloomberg                  investment in the Azito gas-fired IPP and expan-
          .com/news/articles/2016-01-28/azura-says-nigeria-               sion. In 2014 MIGA provided PRI coverage to both
          must-expand-grid-to-boost-power-supply (accessed                debt and equity investors for their investments in
          January 12, 2017).                                              the Bujagali hydro power IPP.
     19.	 Law n° 98-29 (from April 14, 1998), relative to the      23.	   A. Eberhard et al. (2016).
          electricity sector. The Act states: “La SENELEC          24.	   Other forms of finance include Official Development
          est seule habilité à exercer une activité d’achat en            Assistance (ODA); DFIs; Chinese-funded projects—
          gros, de transport et de vente en gros d’énergie                with funding mainly from the China ExIm Bank
          électrique sur toute l’étendue du territoire national,          (soft loans and export credit), the Industrial and
          pour une période qui sera définie par un contrat                Commerce Bank of China, and the China Develop-
          de concession signé avec le Ministre chargé de                  ment Bank (commercial loans); and Arab funds.
          l’Energie et dans le cahier des charges qui lui sera            A. Eberhard et al. (2016).
          annexé, sous réserve des dispositions de l’article 24
Section 5

Independent power transmissions
are the most broadly applicable
business model for increasing
privately financed transmission
in Africa

    IPTs are the business model best suited to the con-       •	 It can create more competitive pressure, compared
ditions in Africa. They have performed well in other             to other business models, by running a tender for
low-income countries. The risks that IPT investors               each line or package of lines (Section 5.3),
carry are similar to those that IPP investors carry, and      •	 It requires a lower need for investor confidence in
the IPP business model has worked well in Africa.                the country’s regulatory capacity (Section 5.4),
This section sets out why a primary focus on IPTs is          •	 It is consistent with policies being developed by
the best approach.                                               African governments and regional power pools
    African governments need to implement a model                (Section 5.5),
for private finance of transmission. The four business        •	 It can be tested, while keeping other funding
models discussed in Section 3 have all successfully              arrangements in place (Section 5.6), and
mobilized private finance for transmission. All can           •	 It is a demonstrated model in low-income coun-
work well under the appropriate conditions. The key              tries, and so is more likely to apply than other busi-
question is how well they will work in Africa.                   ness models (Section 5.7).
    Criteria for assessing the suitability of the different
models to Africa’s requirements and the performance
of each model against the criteria are summarized in
                                                                  Applicability of the
                                                              5.1 
Figure 7.2  Responsibilities under early-stage tenders            model to all types of
and late-stage tenders and then discussed below.                  transmission investment
    IPT is the most broadly applicable business model
for increasing privately financed transmission in
                                                                  in Africa
Africa because:                                               Africa will need transmission investments at differ-
                                                              ent voltages; providing transmission services within
•	 It can be applied to all of Africa’s investment needs      and between countries; and using both HVAC and
   (Section 5.1),                                             HVDC technologies. It is desirable that the business
•	 It can realize economies of scale. However, small          model can be applied to all these investments.
   African countries with a low need for new trans-              Privatizations, concessions, and IPTs can be
   mission investment may need to consider whether            applied to all types of transmission investment.
   the IPT model can realize economies of scale (Sec-         Where interconnection is needed between countries,
   tion 5.2),
34                   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




Table 5.1 Performance of the business models against assessment criteria

                                                               Whole-of-grid          Independent Power
                             Indefinite privatization           concession             Transmission (IPT)              Merchant line
 Applicability               Yes                         Yes                         Yes                         No. Typically used for a
 Is the model applicable                                                                                         single major line, often
 to all types of                                                                                                 HVDC, between two
 transmission investment                                                                                         markets
 in Africa?
 Economies of scale          Yes                         Yes                         Yes in most cases,          Most merchant lines are
 Can the model achieve                                                               but may not realize         major enough to realize
 economies of scale in                                                               economies of scale in       economies of scale
 African transmission?                                                               small countries in Africa

 Competition                 Only on the initial         Only on the initial         Yes, through competition    Yes, but only for the
 Does the model ensure       transaction                 transaction and on          for each new line           merchant line
 competitive pressure                                    (infrequent) rebidding
 on private providers of                                 on contract expiry
 transmission in Africa?
 Investor confidence         No                          Uncertain                   Yes. Much less need         Not relevant. Merchant
 in African regulatory                                                               for periodic review by      projects are not subject
 capability                                                                          regulators                  to regulated charges
 Can the model proceed
 despite the limited track
 record of economic
 regulators in Africa?
 Consistency with            Yes                         Yes                         Yes                         No. Works better as a
 power sector reform                                                                                             link between markets
 Is the model consistent                                                                                         rather than within
 with the intention in all                                                                                       markets. Also at risk
 African pools to promote                                                                                        of stranding from non-
 open access networks                                                                                            merchant investments
 and competition in
 generation?
 Policy flexibility          No. Requires                No. Requires                Yes                         Yes
 Can the model be            commitment to significant   commitment to significant
 tested while African        reform                      reform
 governments keep
 existing approaches
 in place?
 Track record                No. Few examples of         Yes, but limited track      Yes, with substantial       No
 Is the model proven         successful privatization    record                      track record
 in other low-income         in low-income countries
 countries?
     independent power transmissions are the most broadly applicable business model in Africa                       35


these models can be applied to the required transmis-         Most African countries can realize economies of
sion in each country. These models could be used for       scale under all business models. However, small Afri-
all transmission investment required in Africa.            can countries with a low need for new transmission
    Merchant links might make sense to link coun-          investment may need to consider whether the IPT
tries with low generation costs to those with higher       model can realize economies of scale.
generation costs and high demand. One example
could be the major transmission investments to move
large volumes of energy from DRC to Southern Africa.
                                                           5.3 Competitive pressure
    However merchant lines are unlikely to make                 on private providers of
sense within a single country. Some African power              transmission in Africa
pools (such as SAPP) have zonal price differences, but
within African countries the prices are the same at all
                                                               under the model
nodes of the main transmission grid. A business of         African governments can benefit from business mod-
buying low at one point and transporting the power         els that put competitive pressure on the transmission
to sell high at another point—which is the essence of      companies to offer the lowest prices they can accept.
the merchant line—will not be suitable within single           Privatizations and concessions are both imple-
countries.                                                 mented through one major competition, leading to
    As a result, this business model is not generally      the sale of the transmission company or the award of
suitable for in-country transmission investments.          the concession. Privatizations are usually awarded on
The need to control the power flows also means that        highest purchase price bid (given a regulated tariff).
merchant links are best suited to HVDC links.              Concessions are often, though not always, awarded
    Merchant lines could be a very effective business      on the least cost bid to enter the obligations in the
model for some projects, but could not be used for all     concession contract. Neither provides ongoing com-
of Africa’s investment needs. The other models are         petitive pressure on the cost of future investments.
suitable for all transmission investment.                      IPTs create more competitive pressure by running
                                                           a tender for each line or package of lines. Several
                                                           countries with a long experience of privatizations are
    Ability of the model
5.2                                                       introducing IPTs, as discussed in Box 5.1. The main
    to achieve economies                                   rationale is the stronger competitive pressure of the
    of scale in African                                    IPT business model.
                                                               This competitive pressure means that the use of
    transmission                                           IPTs can also reduce costs by bringing in experience
Unit costs will be lower for large-scale transmission      from other countries in managing the lifetime costs
projects. Some African countries have low needs for        of transmission investment—compared to the current
transmission investment and will need to ensure the        business models that focus on contractors managing
business model adopted can achieve economies of            capital costs.
scale.                                                         Using IPT tenders also presents disadvantages rel-
    Privatizations and concessions would result in         ative to other business models. Procuring transmis-
a single company responsible for all transmission          sion infrastructure through the IPT model requires
investment. These models would ensure economies            running frequent tenders. This generates higher
of scale are realized in the transmission sector as        transaction costs than other business models. This is
far as possible given the scale of the investment          especially true if compared to procuring transmission
requirement.                                               lines through a whole-of-grid concession. The cost of
    IPTs require a tender for each line, or each pack-     designing, preparing for, and running a tender for
age of lines, and could result in several different        a whole-of-grid concession may be higher than that
transmission investors within one African country.         for one IPT tender, but the frequency of IPT tenders
The model also requires enough projects of sufficient      increases transaction costs.
size to attract bidder interest and to realize economies       IPTs may also have a lower purchasing power
of scale, even if these projects are awarded to several    than the incumbent transmission utility—generally
different bidders. “Sufficient size” is not a precise      a larger company than an IPT, and with a longer
measurement, but international experience sug-             track record in the country. The higher purchasing
gests a line or package of lines with a capital cost of    power of the utility might mean that, for example, it
US$100 million should be “sufficient.”                     could obtain better deals with equipment suppliers.
36   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Box 5.1 IPTs can reduce whole-of-life costs

     IPTs transfer risk on the costs to build and operate the              Evidence shows that developers under IPT contracts
     transmission line over the contract term. They also transfer       respond to this incentive. For example, Sterlite Power in
     risk on availability. This can lead to innovative solutions that   India introduced the use of unmanned aerial vehicles to
     can reduce costs.                                                  inspect overhead transmission lines in response to avail-
         Governments can already gain the benefits of compe-            ability incentives under its IPT contract.
     tition through engineering, procurement, and construction             The benefits from a whole-of-life focus are likely to be
     (EPC) tenders. However, IPT tenders require bidders to             significant. The potential efficiency gains in the African
     consider efficient investment and operations over a period         energy sector are estimated at US$6  billion a year. More
     of up to 35 years. This brings substantial additional bene-        than half of these gains come from eliminating operational
     fits. This should ensure that the full value of investments is     inefficiencies.1
     realized through good maintenance over the contract term.




     However, this is probably less of an issue in Africa                     Africa has made substantial progress in creating
     compared to other countries given the relatively                     regulators for the energy networks. Twenty-seven
     small scale of the African transmission utilities.                   countries—more than half the countries in Africa—
        In addition, IPT contracts also lock in the O&M                   have established economic regulators for their net-
     costs over the contract period, which is typically                   works.2 African power pools have also established
     between 20 years to 45 years. This excludes the pos-                 regional associations of network regulators, and the
     sibility to periodically review the O&M costs, and                   African Forum for Utility Regulators was established
     potentially gain from more efficient costs in the                    in 2002.
     future.                                                                  However, this still means that many African coun-
        After thorough reviews, other countries have con-                 tries have no network regulators. Many of the regu-
     cluded that the benefits of IPTs outweigh the costs of               lators established have a relatively short track record.
     implementing them. Box 6.1 describes how the Gov-                    Twelve of the twenty-seven regulators have been
     ernment of the United Kingdom recently reached this                  operating for less than 15  years.3 In nearly all those
     conclusion as it moved towards introducing IPTs.                     27 cases, government-owned networks are regulated
                                                                          rather than private networks.
                                                                              African countries vary in how long regulators have
     5.4 Requirements for                                                been established and the adequacy of their resourc-
          investor confidence                                             ing. The willingness of international investors to
         in network regulation                                            take a risk on the performance of regulators will also
                                                                          vary. Discussions with international equity investors
         in Africa                                                        suggest a general reluctance to rely on discretionary
     Transmission networks are a natural monopoly and                     regulatory regimes that lack a long track record in
     are usually subject to economic regulation of trans-                 regulation of private investment in transmission, and
     mission charges. However, Africa has a limited track                 a preference for low-discretion contracts in which
     record of independent economic regulation that                       payments are not subject to periodic review, and
     would help investors assess the risks. Models that                   enforcement rights are clear.
     expose investors to regulatory risk may be less suc-                     This may limit the suitability of privatizations
     cessful than models that minimize this risk.                         and whole-of-grid concessions within some African
        Privatizations and whole-of-grid concessions are                  countries. Concessions may perform better than
     similar. Both work well where regulatory capacity                    privatizations against this criterion. In some cases,
     is well developed and where investors are willing to                 concessions can put greater reliance on the conces-
     take on the risk of the future performance of the reg-               sion agreement and the arbitration clauses in those
     ulatory regime.                                                      agreements.
     independent power transmissions are the most broadly applicable business model in Africa                                       37




   Box 5.2 Merchant transmission faces risks from open access,
   regulated networks

   Two onshore merchant HVDC lines in Australia were pri-         regulated alternating current interconnector between the
   vately financed against the price differences between two      two States, known as QNI, with a transfer capability of
   States. These price differences were later reduced when the    about 700/750 MW.
   regulated transmission companies expanded.                         In 1998 TransEnergie proposed DirectLink, a 180  MW
      In New South Wales the government-owned trans-              HVDC merchant interconnector between the two States,
   mission company, TransGrid, had sought approval for a          with a capacity of 180 MW. The merchant line (Directlink)
   regulated interconnector between New South Wales and           began operating in June 2000. QNI started operating in
   South Australia. In 2001, private company TransEnergie         February 2001.
   built a merchant interconnector called Murraylink between          Both merchant lines subsequently transferred to reg-
   Victoria and South Australia close to the same route. While    ulated status, with the regulator setting the maximum
   Murraylink was being built, the regulated interconnector       allowed revenue. TransEnergie later commented: “Mixing
   received approval. Murraylink appealed the approval, but       regulated and merchant transmission investment regimes
   the appeal tribunal upheld the approval decision.              is clearly difficult. It can lead to controversies, litigation,
      In 1997 the Governments of New South Wales                  delays, and inefficiencies.”4
   and Queensland announced and approved a new



   IPTs have a lower requirement for investor con-                   Privatizations, concessions, and IPTs are all con-
fidence in a well-developed regulatory capacity. The             sistent with these policy reforms. All three business
annual revenues for the IPT are largely established              models provide open access to the transmission net-
up front through the tender process. Regulators still            work under regulated and nondiscriminatory trans-
play a vital role in ensuring the tender is consistent           mission charges.
with the expansion plan and in approving the tender                  Merchant lines do not provide open access and
process. However, these roles do not create risk for the         are less consistent with this wider reform agenda.
private investor.                                                This again suggests that merchant lines may be more
   Merchant lines may also have a lower exposure to              suitable for links between markets rather than within
regulatory determinations. Much will depend on how               them.
this model is implemented. As discussed in Section 3,                Merchant lines also work best where they are not
intervention by regulators in some countries affects             exposed to competition from regulated transmission
the revenues for merchant lines.                                 companies. If this precondition is not met, a regulated
                                                                 business that invests later may threaten the merchant
                                                                 transmission. Box 5.2 illustrates this risk with an
    Consistency of the
5.5                                                             example from Australia.
    model with directions
    in power sector reform                                           Extent to which
                                                                 5.6 
African governments and regional power pools are                     the model can be
developing reforms to how the power sector operates.
They need to ensure the business model for transmis-
                                                                     tested while African
sion is consistent with these reforms.                               governments maintain
    The long-term reform objectives are very varied. A               existing models
common theme is a desire to develop a greater role
for competition within the country and regionally                Africa relies almost entirely on government-financed
in the provision of wholesale electricity. The SAPP              transmission. Introducing a new business model has
is the most advanced regional power pool and has a               risks. So, testing the model to demonstrate its suit-
competitive day-ahead market. Other regional power               ability is preferred.
pools may follow this lead.
38   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




                                                                 been minimal, and several concessions have ended
                                                                 after a few years in operation. However, to date, the
     Box 5.3 IPTs can bring in new                               Philippines has been more successful at achieving
     sources of finance                                          substantial private investment under its transmis-
                                                                 sion concession.
     In India, non-recourse bonds have been issued for IPT           IPTs perform particularly well against this crite-
     transmission lines and received an AAA credit rating. In    rion. IPTs in both middle-income and low-income
     2016 Sterlite Power in India issued bonds to refinance      countries have led to substantial private investment
     loans for one of its power transmission subsidiaries. The   in transmission, significant cost savings through ten-
     bonds did not have a government guarantee, had a 17.5-      ders, and (to date) to stable contractual agreements.
     year tenor, and received a AAA credit rating.               Box 3.1 provides a summary of the outcomes of IPTs
                                                                 in several countries around the world. The use of IPTs
                                                                 for transmission projects in Brazil, Chile, India and
                                                                 Peru in the last 20  years is discussed in more detail
         Privatizations and concessions both require a one-      in Appendix A.
     off major change to the ownership and operation of              Brazil has seen 38  tenders of multiple lots since
     the whole transmission network.                             1999. These tenders have resulted in the award of
         IPTs can be introduced on a project-by-project          211  transmissions, with a total combined length of
     basis. IPTs have been successfully introduced in            69,811 km.
     countries where all other transmission is financed by           It is also essential to ensure that private finance
     government. They are also used in countries where           does not adversely affect consumers. Transmission
     all other investment is by an incumbent private             accounts for around 10 percent of the costs of supply.
     transmission company. Existing arrangements can             Generation accounts for around 55 percent, and dis-
     remain. This reduces the level of risk in testing IPTs      tribution for around 35 percent.5 There is considerable
     compared with the first two models. It also might           variation and the share can be higher. Any increase in
     lower the challenges of implementing this model.            costs would adversely affect the affordability of elec-
         The IPT business model enables project finance          tricity. However, IPTs have resulted in lower costs.
     for transmission investments. This means investors              In most cases the tenders include a price cap
     will focus on the costs and revenues of the project         based on expected costs. Bids may be well below this
     itself, and on the ability of the IPT to manage them.       price cap. The Brazilian regulator ANEEL estimates
     This model can bring in additional sources of finance,      the annual revenue required. The average weighted
     compared to now where government-owned utilities            discount for all tenders awarded between 2000
     in Africa finance all transmission investments. Box 5.3     and 2015 was 22.8  percent of ANEEL’s estimate of
     provides one example of an IPT that has successfully        the AR required. Individual line discounts reached
     accessed new sources of finance in India.                   59.2 percent.
                                                                     In Peru, the regulator also sets a price cap on
         Evidence that the model
     5.7                                                        investment and O&M costs. Table 5.2 shows that
                                                                 winning bids were, on average, 36 percent lower than
         has worked well in other                                the estimated annual costs, according to a sample of
         low-income countries                                    15 tenders between 1998 and 2013.
     Business models that work well in OECD countries
     may not work well in low-income countries. Africa           Notes
     should prefer those business models for transmis-
                                                                  1.	 V. Foster and C. Briceño-Garmendia (2010).
     sion that have been proven to perform in low-income
                                                                  2.	 A. Eberhard (2015), “Powering Africa: Facing the
     countries.                                                       Financing and Reform Challenges,” AFD Research
         No low-income countries have adopted the model               Paper Series, No. 2016-21, February. https://www
     of full privatization combined with the establishment            .gsb.uct.ac.za/files/PoweringAfricaChallenges.pdf
     of independent regulation. Merchant investment has               (accessed March 17, 2017).
     also been minimal in low-income countries.                   3.	 A. Eberhard (2015), “Powering Africa: Facing the
         Several countries in Africa and Asia have used               Financing and Reform Challenges.”
     whole-of-grid concessions. Private investment in             4.	 S. Littlechild, “Transmission regulation, merchant
     African transmission under these concessions has                 investment, and the experience of SNI and Murray-
                                                                      link in the Australian National Electricity Market,”
       independent power transmissions are the most broadly applicable business model in Africa                                                                                    39



Table 5.2 Information of Winning Bids for Transmission Lines in Peru (1998–2013)

                                                                                                                                Annual transmission
                                                                                                                                 cost (US$ millions)
                                                                             Length             Capital             Cost                                             Discount
 Year of                                                                     of line Capacity investment Winning estimate                                             on cost
 award                                 Project                                (km)    (MVA) (US$ million)  bid   (price cap)                                         estimate
   1998        Mantaro–Socabaya                                                700            300             179.0               27.6             42.6                  35
   1999        Southern electric transmission system                           444            180               74.5              11.5             14.3                  19
               reinforcement
   2008        Eléctrica Carhuamayo–Paragsha–                                  696            360             106.1               10.0             42.6                  77
               Conococha–Huallanca–Cajamarca–Cerro
               Corona–Carhuaquero
   2008        Eléctrica Mantaro–Caravelli–Montalvo and                        200            350               35.7                5.4              5.6                   4
               Machupicchu Cotaruse
   2008        Chilca–La Planicie–Zapallal and substations                      94         1,400                52.2                8.1            14.5                  45
   2009        Zapallal–Trujillo                                               530         1,000              167.5               25.8             32.0                  19
   2010        Chilca–Marcona–Montalvo                                         872            700             291.0               48.2             61.6                  22
   2010        Tintaya–Socabaya and associated                                 207            400               43.6                6.7            12.3                  46
               substations
   2010        Talara–Plura                                                    102            —                 14.6                2.3              2.5                   9
   2010        L.T. Machupicchu–Abancay–Cotaruse                               204            500               62.5                9.8            14.2                  31
   2011        Trujillo–Chiciayo                                               325            —               101.4               15.6             15.8                    1
   2012        Carhuaquero–Cajamarca Norte–Cáclic–                             402            450             106.9               16.2             22.2                  27
               Moyobamba
   2013        Machupicchu–Quencoro–Onocora–Tintaya                            356            354             114.3               16.7             28.5                  41
               and substations
   2013        Mantaro–Marcona–Socabaya–Montalvo                               900            —               278.0               41.4             63.5                  35

Source: S. Oguah and P. Sanchez, “Private Sector Participation in Transmission Systems: Making It Work. Live Wire,” (World Bank Group), 2015, http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/337861467990990322/pdf/100989-BRI-VC-PUBLIC-ADD-SERIES-Box393254B-Knowledge-Notes-LW52-OKR.pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).




     12 June 2003. https://www.hks.harvard.edu/hepg/                                  sourced from Table A8. Electricity supply, disposi-
     Papers/Littlechild.Transmission.Regulation.Austra-                               tion, prices, and emission, 2015, https://www.eia
     lia.pdf (accessed March 17, 2017).                                               .gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/0383(2015).pdf (accessed on
 5.	 Energy Information Administration, “Annual                                       May 12, 2017).
     Energy Outlook 2015 with projections to 2040,” data
part B

how to
scale-up private
investment
in Transmission
in africa
Section 6

Steps to realize the potential
of IPTs for Africa

Introducing IPTs for electricity transmission in Africa    •	 Conduct trials of IPTs alongside existing business
could result in similar benefits to those achieved by         models of transmission (Section 6.3)
IPTs in other countries, and by IPPs in Africa.            •	 Introduce new models for concessional finance
    The approach to introducing IPTs can draw on the          (Section 6.4)
lessons from introducing IPPs in Africa, and interna-      •	 Decide the stage at which to tender transmission
tional experience in IPTs.                                    projects (Section 6.5)
    Legislation, licenses, and other legal instruments     •	 Determine payments to IPTs based on transmis-
can be amended to provide for multiple transmission           sion availability (Section 6.6)
providers. Concessional finance can be adapted to          •	 Ensure adequate revenue flow and credit enhance-
this new business model, in the same way that con-            ment for projects (Section 6.7)
cessional finance has supported both debt and equity       •	 Tailor IPT projects to attract international inves-
for IPPs in Africa.                                           tors (Section 6.8)
    A small percentage of power sector revenues can        •	 Prepare to implement IPT transactions (Sec-
be placed into an escrow account to enable a trial of         tion 6.9), and
IPTs. Where necessary, additional financial security       •	 Run competitive tenders for IPTs (Section 6.10).
can be provided, including by Development Finance
Institutions (DFIs), until the point is reached where         The following sections describe each of the steps
African power sectors are sufficiently profitable.         above.
    African governments can build capability in-house
and appoint transaction advisors. They can identify
projects for initial tenders, prepare the TSAs, run ten-
                                                               Develop policies that
                                                           6.1 
ders, evaluate bids, and award the contracts.                  support IPTs
    The World Bank has also developed a toolkit to         Introducing private finance in transmission is a
help decision makers in African governments imple-         major shift. It will require changes to legislation, reg-
ment IPT projects. Over time, the pipeline of trans-       ulation, and to the financing arrangements currently
mission projects in Africa to be implemented using         used for transmission investment. Governments
the IPT model will demonstrate that the IPT business       control these issues; potential private investors in
model is suitable for Africa. This will create further     transmission cannot control them. It will therefore be
investor interest.                                         important for African governments to develop a clear
    The 10 steps needed to realize the potential of IPTs   policy direction on how to introduce IPTs.
in Africa are:                                                The policy development will need to consider the
                                                           arguments for and against using IPTs to meet gov-
•	 Develop policies that support IPTs (Section 6.1)        ernment policy objectives, and reach a final decision.
•	 Develop the legal and regulatory frameworks to          Box 6.1 illustrates how the United Kingdom conducted
   support IPTs (Section 6.2)
                                                                           Steps to realize the potential of IPTs for Africa                           43




   Box 6.1 Introducing onshore transmission tenders in the United Kingdom

   The United Kingdom has three transmission companies:                            Regulated transmission companies already have
   National Grid in England and Wales, Scottish Power in                       incentives to minimize costs and already tender elements
   southern Scotland, and SSE in northern Scotland.                            of the projects they undertake. However, the assessment
       These three companies were responsible for all trans-                   concludes that the control of all procurements by a single
   mission investment within their transmission regions. The                   transmission company is likely to lead to a lower level of
   first move to use competition was for offshore transmission.                innovation. Information asymmetry between the trans-
       Ofgem considers that introducing competition for                        mission companies and the regulator may also reduce the
   offshore transmission has saved between £0.6  billion and                   benefits to consumers. In other words, the businesses know
   £1.2 billion since 2009. The vast majority of these savings                 more than the regulator about the costs of the project. By
   were associated with the operation of the assets. Anal-                     contrast, they will only win an IPT tender if they reveal the
   ysis of those assets found that competitive tendering led                   efficient costs.
   to savings through innovation and different contracting                         Since then, Ofgem has developed proposals for compet-
   approaches.                                                                 itively appointed transmission owners for onshore trans-
       An Integrated Transmission Planning and Regulation                      mission. Competition will only be used for new, separable,
   review concluded in 2015 was that competition should                        and large projects. The projects will be greenfield, but exist-
   extend to onshore transmission.1                                            ing assets may need altering to ensure interconnection. The
       An assessment of the expected impact of competition                     construction cost will be at least £100 million. In November
   was published in January 2016.2 The assessment allows for                   Ofgem consulted on a possible first project to be procured
   transaction costs of 3  percent of asset value. However, it                 using onshore transmission.3 The line is proposed to con-
   concludes that cost savings from competitive tendering will                 nect to 3.8  GW of new nuclear generation in northwest
   more than offset this, drawing in part on the experience of                 England, and has an estimated construction cost of about
   offshore transmission.                                                      £2.5 billion.

   Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change, “Impact Assessment: Extending competitive tendering in the GB electricity transmission network,”
   January 2016, https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/493712/Impact_Assessment_-_Extending_
   competitive_tendering_in_the_GB_electricit___.pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).




this assessment before deciding to proceed with ten-                         Kingdom is only now moving to use this model for
ders for major onshore transmission.                                         onshore transmission, as described in Box 6.1.
                                                                                 The context for transmission investment in Africa
Drawing from international experience                                        also differs from those in most countries with IPTs.
International experience in using IPTs to increase                           The differences include the financial viability of the
private investment in transmission will help Afri-                           power sector and the industry structure.
can governments, but they will also face challenges                              Most other countries using IPTs have sufficient
in drawing on and applying that experience. IPTs                             revenue from electricity consumers to ensure the
are a recent development, initially adopted mainly                           profitability of generators, network businesses, and
in ­Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking countries. As                           supply businesses. In most African countries this
a result, many African governments are unfamiliar                            is not the case. However, India’s experience demon-
with the potential of IPTs.                                                  strates that overall power sector profitability is not a
    The DFIs that currently support transmission                             necessary precondition for IPTs to work well.
investment in Africa may also have limited famil-                                Low tariffs and high losses in some states in India
iarity with IPTs. The United States made the regula-                         create problems in funding private transmission. If
tory changes that enabled IPTs in 2011. The United                           revenues are insufficient, the state can obtain support
44   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     from the Central Government through Viability Gap               African governments can review existing leg-
     Funding (VGF). The transmission tariff is determined        islation and regulation to ensure that it enables
     up front rather than by bids, and the bids determine        the introduction of IPTs. Where change is needed,
     the level of additional funding required. Bidders           governments can draw on the substantial body of
     sign a Model Transmission Agreement developed               international experience to identify the lessons from
     by the Planning Commission. Three projects to date          elsewhere and in legislation and regulations that sup-
     have used the VGF mechanism, in Haryana, Madhya             port IPTs.
     Pradesh, and Rajasthan.                                         A supportive legislative and regulatory framework
         This model could be used in Africa, if a funding        will be important for investors. Primary legislation
     source was available. The scale of funding required         may be required. The United Kingdom introduced
     for an IPT trial is discussed later in this section.        legislation to allow competition in offshore transmis-
         A further difference is that most countries using       sion in 2009, and made further legislative changes in
     IPTs have already introduced vertical separation            2016 to extend competition to onshore competition.
     between generation, transmission, and distribution.             The legislation may also need to evolve over time.
     Some African countries have introduced vertical sep-        Box 6.2 describes how Peru modified its initial legis-
     aration, but most have not.                                 lation to ensure continued investor interest in IPTs.
         In this case, African experience of IPPs is encour-         African governments should also consider what
     aging, as it shows that full unbundling is not a nec-       changes are necessary to regulations such as licenses
     essary precondition for introducing private finance.        and the Grid Code. Box 6.3 illustrates the potential
     African countries have successfully attracted IPP           issues.
     investors without full unbundling of the generation
     sector. The important issue has been the risks borne
     by the IPP investor, not the industry structure. As
                                                                     Conduct trials of IPTs
                                                                 6.3 
     described in Section 6.6, the risk allocation to IPTs can       alongside existing
     follow the model used for IPPs.                                 business models for
         African governments can be reassured that other
     countries—including other low-income countries—
                                                                     transmission
     have successfully attracted large volumes of trans-         Moving to a new model that has worked well inter-
     mission investment using IPTs. They should draw             nationally but is unproven in the country-specific
     on this international experience to develop their           context involves risk. Governments should therefore
     own policies and their own approach to the practical        maintain existing approaches while conducting trials
     steps for introducing IPTs as set out in this section.      of IPTs.
     DFIs can assist through dissemination of knowledge              International experience demonstrates that IPTs
     products and technical assistance, including peer-          can be introduced alongside other business models
     to-peer advice from other developing countries with         for transmission without causing problems.
     IPT experience as well as mobilizing commercial                 In India, the majority of transmission investment
     financing.                                                  is by government-owned businesses. India has intro-
                                                                 duced IPTs alongside this business model. Over time
                                                                 the share of new transmission investment financed
         Develop the legal
     6.2                                                        by IPTs has steadily grown. This is shown in Box 6.4.
         and regulatory                                              IPTs can also be introduced alongside privately
         frameworks to                                           owned transmission. In the United Kingdom all
                                                                 transmission is privately owned. The Government
         support IPTs                                            has passed legislation to enable large new transmis-
     In most cases, introducing IPTs will require changes        sion projects to be procured through competitive
     to legislation and regulation (for example, changes to      tender. The United States has also combined existing
     the form of the license for transmission companies          private ownership of transmission with tender for
     and the establishment of clear grid codes).                 new lines.
                                                                                      Steps to realize the potential of IPTs for Africa                                             45




   Box 6.2 Peru passed new legislation to maintain investor interest in transmission

   Peru’s “Law of Power Concessions” in 1992 enabled PSP in the                                     change in the tariff setting to ensure that payments under the con-
   electricity sector. IPT contracts were initially based on efficient costs                        tracts directly reflected the prices from the winning bid. This change
   drawing on both bids and the regulator’s model, which was revised                                to legislation gave bidders a clear understanding of what their
   periodically. This exposure to regulatory risk led to a reduction in                             revenues would be, and private transmission investment increased.
   private investment by the early 2000s. Private investment fell from                                  The new legislation also included changes to transmission plan-
   more than US$160 million in 1999 to around US$10 million in 2003,                                ning and to the governance arrangements for the system operator.
   as illustrated in Figure 6.1.
       In 2006, Peru introduced the “Law to Ensure the Efficient Devel-
   opment of Electricity Generation.” The new legislation established a

   Figure 6.1 Investments in transmission in Peru (1991–2000)

                               350

                               300

                               250
                   Million $




                               200

                               150

                               100

                                50

                                0




                                                                                                                                                                           2010
                                     1991

                                            1992

                                                   1993

                                                          1994

                                                                 1995

                                                                        1996

                                                                               1997

                                                                                      1998

                                                                                             1999

                                                                                                    2000

                                                                                                           2001

                                                                                                                   2002

                                                                                                                          2003

                                                                                                                                 2004

                                                                                                                                        2005

                                                                                                                                               2006

                                                                                                                                                      2007

                                                                                                                                                             2008

                                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                                                        Public investment                         Private investment


   Source: ESMAP (2015).
   Source: World Bank, “International Experience with Private Sector Participation in Power Grids: Peru Case Study,” (Energy Sector Management Assistance Program,” 2012, http://
   documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/498461468000021182/pdf/101753-WP-P146042-Box393265B-PUBLIC-Private-Sector-Participation-in-Power-Grids-Peru.pdf (accessed
   March 10, 2017).




    Introduce new models
6.4                                                                                   cost to consumers. Any shift to IPTs must safeguard
                                                                                       these benefits.
    for concessional lending                                                              Currently, concessional lending is provided to
African governments need to maintain their access                                      ­
                                                                                       government-owned transmission companies. No
to concessional lending for transmission projects,                                     examples are available of concessional loans to pri-
but can utilize this lending differently by not tying                                  vate transmission in Africa. If this situation contin-
it to delivery of the projects by government-owned                                     ues, it will distort the decision on the best business
businesses.                                                                            model for future transmission projects. African
    The low cost of concessional lending helps African                                 governments could continue with existing models
governments meet their targets for access at a lower                                   and retain access to concessional finance. If they
46


     Box 6.3 Developing regulations suitable for IPTs

     Nigeria is one of the African countries that have gone the                        The Grid Code may need further development to enable
     furthest in preparation for IPTs. The Electric Power Sector                   IPT tenders. The Code states that it is designed to facilitate
     Reform Act 2005 established the framework for competi-                        competition in generation and supply, but does not refer to
     tion in transmission. A transmission licensee is authorized                   competition in transmission. Section 1.4 states that the Grid
     to carry out construction, operation and maintenance of                       Code applies to TCN and Users of the Transmission System,
     the transmission systems within Nigeria, or that connect                      but does not state that it applies to other parties such as
     Nigeria with a neighboring jurisdiction. The Act establishes                  IPTs. The Code defines the responsibilities of transmission
     no restriction on the number of transmission licensees. The                   service providers. Some of these responsibilities, such
     Act details the application procedure for securing a license.                 as accepting grid connections to the networks they own,
         The Act also establishes vertical separation by requir-                   would normally be applicable to IPTs. However, the Code
     ing that no person shall engage in electricity transmission                   defines the transmission service provider as “the division
     among other business activities, except in accordance with                    of TCN that owns and maintains the Transmission Network.”
     a license issued under the Act.                                                   The changes required are not major, illustrating Nigeria’s
         The Transmission Company of Nigeria, TCN, is a                            preparation for possible IPTs. Other African countries may
     ­
     government-owned transmission company. The Grid Code                          need to make greater changes to their Codes, licenses, and
     sets out the operating procedures and principles governing                    other documents.
     the Transmission System. This will be a sensitive document
     for IPT investors. It defines their rights and obligations, and
     also the rights of TCN and other parties.

     Source: Castalia review of Nigerian Grid Code.




     Box 6.4 Privately financed transmission in India has been growing

     In India, transmission is planned over five-year periods.                     financed or financed in joint ventures (JVs) with Power Grid
     Figure 6.2 shows the total kilometers of new transmission                     Corporation of India Ltd. (PGCIL). The Government holds a
     investment in the last six five-year plan periods. It also                    majority ownership of PGCIL.
     breaks this down between publicly financed transmission                           Privately financed transmission, including JVs with
     (investments by utilities owned by state governments or                       PGCIL, has taken a growing share of new transmission
     the national government), and transmission that is privately                  investment, reaching 14 percent in the current plan period.
     Figure 6.2 Evolution of new transmission lines in India, 1985–2017* (ct km of new
     transmission lines)

            100,000


             80,000


             60,000


             40,000


             20,000


                       0
                              1985–90                 1992–97         1997–2002             2002–07               2007–12             2012–17*

                                                                    Total public              JV/private

     Source: Castalia. Growth in transmission network (ct km). Data sourced from Ministry of Power of the Government of India, http://powermin.nic.in/en/
     content/growth-transmission-sector, (accessed March 10, 2017); * To end-July 2016. Available data do not include figures for the 1990–1992 period.
                                                                         Steps to realize the potential of IPTs for Africa                            47




   Box 6.5 Example of concessional lending to IPP

   The Tobene IPP in Senegal is a 96 MW heavy-fuel, oil-fired                arrangements the IPP (Melec PowerGen) will own at least
   plant. The IPP agreed to a 20-year PPA with SENELEC,                      90  percent of the plant, and IFC will retain a 10  percent
   the government-owned power utility in Senegal. In 2014                    stake in the project upon completion of a proposed equity
   the World Bank Group signed a €93.4  million financing                    investment.
   agreement for the Tobene Power IPP. Under the financing
   Source: “World Bank Group Finances 96 megawatt Tobene Power Plant in Senegal,” IFC, http://ifcextapps.ifc.org/ifcext/pressroom/ifcpressroom.nsf/
   1f70cd9a07d692d685256ee1001cdd37/e9c240ad1e4953a885257d2c006e9e78?OpenDocument (accessed January 20, 2016).




introduce IPTs, they may achieve some efficiency                               African reality is one in which most IPPs carry
gains but will face higher financing costs.                                    substantial risks. Without DFI financing, key proj-
   Transmission projects are capital intensive.                                ects would not have reached financial close and
If concessional finance is tied to delivery by                                 commercial operation. DFIs have also reduced the
government-owned transmission companies, then
­                                                                              chances of investments and contracts unraveling—
the case for IPTs is likely to be difficult or impossible.                     in part because of rigorous due diligence practices,
In an environment of limited concessional financing,                           but also because of the pressure governments
IPTs bring a much needed complement through                                    or multilateral institutions might bring to bear
commercial funds. This may very well be a strategic                            around honoring investment contracts.4 Credit
decision by the government on which part of the                                enhancement instruments offered by multilateral
transmission network should be funded through                                  finance institutions have also played an important
concessional funds and which parts can be procured                             role in IPP financing.
through IPTs.
   African governments should work with DFIs                                  An example of the approach to concessional lend-
to ensure that DFI lending policies are not biased                         ing for an IPP is shown in Box 6.5.
towards government ownership of transmission
and do not impede the use of privately financed
transmission.
                                                                               Decide the stage
                                                                           6.5 
                                                                               at which to tender
Concessional lending for IPTs can draw on                                      transmission projects
African experience with IPPs
The development of new lending policies for the                            Governments can choose between early- and late-
transmission sector can draw on Africa’s experience                        stage tenders but this should be decided early in the
of working with concessional lenders to support IPPs                       project design. This decision has a major impact on
in the generation sector. A recent study concluded                         how the project is prepared, the contract designed,
that the role of concessional finance has been key to                      and the tenders prepared.
the successful introduction of IPPs in generation:
                                                                           •	 Under an early-stage tender, the government sets
      There has been a wide variety of African IPP                            out the broad transfer requirements between two
   sponsors and debt providers. State institutions                            points. The private investor is responsible for iden-
   have invested in some IPPs, but private sponsors                           tifying the best solution and preparing all prelimi-
   are prominent, including private African partners,                         nary works.
   European entities such as Globeleq, Aldwych, and                        •	 Under a late-stage tender, the government does
   Wartsila, and numerous European bilateral DFIs.                            preliminary work, such as selecting the route and
   A smaller number of sponsors are from North                                acquiring the right of way (ROW).5 The private
   America, Asia, and the Middle East. A few multilat-                        investor is responsible for building and operating
   eral agencies also hold some equity.                                       the transmission project in accordance with the
      In addition to equity investments, DFIs are                             specification developed by the government.
   prominent in the debt financing of IPPs. The
48                LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




Figure 6.3 Responsibilities under late-stage tenders and early-stage tenders

                                                     Transmission planning                   Government

                                                        Route selection

                       Government                       ROW acquisition

     Late-stage                                                EIA                                                Early-stage
         tender                                                                           Private developer       tender
                                                         Project design

                                                          Construction

                    Private developer                 Line commissioning

                                                 Operation and maintenance

                                                                                                  Preliminary works



                      Early-stage tenders transfer more risk on prelim-      •	 To avoid investors being exposed to risks on route
                  inary works to private developers, including route            selection, ROW acquisition, and permitting on
                  selection, acquisition of ROW, environmental impact           the initial projects. It can be hard to assess, price,
                  assessments, and project design. In contrast, late-           and manage these risks. Later procurements could
                  stage tenders have a high degree of project definition,       explore whether these risks could be transferred to
                  and the government needs to prepare all preliminary           bidders once they are more familiar with the use of
                  works before tendering. The responsibilities under            IPTs in Africa, and
                  the two approaches are shown in Figure 6.3.                •	 To ensure a simpler evaluation task for the initial
                      International experience shows that both                  tenders. Late-stage tenders are simpler to evaluate,
                  approaches can work. In South America, most coun-             based on the price offered by different bidders
                  tries have used late-stage tenders. However, Peru             to build and operate a line according to a single
                  has moved to a more output-based approach, leaving            detailed design. By contrast, early-stage tenders
                  scope for bidders to offer innovative solutions to pro-       lead to offers with different designs and require
                  viding the required transfer capacity. India has also         more assessment of the viability of the proposed
                  used late-stage tenders.                                      solutions.
                      In the United Kingdom the initial tenders will all
                  be late-stage, with the incumbent transmission com-
                  pany developing the detailed design. Ofgem has left
                                                                             6.6 Determine payments
                  open the possibility of using early-stage tenders later.        to IPTs based on
                      In the United States, the Regional Transmission            transmission availability
                  Organizations (RTOs) distinguish between an “Early
                  methodology” and a “Late Methodology.” Under the           African governments will need to determine the per-
                  early methodology the RTO identifies the required          formance they want from IPTs and develop key per-
                  upgrades during expansion planning and solicits            formance indicators (KPIs) under the contract. This
                  innovative solutions and proposals. Under the late         will be a sensitive issue for investors as it will affect
                  methodology the RTO also provides the solutions.           their revenues. The Transmission Service Agreement
                  The developers compete to build, own and operate           (TSA) with the IPT will need to set out the require-
                  this solution. The early methodology is used in five       ments on commissioning and the performance after
                  regional markets and the late methodology in four.6        commissioning.
                      Both alternatives could be used in Africa. But             The TSA should include an obligation to commis-
                  African governments should consider procuring the          sion the line in accordance with the technical spec-
                  first IPT projects through late-stage tenders for two      ifications by a defined date (often referred to as the
                  reasons:                                                   Commercial Operation Date). If the obligation is not
                                                                             met, the contract should impose penalties. Prolonged
                                                          Steps to realize the potential of IPTs for Africa               49


failure to achieve commissioning should lead to con-       load within the network, and on the system operator’s
tract termination.                                         decisions on the dispatch of a generation plant.
    Under the IPT contract, payment can start:                As a result, established international practice for
                                                           IPTs in South America, India, the United States, the
•	 On the Commercial Operation Date, provided the          United Kingdom, and other countries is to make line
   plant has been successfully commissioned, or            availability the dominant KPI as the basis for pay-
•	 Immediately on commissioning, even if this occurs       ment (as opposed to energy delivered or line use). The
   before the due date in the contract.                    availability target is typically close to 98 percent.

    The second approach provides an incentive to
achieve early commissioning. This requires confir-
                                                           6.7 Ensure adequate
mation that it is desirable for the line to commission          revenue flow and credit
early. For example, if the commissioning of a new              enhancement
power station affects the use of the new line, early
commissioning may have little value.
                                                               for projects
    In India the Ministry of Power introduced a policy     It will be critical for African governments to take all nec-
to incentivize early commissioning in July 2015, with      essary steps to ensure that IPT projects are bankable in
payment to start from the Commercial Operation             the near future, while continuing long-term measures
Date even if this is before the date specified in the      to move the entire power sector to profitability.
contract.7                                                     IPTs will be implemented on a project finance
    The Rajasthan Atomic Power Project (RAPP) line         basis. Typically, investors will set up a Special Purpose
achieved early commissioning in 2016 and was the           Vehicle (SPV) to undertake the project. The investors
first project to benefit from this new policy. The RAPP    will provide the equity for the SPV. The SPV will also
Transmission Project is a 200  km, 400  kV double-         borrow from providers of debt finance.
circuit transmission line crossing two Indian states           Transmission projects are capital-intensive and
(Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh). The project was            their costs are directly affected by the cost of capital
completed in less than 12 months.                          for the SPV. Equity costs more than debt (that is, the
    The TSA will need to set performance incentives        required returns are higher). The SPV will therefore
after commissioning. African governments should            aim for a high share of debt. It may also refinance
ensure that their approach to IPTs follows the model       after the project has reached commissioning, when
that has successfully attracted IPP investment.            the risks are lower. The SPV may be able to reduce
    IPP investors are typically at risk for the capital    financing costs by increasing the share of debt
and operating cost associated with their plant and for     finance. It may also be able to agree to lower costs
its operating performance. However, they are not at        with existing debt providers.
risk for the level of demand and whether the plant is          The returns to debt and equity will depend on the
operated at a high or low load factor. (The load fac-      cash flows for the SPV. Debt providers will not have
tor is the output during the year as a percentage of       recourse to the balance sheets of the parent compa-
what could be achieved if the plant ran at full capac-     nies. As a result, they need to be confident that the
ity throughout the year. Load factors can vary from        cash flows will enable the SPV to cover its debt pay-
only a few percent for a peaking plant to levels above     ments. Equity investors also need confidence that the
90 percent for a heavily used baseload plant.)             cash flows will be sufficient for the SPV to be prof-
    IPP investors cannot determine how the system          itable and to provide the expected returns on equity.
operator wants to run the plant. This depends on               The SPV will bid a yearly payment that covers the
demand and on the availability of other generating         costs of the project, and that provides the returns to
plants. As a result, IPPs typically enter two-part         debt and equity. As described in the previous section,
contracts with a capacity payment and an energy            after the transmission line is commissioned the SPV
payment. The capacity payment is made provided the         will receive a fixed payment based on its availability
capacity is available. This payment covers the IPP’s       performance. This payment will enter the cost base
fixed costs. The energy payment varies with the elec-      to be recovered from transmission charges, and ulti-
trical energy delivered by the power station.              mately from final consumers.
    Transmission lines have high fixed costs, and the          This model has enabled IPT investment in many
owners cannot influence the flow of energy along the       countries, but Africa is different in one important
line. This depends on the location of generation and       aspect. Box 6.6 shows that the power sector is not
50                         LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Box 6.6 Most African utilities do not collect enough cash to cover costs

     A study in 2016 found that 37 of 39 countries in Africa did not        Figure  6.4 shows the relationship of cash collected to capital and
     collect enough cash to recover both operational and capital costs.8    operating costs in 2014, by country. These figures are reflected in the
     Only 19  utilities collected enough cash to cover operational costs.   financial viability of the utilities.9

     Figure 6.4 Comparison of electric supply costs with cash collected in 2014
     (US$/kWh billed)

                        Liberia
                      Comoros
                  Sierra Leone
       São Tomé and Principe
                   Cape Verde
                  Gambia, The
                       Rwanda
                        Guinea
                       Senegal
                    Mauritania
                  Burkina Faso
                          Togo
                           Mali
                   Madagascar
                    Seychelles
                          Benin
                         Gabon
                         Kenya
                     Botswana
                        Nigeria
                  Côte d’Ivoire
                      Mauritius
                       Burundi                                                                                    Operating expenditure
      Central African Republic                                                                                    Capital expenditure
                          Niger
                                                                                                                  Cash collected
                     Swaziland
                   Congo, Rep.
                       Ethiopia
                      Tanzania
                        Malawi
                    Cameroon
                       Uganda
                    Zimbabwe
                         Sudan
                         Ghana
                  Mozambique
                  South Africa
                       Lesotho
                        Zambia

                                           0.0    0.10          0.20          0.30             0.40           0.50           0.60            0.70
                                                                                     Dollars

     Source: M. Kojima and C. Trimble (2016).
                                                                 Steps to realize the potential of IPTs for Africa                                 51




   Box 6.7 The use of escrow accounts to attract IPP investments

   Revenue escrow arrangements require cash collected from         thermal plant), and LTWP (310 MW wind farm) are exam-
   electricity consumers to be deposited into a special bank       ples. In the case of LTWP (also known as “Lake Turkana”),
   account, and paid out in accordance with special rules that     for example, the money for the escrow account was “to be
   ensure monies owed to privately owned generators or             raised by a tariff increase starting in 2013.” Subsequent
   transmission providers are paid first. Kenya has success-       IPPs used IDA Payment Guarantee instead and currently,
   fully attracted IPP investment, supported through escrow        payment securities are no longer required due to the good
   accounts. Westmont (46 MW thermal plant), Tsavo (46 MW          track record in payments to IPPs.
   Source: A. Eberhard et al. (2016).



profitable in most African countries. As a result,                    This sensitivity may be reduced because the total
investors may attach a high degree of risk to the antic-          share of revenues that would need to go through an
ipated revenues from transmission charges.                        escrow account to support IPT trials would be low.
   In most countries in Africa, the power sector’s                International data illustrates this: A recent tender in
financial weakness means that power sector invest-                Peru resulted in annual payments of US$16.7 million,
ment cannot be secured against power sector reve-                 to build, own, and operate a 356 km, 220 kV transmis-
nues. In other words, the sector’s total income does              sion line, and a transmission capacity of 354 Mega-
not provide the required returns to debt and equity if            volt Ampere (MVA).10 If similar annual payments
investment is privately financed.                                 were needed for a trial of IPTs in Kenya, 3 percent of
   In almost all cases the revenues are sufficient to             total power sector revenues would have to be secured
cover part of the required investment, and so can                 to cover the repayments. In practice, initial trials may
be used to secure private investment in generation                well be on a smaller scale and so require a lower share
(IPPs) and transmission (IPTs). However, as total rev-            of power sector revenues.
enues are insufficient, investors want to be sure that                Where escrow arrangements are not enough to
they will have first claim on these funds.                        make the project bankable, governments may also
   One option for ensuring that first claim to the cash           have to use a government guarantee to back payment
flows is to use revenue escrow arrangements. Box 6.7              obligations to IPTs. If the sovereign guarantees are
shows how this approach works for IPPs.                           insufficient, multilateral guarantees may be needed
   Escrow arrangements may be a sensitive issue. If               (from the World Bank, MIGA, African Development
IPP and IPT investors have a first claim on the rev-              Bank, or other DFIs).
enues, then other claims by the government-owned                      Again the experience of IPPs in Africa gives confi-
transmission company and its suppliers will be                    dence that these guarantees can be provided. Box 6.8
weakened.                                                         shows the financing structure for the Azura IPP




   Box 6.8 The role of guarantees in ensuring the Azura IPP (Nigeria) was bankable

      IPP projects can include one or various guarantee products to            The project is to develop, build, and operate a 459  MW open-
   ensure bankability and reassure the investor on risks. Africa has        cycle, gas-fired plant in Benin (Edo State). The IPP is owned by the
   significant experience structuring bankable IPPs in recent years. Fig-   SPV “Azura Power West Africa.” The IPP has a 20-year PPA with the
   ure 6.5 presents the financing structure of the Azura IPP project in     Nigerian Bulk Electricity Trader (NBET) backed by a Put-Call Option
   Nigeria—the first project-financed generation investment since the       Agreement (PCOA) with the Government of Nigeria.11
   reform of Nigeria’s power sector.

                                                                                                                      (box continues on next page)
52                        LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Box 6.8 Continued

       To make the project bankable, multiple credit-enhancement                              •	 The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) pro-
     mechanisms were used:                                                                       vided Political Risk Insurance (PRI), to: (i) equity investors,
                                                                                                 through Azura Edo International Mauritius, for their equity and
     •	 The World Bank provided: (i) a loan guarantee to cover defaults                          quasi-equity investments in Azura Power West Africa; (ii) a con-
                                                                                                 ­
        of debt service payments in the form of Partial Risk Guarantees                          sortium of commercial lenders for their non-shareholder loans
        (PRGs); and (ii) a payment guarantee to cover payment defaults                           to Azura Power West Africa; (iii) hedging instruments, including
        by NBET of payment obligations not related to loans from                                 interest rate swap, were also covered against the risk of breach of
        government,                                                                              contract, and
                                                                                              •	 The IFC (and other DFIs) provided senior and mezzanine debt.

     Figure 6.5 Financing structure of Azura IPP (Nigeria)


                                                                                                                                                           Guarantee
                                                                                      Amaya Capital

                  Standard                                                        American Capital
               chartered bank                                                   Energy & Infrastructure

                   Rand
                                                                                      Aldwych Azura
               Merchant Bank             Interest rate
                                         swap cover
                                                                                   Africa Infr. Invest.
                                                                                 Fund 2 power holding
                                                                                                                                              FGN
                                                                                    Asset & resource
                                            Equity &                                 management
             Siemens Bank                   quasi-equity                                                                                             Indemnity
                                            cover

            KfW IPEX-Bank                                                                Azura                       PCOA
                                                                                    Edo International
                                                                                       Mauritius                                                     Guarantee
        Rand Merchant Bank

                                                                                       Azura Power                                         L/C bank
             Standard bank                                                              West Africa
                                                                                                                                                            Reimbursement
                                                                                                                        PPA                                 agreements
         Standard chartered                     Senior
              as agent                           debt                                                                                        NBET


                                                                                             DFIs
              Local lender                                                                                                                 Guarantee holder
                                                              Senior &                                                                     Project enterprise
                                                              mezzanine debt                                                               Obligor under BOC

     Source: Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency. “Political Risk Insurance and Credit Enhancement Solutions” 2016 (pers. comm. with Annabelle Libeau, February 3, 2017). BOC
     refers to Breach of Contract.
                                                           Steps to realize the potential of IPTs for Africa            53


project in Nigeria, and how loan and payment guar-             The case studies attached to this report describe
antees made the project bankable.                           the different approaches taken to TSA contracts. The
                                                            key issues include:

    Tailor IPT projects to
6.8                                                        •	 Contract term: A long-term contract is required
    attract international                                      to transfer risk on whole-of-life cost and perfor-
    investors                                                  mance to the IPT. International experience shows
                                                               contract terms vary from 20  years to 45  years. In
IPT opportunities will only attract sufficient interna-        Chile, contracts are to 20  years, but after that the
tional bidders and ensure bids are competitive if the          IPT continues to own the transmission line and the
projects are carefully selected and designed.                  regulator sets the payments. The United Kingdom
    Governments should focus on projects that are              is considering 25-year terms for the first onshore
technically, economically, financially, and environ-           IPTs. In Peru and Brazil, contracts are for 30 years.
mentally feasible. They should avoid projects that             India started with 25-year terms, with an option of
raise controversial environmental or other sensitivi-          a further 10-year extension, and moved to 35-year
ties, especially for the first tenders.                        terms from 2008. A 45-year term has reportedly
    The projects should be large enough to justify             been agreed for the first IPT in Pakistan.
the transaction costs. In some cases, this may mean         •	 Specification: Late-stage tenders, which include
bundling several projects into a single tender. In Peru,       a detailed design for the project are recommended
capital costs ranged between US$52.2  million and              for African countries.
US$291.0  million, from a sample of 14  transmission        •	 Commercial operations: Contract payments
projects tendered between 1998 and 2013. On average,           could start on the due date required under the
capital costs were US$116.2  million. Alternatively,           contract, subject to successful commissioning.
governments can also attract investor interest by con-         Alternatively, commercial operations could start as
firming a pipeline of future IPT projects.                     soon as commissioning is achieved. These options
                                                               are described in Section 6.6.
    Prepare to implement
6.9                                                        •	 Payment: The TSA should set out the payment
                                                               arrangements over the contract term. This may
    IPT transactions                                           be a fixed annual payment, but some variation is
Designing an IPT transaction requires expertise in             possible (for example, higher payments during the
multiple fields. Governments often lack this exper-            initial 15 years). In India, the phasing of payments
tise. They will need to develop in-house capacity and          has been a bid parameter.
appoint international transaction advisors.                       In Peru the contract is awarded to the bidder that
    To prepare for IPT transactions, each government           proposes the lowest Total Service Cost. This cost
and their advisory team will need to prepare TSAs to           is equal to the sum of the annuity of investment
be signed with the IPT, define the eligible bidders, and       costs (calculated using a 12 percent real annual rate
conduct a market sounding.                                     for a 30-year period), and the annual O&M cost.
    Using IPTs will require more frequent transac-             The bidder also has to present the details of how
tions than other approaches. Preparing for this well           the investment costs are formed—including value
will reduce implementation costs. The Toolkit in Sec-          of supplies, transport and insurance, construction
tion 7 provides guidelines on how to do this.                  and assembly, indirect costs, administration costs,
                                                               engineering, surveillance, and financial expenses.
Prepare TSAs                                                   If the tender is for a package of lines, or includes
The government advisory team should prepare a                  substations, the bidder needs to present the disag-
model TSA that can be used for all transactions. The           gregate data for each asset.
team should draw on this model to prepare a TSA spe-              Box 6.9 describes how transmission companies
cific to each IPT tender.                                      are paid in Peru, adjusting the total service cost for
                                                               under or over-recovery in the previous year.
54   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Box 6.9 Tariff for IPT Contracts in Peru

     The transmission companies operating in the main trans-         •	 Annual O&M cost (defined during the bid), and
     mission system in Peru are remunerated according to a base      •	 Annual settlement. This component corresponds to the
     tariff as follows:                                                 difference between the base tariff set the previous year
                                                                        and the money effectively collected by the transmission
     •	 Annuity of investment costs (defined during the bid),           company in the current year.




             In Chile, the bid price is defined in a similar              term. IPTs in Chile do not have to transfer the
          way but they refer to it as transmission value per              assets. In Peru the IPT contracts state that the
          segment (Valor Anual de Transmisión por Tramo,                  investor must transfer the assets to the govern-
          or VATT). The tender is awarded to the bidder that              ment at the end of the contract term. India also
          proposes the lowest VATT which is equal to the                  includes a transfer option. Where the government
          sum of annual value of investment (Anualidad del                includes an obligation to transfer the asset, the TSA
          Valor de la Inversión or AVI) and the maintenance,              will also need to provide incentives for the IPT to
          operation, and administration cost (Costos de                   maintain the condition of the asset towards the end
          Operación, Mantenimiento y Administración, or                   of the contract term.
          COMA), calculated using a 10 percent real annual             •	 Force Majeure: The Force Majeure clauses should
          rate for 20 years.                                              protect investors from unforeseeable circum-
     •	   Performance obligations and incentives: The                     stances that prevent them fulfilling their contrac-
          main performance obligation should be to ensure                 tual obligations.
          availability of the line, with a target of about 98 per-
          cent. The TSA should set out the penalties (and                  The preliminary works will include route selec-
          possibly incentives) for availability below or above         tion, environmental approvals, and permitting.
          the target.                                                  African governments should start with late-stage
     •	   Indexation: A large share of the costs can be fixed          projects, and the preliminary works should be under-
          up-front through an EPC contract. Other costs are            taken within the government, for example by the
          likely to be subject to inflation over the contract          government-owned transmission company.
          period. The TSA should define which costs are sub-               Governments will need to consider how best to
          ject to indexation and the index to be used. Interna-        transfer these approvals to the successful bidder.
          tionally, TSAs vary in how they treat indexation. In         Local regulations will affect the approach they select.
          some cases, this can be a bid parameter.                     It is possible that approvals and permits can be trans-
     •	   Foreign exchange risk: Transmission projects                 ferred to the successful bidder. In some cases, approv-
          have a large share of offshore costs. Investors will         als are specific to a particular company. If so, an SPV
          want to ensure that the payments they receive                can be set up to hold these permits and approvals, and
          cover these offshore costs. Approaches vary inter-           the SPV can be transferred or sold to the winning bid-
          nationally. In Chile and Peru the payments are fixed         der together with the approvals.
          in US dollars. Foreign exchange risk is borne by the
          off-taker and ultimately by power consumers. In              Define eligible bidders
          Brazil the payments are fixed in Brazilian reals, and        It will be important to resolve the role, if any, of
          in India they are fixed in Indian rupees, with the           government-owned companies in the IPT tenders.
          investor carrying the foreign exchange risk. The             The options are discussed in Box 6.10. International
          approach in African countries should be based on             bidders are likely to be concerned about the transpar-
          consultation with potential investors.                       ency of the evaluation process if government-owned
     •	   End of the term: The TSA should define the obli-             companies are allowed to bid. This decision will also
          gations of the IPT at the end of the contract. The           influence which institution manages the preliminary
          options may include an obligation to transfer the            works and the IPT tender.
          assets, or an option to extend the TSA for a further
                                                                   Steps to realize the potential of IPTs for Africa                   55




   Box 6.10 The role of government-owned bidders

   There are arguments for and against allowing government-          of Senegal in SENELEC. In India, private bidders can form JVs
   owned companies to participate as bidders in IPT tenders.         with PGCIL and jointly bid for an IPT contract.
       One option is to allow government-owned businesses to             This may reassure bidders that the government has
   bid. Examples include India, Brazil and Colombia. If existing     full insight into the operations of the SPV. However, if the
   government-owned businesses are allowed to bid, this              government has to buy the equity stake, it is less successful
   could assist with buy-in from the existing utility. However       at reducing the financial demands on public funds. If the
   allowing government-owned bidders could prove sensitive           equity stake is required to be provided free, as a condition
   and risks discouraging bidders.                                   of bidding, then it increases costs of the bids.
       Another option is for the government to take a stake in           A third option is for all bidders to be fully private, with
   the SPVs that own and operate transmission lines under IPT        no incumbent utility or other government-owned business
   tenders. This would be similar to the Government of Mali’s        taking part in the bidding process. This approach is recom-
   majority stake in EDM, the concessionaire, or the Government      mended for those African governments trialing IPTs.



Run market soundings                                                    Allowing government-owned companies to bid is
A market sounding evaluates how attractive the                      likely to deter private bidders, and will not meet the
business model is for investors. It also tests whether              objective of raising additional finance.
investors will be able to assume the risks that are to
be transferred to them through the IPT contract, and
generates inputs and requirements from investors
                                                                    6.11 Next Steps
and other parties.12                                                There is potential to develop IPT programs that will
   Market sounding involves gathering information                   be attractive to international bidders. To achieve this,
about the viability of the business model, the ability              governments can work with international investors
of the private sector to meet the requirements, and                 and potential providers of loan finance to build the
the market’s capacity and maturity.13 Section 7.2.1 of              detailed business models that will attract interna-
the Toolkit included in Section 7 provides further                  tional interest and can be replicated across the Afri-
information about this.                                             can continent.
                                                                       The key next step is to move beyond merely
                                                                    considering how this business model applies within
6.10 Run competitive                                               Africa. This report provides a Toolkit to help practi-
      tenders for IPTs                                              tioners progress with implementing the model in a
                                                                    real setting.
African governments will need to decide whether
to run competitive tenders as the basis for entering
contracts with IPTs.                                                Notes
    Internationally, almost all contracts have been
                                                                     1.	 Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, “Integrated
awarded through competitive tenders. However, in
                                                                         Transmission Planning and Regulation (ITPR) Proj-
some cases contracts have been allocated without                         ect: Final conclusions,” March 2015, https://www
tender to a government-owned company. The reason                         .ofgem.gov.uk/publications-and-updates/integrated-
has usually been that the projects have tight timelines                  transmission-planning-and-regulation-itpr-project-
and this avoids any delay in the tendering stage.                        final-conclusions (accessed March 10, 2017).
    African governments will also need to determine                  2.	 Department of Energy and Climate Change (2016).
whether they will allow government-owned com-                        3.	 Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, “North
panies to participate in the bids (see discussion in                     West Coast Connections—Consultation on the
Box 6.10). International experience shows that some                      project’s Initial Needs Case and suitability for
countries have allowed this, while other countries                       tendering,” February 2017, https://www.ofgem.gov
                                                                         .uk/publications-and-updates/north-west-coast-
have not.
56   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




            connections-consultation-project-s-initial-needs-       8.	 M. Kojima and C. Trimble (2016).
            case-and-suitability-tendering (accessed March 10,       9.	 The cash collected approach covers cash payments
            2017).                                                       for minor capital expenditures, but does not include
     4.	    A. Eberhard et al. (2016).                                   future investment needs for “significant replace-
     5.	    Preliminary works do not necessarily involve the             ment or upgrading of existing capacity as well as
            actual acquisition of the ROW. This can be left for          capacity expansion.” M. Kojima and C. Trimble
            the IPT developer to conclude. The government                (2016).
            generally reaches an agreement with the land-          10.	 S. Oguah and P. Sanchez (2015).
            owners and the IPT (after tender is awarded) pays       11.	 A PCOA provides a framework to protect the
            for the land or ROW. However, this may vary by               interests of the IPP (supplier) in the event of an
            country.                                                     early termination of the PPA. Early termination will
     6.	    The early methodology is used by the Alberta                 result in the government buying out the facility.
            Electric System Operator (AESO), the California              The amount paid will be calculated based on clear
            Independent System Operator (CAISO), the Electric            and predetermined rules, and will differ depending
            Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT), the Southwest          on which party caused the early termination. The
            Power Pool (SPP), and Midcontinent Independent               Put option is the supplier’s right to require the
            System Operator (MISO). The late methodology                 government to acquire the plant (under events
            is adapted by the New York Independent System                specified in the PCOA). The Call option is the buy-
            Operator (NYISO), the Independent System                     er’s right to require the wholesale supplier to sell
            Operator of New England (ISONE), SPP and PJM                 the plant to the government (under events specified
            Interconnection. Source: “Competition in Electricity         in the PCOA).
            Transmission: An international study on customer       12.	 World Bank and Public-Private Infrastructure
            interests and lessons learned” (2015). The report            Advisory Facility, “Market Sounding” (Toolkit for
            was prepared by Navigant as part of National Grid’s          PPPs in Roads and Highways), 2009, https://ppiaf
            response to Ofgem’s consultation on the introduc-            .org/sites/ppiaf.org/files/documents/toolkits/
            tion of onshore competition.                                 highwaystoolkit/6/pdf-version/5-92.pdf (accessed
      7.	   Government of India, Ministry of Power, “Order               March 10, 2017).
            No. 15/1/2013,” July 2015, http://www.powermin.nic     13.	 World Bank and Public-Private Infrastructure Advi-
            .in/sites/default/files/webform/notices/policy_              sory Facility, “Market Sounding” (Toolkit for PPPs
            for_incentivizing_early_Commissioning_of_                    in Roads and Highways), 2009.
            Transmission_Project_0.pdf (accessed March 10,
            2017).
Section 7

Toolkit to introduce independent
power transmission tenders

This Toolkit is a guide for government officials and        government-owned utilities finance all transmission
policymakers (“the government”) in Africa who are           investments), and allow more projects to get done. For
considering whether to seek private finance for             a further discussion on this, see Section 5.
investments in transmission using the IPT model.
   Under the IPT model, a private investor enters a         IPTs have been successful internationally
long-term contract to build, operate, maintain, and         IPTs are widely used around the world, including in
finance a transmission line for a defined period. The       Mexico, South America (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and
contract may be for a new single line or a package of       Peru) India, and Pakistan. IPTs are also increasingly
several transmission lines. It may also include trans-      being used in countries that previously provided
mission substations or (in a few instances) only be         exclusivity to a private transmission company. The
for substations. For simplicity, this Toolkit uses the      United Kingdom has tendered all offshore transmis-
phrase “transmission projects” to refer to projects         sion using the IPT model, and is moving to tender
that include transmission lines, substations, or both;      major onshore projects. IPT tenders have also been
and to refer to both single projects and a package of a     used in Australia, the United States, and Canada.
few projects.                                                   Countries that have used IPT contracts have raised
   The IPT receives annual payments typically in            large amounts of funds from the private sector for
monthly instalments. The payments are largely deter-        transmission investments. For example, IPTs in Bra-
mined by the winning bid. The revenues to make              zil, Peru, Chile, and India collectively attracted over
these payments are usually based on revenues from           US$24.5 billion from the private sector between 1998
wheeling charges. However, the IPT investor does not        and 2015. For more information about the experience
carry the risk for the level of wheeling charges or the     of each of these four countries, see Appendix A (which
Megawatt-hour (MWh) of energy that is wheeled.              includes each of these countries as a case study).
   The IPT typically becomes a licensed transmission
company and is subject to a set of obligations and          Summary of the process
standards set out in the licenses and in associated         Governments can develop and implement IPT trans-
Codes and other documents. The privately financed           actions through the process described in this Toolkit,
line is integrated with the rest of the transmission grid   and summarized in Figure 7.1. The process consists of
through connection to one or more grid substations.         six stages:
   An IPT also enables the use of project finance. This
means investors will focus on the costs and revenues        •	 Validate Project: The purpose of this stage is to
of the project and on the ability of the IPT to man-           validate that the transmission project is part of
age them. This, in turn, means that procuring trans-           an optimized transmission expansion plan and is
mission projects through the IPT model can unlock              a feasible project. This stage is described in Sec-
additional finance for transmission projects in Africa         tion 7.1 of this Toolkit.
(compared to the business-as-usual case in which
58                  LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




Figure 7.1 Summary of the process

                                                            • Conﬁrm the project is part of
     PF = Private ﬁnance                                      an optimized transmission
                                        Validate the
     ROW = Right of way                                       expansion plan
                                          project
                                                            • Check project is feasible
     ESIA = Environmental and
     Social Impact Assessment
                                                            • Evaluate if the project
                                        Evaluate the          could be privately ﬁnanced
                                         suitability
                                                            • Assess if project serves the
                                           for PF
                                                              public interest

                                                            • Appoint the government
                                         Select the           team
                                         team and           • Decide on an early-stage or
                                        tender type           late-stage tender

     Late-stage tender                                                                                          Early-stage tender

                           •   Select the route
        Prepare the        •   Acquire the ROW
        preliminary        •   Prepare an ESIA
           works
                           •   Prepare the project design

                           •   Hire the transaction advisors                                 •   Hire the transaction advisors
                           •   Manage the risks                                              •   Manage the risks
        Design the                                                       Design the
                           •   Design the contract                                           •   Design the contract
        transaction        •   Design the tender process                 transaction         •   Design the tender process
                               and draft bidding documents                                       and draft bidding documents

                           •   Issue the bidding documents                                   •   Issue the bidding documents
          Run the          •   Evaluate the bids                           Run the           •   Evaluate the bids
           tender          •   Award the contract                           tender           •   Award the contract
                           •   Reach ﬁnancial close                                          •   Reach ﬁnancial close



                    •	 Evaluate Suitability for private finance: The                 between two points. The private investor is
                       purpose of this stage is to evaluate if the project           responsible for identifying the best solution and
                       could be privately financed and if the project serves         preparing all preliminary works. If the govern-
                       the public interest. This stage is described in Sec-          ment decides to pursue an early-stage tender, it
                       tion 7.2 of this Toolkit.                                     should follow the process described on the right
                    •	 Select Team and Tender Type: The purpose of                   side of Figure 7.2.
                       this stage is to select the government team who will          This stage is described in Section 7.3 of this
                       manage the transaction. The team may be a single           Toolkit.
                       committee, or a working committee that reports to       •	 Prepare Preliminary Works: The purpose of this
                       a steering committee. This team’s first decision will      stage is to prepare the project’s detailed design,
                       be to decide on the type of tender for the transac-        select the route, acquire the right of way (ROW),
                       tion. IPTs have two types of tender process:               and prepare the Environmental and Social Impact
                       •	 Under a late-stage tender, the government does          Assessment (ESIA).1 This stage is described in Sec-
                          preliminary work such as selecting the route            tion 7.4 of this Toolkit.
                          and preparing the project’s detailed design. The     •	 Design Transaction: The purpose of this stage is
                          private investor is responsible for building and        to design a transaction that promotes competitive
                          operating the transmission project in accor-            bidding, delivering value to the public. At this stage
                          dance with this. If the government decides to           the government should hire transaction advisors
                          pursue a late-stage tender, it should follow the        to help it manage risks, design the contract, and
                          process described on the left side of Figure 7.2.       design the tender process and draft the bidding
                       •	 Under an early-stage tender, the govern-                documents. This stage is described in Section 7.5 of
                          ment sets out the broad transfer requirements           this Toolkit.
                                        TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                      59


•	 Run Tender: The purpose of this stage is to imple-          Developing credible scenarios is key to develop-
   ment the transaction designed in the previous           ing the transmission expansion plan. The scenarios
   stage. The government, assisted by its transaction      should consider existing energy policy objectives
   advisor, should: issue the bidding documents, eval-     set at a countrywide level, and accurate assumptions
   uate bids, award the contract, and reach financial      about the evolution of the generation sector, demand
   close. This stage is described in Section 7.6 of this   forecasts, and technology and fuel costs.
   Toolkit.
                                                           7.1.2  Check project is feasible
                                                           The government should check that the project is
7.1 Validate the project                                   technically, economically, financially, and environ-
                                                           mentally feasible as part of the optimal transmission
                  Conﬁrm the
                 project is part        Check the          system expansion plan. To do this, the government
  Validate
                of an optimized         project is         should find out if a recent feasibility study shows
  project
                  transmission           feasible          the project is feasible.3 If this is the case, the govern-
                expansion plan                             ment can move to the next stage. A feasibility study
                                                           assesses whether the risks and uncertainties have
To validate a project, the government should confirm       been properly modeled, that the costs are accurate,
that it results from an optimized transmission expan-      and that the preliminary works (if applicable) are fit
sion plan (Section 7.1.1) and check that the project is    for purpose. Feasibility studies can focus on different
feasible (Section 7.1.2).                                  dimensions of the project. Given the characteristics
                                                           of transmission projects, feasibility studies should
      Confirm the project is part
7.1.1                                                     consider the technical, economic, financial, and envi-
      of an optimized transmission                         ronmental dimensions.4
      expansion plan                                           If no recent feasibility study shows the project is
The government should confirm the project was              feasible, the government should find out if any recent
defined as a result of an optimized transmission           pre-feasibility study shows the project could be feasi-
expansion plan. This ensures that the project is           ble. Pre-feasibility studies are commissioned before
consistent with the power sector strategy and the          investing a considerable amount of time and money
electricity development plans, considers uncertainty,      into the project (and before commissioning a feasi-
is used and useful for the long run, and takes into        bility study). A pre-feasibility study does not ensure
account different costs and benefits.                      feasibility, but should at least: (i) exclude projects that
    Preparing an optimized transmission expansion          are evidently not feasible; and (ii) suggest how likely
plan is a rigorous process that requires:                  it is that the project will be feasible, and identify the
                                                           key factors in determining feasibility. If this is shown
•	 Estimating transmission needs for a horizon year        in a recent pre-feasibility study, the government can
   (for example, five to ten years into the future) and    move to the next stage. However, the government
   working backwards to plan implementation from           should also start any additional work that may be
   present year up to horizon year,                        needed to confirm feasibility—like obtaining permits
•	 Preparing system simulation studies based on            and approvals. This additional work could be done
   accurate data,                                          while undertaking other tasks in Stage 3.
•	 Meeting standard planning criteria (for example,            If no recent feasibility or pre-feasibility studies
   an n-1 criteria2),                                      have been completed, the government should com-
•	 Following an unbiased regional approach (country-       mission a study to identify whether the project is
   wide, pool-wide, multi-country, etc.),                  likely to be technically, economically, and financially
•	 Modelling uncertainty by assuming different             feasible; the ROW can be acquired, and environmen-
   future scenarios,                                       tal permits are likely to be obtained. Route selection
•	 Doing a rigorous cost–benefit analysis of transmis-     and project design can be prepared at a later stage—by
   sion alternatives, and                                  either the government or bidder, depending on the
•	 Updating the plan frequently.                           tender type.
60   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




         Evaluate the suitability
     7.2                                                       •	 The transaction has a credit-worthy public
                                                                   counterparty, or it is plausible that credit
         for private finance                                       enhancements to create a bankable arrange-
       Evaluate
                                                                   ment can be arranged. If the power sector is not
                         Evaluate if          Assess if            financially viable, investments have to be secured
          the
                       project could           project
      suitability                                                  through revenue escrow accounts or other liquid-
                        be privately        serves public
      for private                                                  ity arrangements. However, escrow accounts
                          ﬁnanced              interest
        ﬁnance                                                     may not be enough to make the project bankable.
                                                                   Governments may also have to back payments obli-
        The government should evaluate if the transmis-
                                                                   gations to IPTs with government guarantees, and
     sion project could be privately financed (Section 7.2.1)
                                                                   sometimes also guarantees from multilateral insti-
     and assess if the project serves the public interest
                                                                   tutions like the Work Bank, African Development
     (Section 7.2.2). This Toolkit presents several factors
                                                                   Bank, or other DFIs. This point is discussed in more
     that the government should consider when evaluat-
                                                                   detail in Section 6.7.
     ing if the project is privately financeable, and sug-
                                                                •	 Bidders are interested in the project, because it
     gests organizing a market sounding to consult the
                                                                   is large enough to justify the transaction costs
     level of interest of private investors. It also defines
                                                                   for them. However, bidders will also evaluate if
     what a Value for Money (VfM) analysis is, and how it
                                                                   there are reasonable prospects of a future pipe-
     could be applied to quantify the costs and benefits of
                                                                   line of other investment opportunities. Therefore,
     developing the transmission investment through an
                                                                   governments should frame the project within a
     IPT model, compared to being publicly financed.
                                                                   broader pipeline (if it is the case), or consider devel-
                                                                   oping a pipeline of future IPT projects.
           Evaluate if the project could
     7.2.1 
           be privately financed
                                                                    It is in the interest of the government to organize
     The government should consider the following four
                                                                a market sounding to consult the level of interest
     factors to evaluate if a project could be privately
                                                                of private investors. A market sounding evaluates
     financed:
                                                                how attractive the business model is for investors,
                                                                tests whether investors will be able to assume the
     •	 The legal and regulatory framework to support
                                                                risks that are to be transferred to them through the
        private investment in transmission is in place.
                                                                IPT contract, and generates inputs and requirements
        Depending on the country, reforms may need to be
                                                                from investors and other parties.6
        made to electricity laws, licenses, and Grid Codes,
                                                                    Market sounding involves gathering informa-
        as well as to regimes for the economic regulation of
                                                                tion regarding the viability of the business model,
        the monopoly networks or the vertically integrated
                                                                the ability of the private sector to meet the require-
        utility. Economic regulators will also need to adapt
                                                                ments, and the market’s capacity and maturity.7 The
        their approaches to accommodate charging models
                                                                government can find further information about
        used by IPTs.
                                                                what market sounding involves and how to prepare
     •	 The costs of the project can be recovered from
                                                                a market sounding in the “Market Sounding” volume
        users of the transmission grid. International
                                                                of the World Bank “Toolkit for PPPs in Roads and
        experience shows there is not a unique way to struc-
                                                                Highways.”
        ture the contract payment. In Peru, for example,
        investors sign the IPT contract with the Ministry
                                                                7.2.2 Assess if the project serves
        of Energy and obtain rights to operate the trans-
                                                                       the public interest
        mission line and receive transmission revenues. In
                                                                The government should ensure that financing trans-
        India, IPT contracts are signed with regional Long
                                                                mission projects through the private sector benefits
        Term Transmission Customers (LTTCs). LTTCs
                                                                the country. This involves quantifying the costs and
        are generators, distribution companies, and major
                                                                benefits of developing the transmission project under
        load centers. In the future, investors will sign the
                                                                an IPT contract, compared to a scenario where the
        contract with distribution companies, based on use
                                                                project is publicly financed. To do so, the government
        of the transmission network.5 In Chile, the winning
                                                                should prepare a VfM analysis.
        bidder becomes party to a multilateral agreement
                                                                   Value for money refers to “achieving the opti-
        that provides transmission providers with access to
                                                                mal combination of benefits and costs, in delivering
        the transmission revenues.
                                         TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                          61


services users want.” VfM typically involves a com-            7.3.1 Appoint the government team
bination of qualitative and quantitative approaches,           The government needs to appoint the Government
where qualitative analysis “involves sense-checking            Team to manage the process successfully. The team
the rationale for using PPP [Public Private Partner-           may be a single committee, or a working commit-
ships]” and quantitative analysis “typically involves          tee that reports to a steering committee. A contract
comparing the chosen PPP option against a ‘Public              management committee may also be part of the Gov-
Sector Comparator’ (PSC)—that is, what the project             ernment Team, responsible for managing contract
would look like if delivered through conventional              arrangements after financial close. Box 7.1 defines
procurement.”8                                                 each of these committees.
   The government can refer to the World Bank’s                   Deciding the best option to assemble the team will
“Public-Private Partnerships. Reference Guide” to              depend on the government’s experience with similar
find further information about what VfM is, and what           processes, whether the IPT transaction is the first one
qualitative and quantitative VfM analysis involves.            or if the government has tendered IPTs previously,
The Guide also includes various references to other            budget constraints, and other factors.
useful related documents.9                                        For simplicity, from now onwards this Toolkit
                                                               refers to the appointed Government Team as ‘the
                                                               government’.
    Select the team
7.3 
    and tender type                                            Team composition and responsibilities
                                                               Members of the government—either a single, dou-
    Select                               Decide on             ble, or triple committee—typically include officials
  team and          Appoint              an early-
                  government              stage or             from the Ministry of Power (or analogous ministry
    tender
     type            team                late-stage            or agency), the Ministry of Finance, the regulatory
                                           tender
                                                               agency, the government-owned utility (if this is the
                                                               case), and external consultants (if hired).
The government should appoint a Government Team                    The team is responsible for completing all the
to manage the process (Section 7.3.1). Managing an             following stages. This includes deciding the tender
IPT transaction requires decision making, time,                type (including preparing preliminary works if the
resources, and coordination among stakeholders.                government decides on a late-stage tender), design-
Appointing a specific team to be responsible for this          ing the transaction, and running the tender.
is key to ensuring a smooth process.
    Once appointed, the Government Team should                 7.3.2  Decide on an early-stage tender or a
decide whether to conduct an early-stage tender or a                   late-stage tender
late-stage tender (Section 7.3.2). This decision deter-        First, the government should decide between the
mines the point in the process at which the tender             two tender types: an early-stage tender or a late-
takes place. It also impacts on who prepares prelimi-          stage tender. The main difference between the two
nary works, on risk allocation, on contract design, and        approaches is who is responsible, and who carries the
on other tasks.




   Box 7.1 Definition of different committees

   A steering committee is typically formed by high-level       committee typically comprises experts in specific areas of
   government officials who prepare the strategy, make the      knowledge, and is designated by the steering committee.
   main decisions, and set out the timelines and working           A contract management committee is usually formed
   arrangements, including responsibilities of each steering    to manage contract arrangements after reaching financial
   committee member. A steering committee generally has an      close. A contract management committee can be formed by
   explicit mandate and is headed by a committee chair.         a group of people or one person, and is typically appointed
      A working committee is generally formed by a more         by the Ministry of Power.
   junior group of government officials who prepare the day-
   to-day work, guided by the steering committee. A working
62                LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




                  risk, for preliminary works. Box 7.2 describes the two         apply in other countries, but these can at least provide
                  types of tenders for IPTs.                                     a reference. In addition, Ofgem states that early-stage
                      Early-stage tenders transfer more risk on prelim-          tenders would allow for innovation on technology,
                  inary works to private developers, including route             asset design, and routing and planning approvals.
                  selection, acquisition of ROW, environmental impact            The level of innovation in designs will vary according
                  assessments, and project design. In contrast, late-            to the performance requirements set by the tender
                  stage tenders have a high degree of project definition,        guidelines. Late-stage tenders focus more on procure-
                  and Government needs to prepare all preliminary                ment, construction, and financing solutions.
                  works, as described in Section 7.4. The responsibilities           Both tender types could be used in Africa. How-
                  under the two approaches are shown in Figure 7.2.              ever, as discussed in Section 6.7, African governments
                      Early-stage tenders require greater time. The              should consider procuring the first IPTs through
                  Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem), the             late-stage tenders. This alternative would avoid inves-
                  regulator in Great Britain, consulted on the choice            tors being exposed to risks associated to preliminary
                  between early- and late-stage tenders. Ofgem con-              works (which they may not be best placed to manage
                  sidered that late-stage tenders would need to be con-          at the start), and would involve a simpler bid evalua-
                  ducted four to five years before the transmission asset        tion process.
                  is required. Early-stage tenders would need eight to               The costs associated with preparing preliminary
                  nine years. Identical timelines would not necessarily          works are significant. If the government decides on




                  Box 7.2 Early-stage tenders and late-stage tenders

                  IPTs have two types of tender:                               •	 Under an early-stage tender, the government sets out
                                                                                  the broad transfer requirements between two points.
                  •	 Under a late-stage tender, the government does pre-          The private investor is responsible for identifying the
                     liminary work such as selecting the route and preparing      best solution and preparing all preliminary works.
                     the project design. The private investor is responsible
                     for building and operating the transmission project in
                     accordance with this.




Figure 7.2 Responsibilities under early-stage tenders and late-stage tenders

                                                       Transmission planning                     Government

                                                          Route selection

                       Government                         ROW acquisition

     Late-stage                                                  ESIA                                                   Early-stage
         tender                                                                                Private investor         tender
                                                           Project design

                                                            Construction

                     Private investor                   Line commissioning

                                                   Operation and maintenance

                                                                                                       Preliminary works
                                        TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                     63


a late-stage tender, it should also discuss and define     bidder. In some countries, the ROW can sit with a
the following activities before preparing preliminary      shell company which is sold or transferred to the
works:                                                     winning bidder. In other cases, preliminary works
                                                           end once the government reaches an agreement
•	 Setting the scope of work and the expected costs        with the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the land and the
   of preparing preliminary works, and the ability to      winning bidder makes payments for the land or ROW
   recover these costs from users of the transmission      easements.
   grid,                                                       The responsibility of preparing preliminary works
•	 Identifying who will prepare the preliminary            under a late-stage tender generally rests with the
   works,                                                  sector entity in charge of planning (generally within
•	 Establishing the role of the government in oversee-     the Ministry of Energy or similar) or the transmission
   ing the preliminary work, and                           utility. In addition, the government should consider
•	 Defining how the ROW gets transferred to the suc-       obtaining support from multilateral agencies to fund
   cessful bidder.                                         or provide technical assistance for these activities,
                                                           especially if the government has little or no experi-
   The government may wish to obtain legal advice          ence running IPT tenders.
on how best to transfer the ROW to the successful


    Prepare the preliminary works
7.4 

   Prepare                                                                        Prepare the
                                          Acquire the         Prepare the           project
  preliminary      Select the route         ROW
    works                                                        ESIA               design



If the government decides on a late-stage tender, it       •	 Evaluating options: This involves analyzing the
must prepare the preliminary works. These involve             data gathered in the previous activity and selecting
selecting the route (Section 7.4.1), acquiring the ROW        the preferred and alternative routes.
(Section 7.4.2), preparing the ESIA (Section 7.4.3), and
preparing the design (Section 7.4.4). Once prelimi-            The sector entity in charge of transmission plan-
nary works are completed, the project will be clearly      ning is the party best suited to carry on both activities.
defined. The private investor will be responsible for      In many countries, this is the Ministry of Energy or
building and operating the transmission project in         similar. In others it will be the planning department
accordance with that process.                              of the transmission utility (can be a local, regional,
                                                           or national company, depending on the country). If
7.4.1 Select the route                                    it is the Ministry of Energy or similar, it should also
The government should select the route of the trans-       request the opinion and participation of the planning
mission line. Selecting the route is typically an itera-   department of the transmission utility when it per-
tive process that requires aerial and field surveys. The   forms these activities.
result of this task is a preferred route and alternative
routes if permits and ROW cannot be obtained for the       7.4.2 Acquire the ROW
preferred route.                                           The government should acquire the ROW for the
    To complete this task, the government should per-      selected route. The ROW is the right to cross privately
form two main activities:                                  or publicly owned property to build the transmission
                                                           project.
•	 Postulating potential routes and gathering                 To acquire the ROW, the government will need to
   data: This involves conducting aerial and field sur-    negotiate with the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the land.
   veys and considering ancillary facilities required to   The negotiations are often based on the quantifica-
   access the transmission project                         tion of the economic losses that the landowner will
64   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     bear due to the impact of the project, or the restric-        next stage. For example, the EIS may suggest that
     tions imposed on the use of land once the landowners          obtaining the environmental permits may be feasible.
     provide the ROW.                                              However, getting the environmental permits may
         Acquiring the ROW is one of the highest risk              take time. In that case, it may be reasonable to proceed
     tasks of the process and can require years to accom-          with the next stage, especially if the project is urgent.
     plish, depending on the characteristics of the project.
     It is also a sensitive task that must be handled with         7.4.4 Prepare the project design
     care. As with the previous task, the party best placed        The government should also prepare the project
     to perform this task is the sector agency in charge           design. This involves defining the project characteris-
     of transmission planning (after they have consulted           tics and the specifications needed to procure materi-
     with the planning department of the transmission              als and equipment.
     utility).                                                         The major project characteristics include:
         Accomplishing this task can also depend on both
     property rules and regulations relating to local land.        •	 Year when the transmission project must be in
     In some cases, the government may have to amend                  service,
     the existing rules and regulations to allow for private       •	 Start point and end point for the transmission line
     investors to acquire the ROW.                                    (or the locations for substations),
                                                                   •	 Voltage of line (kV),
     7.4.3  Prepare an ESIA                                       •	 Nominal capacity (MVA),
     The government should commission an ESIA to eval-             •	 Approximate length (km), and
     uate the expected environmental and social impacts            •	 Number of circuits.
     of the project, and identify potential environmental
     and social limitations of the project. Typically, state           The main set of specifications to procure materi-
     regulatory agencies require an ESIA to issue permits          als and equipment include:
     for the project.
         The document that results from the ESIA is called         •	 Mechanical specifications of tower (for example,
     an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). The EIS                 lattice or tubular),
     should state whether the project complies with envi-          •	 Type of conductors, number of conductors for each
     ronmental and social impact standards, or whether                phase, and number of earth conductors,
     the government should put in place mitigation mea-            •	 Grounding, insulator and hardware requirements,
     sures to reduce or avoid those impacts to obtain the          •	 Construction methodology, and
     necessary permits. However, sometimes mitigation              •	 Design norms and standards.
     measures can be implemented in parallel with the


         Design the transaction
     7.5 
                                                                                                    Design
                                                                                                    tender
                  Design           Hire transaction           Manage           Design the           process
                transaction            advisors                risks            contract           and draft
                                                                                                    bidding
                                                                                                  documents


     The government should design a transaction that               the transaction will depend not only on designing the
     results in a transparent, open, and competitive tender        contract correctly, but also on designing an appro-
     process. To achieve this, it should start by hiring           priate tender process, and drafting the bidding doc-
     transaction advisors (Section 7.5.1), especially if this is   uments. Section 7.5.4 discusses how the government
     the first time the country will tender an IPT contract.       can design the tender process and draft the bidding
     The government will also need to identify the risks           documents.
     associated to the project, evaluate who is best placed           Procuring IPTs will require frequent tenders
     to carry each risk and how to allocate those risks            (compared to other business models). Preparing for
     (Section 7.5.2). This will be a key step in designing the     this well will reduce implementation costs.
     IPT contract (Section 7.5.3). However, the success of
                                                         TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                                             65



7.5.1 Hire the transaction advisors                                                best manage the risk or the party that can mitigate
Designing an IPT transaction requires expertise in                                  the risk at least cost. Managing risks appropriately
multiple fields: legal and regulatory issues, commer-                               minimizes project costs and attracts high-quality
cial and financial issues, technical issues, or specifi-                            investors.
cally to draft bidding documents. Governments often                                      The government may wish to complete this task by
lack this expertise and may desire to hire experts to                               filling in a risk matrix like the one shown in Table 7.1.
support the process. Transaction advisors are espe-                                 To complete a risk matrix, the government should:
cially important when countries are introducing IPT
tenders for the first time. They can also build capacity                            •	 Identify the project risks (first column),
within the government, reducing the need to hire                                    •	 Evaluate how the risks arise (second column), and
advisors in future transactions.                                                    •	 Assess how to allocate the risks (third column).
    When hiring transaction advisors, the govern-
ment will face choices: hire local or international                                    The government can refer to the World Bank’s
advisors; hire all advisors from one entity or from                                 “Concessions for infrastructure. A guide to their
different entities; or hire advisors for specific tasks                             design and award” to find further information about
or for all stages of the transaction process. The need                              identifying and allocating risks, and to help it com-
for advisors may vary according to the project char-                                plete the risk matrix in Table 7.1.12
acteristics, but the hiring process should always be                                   In addition, Table 7.2 describes the main risks of an
“transparent, fair, cost-effective and free of conflict of                          IPT project (including the risk, and its risk category
interest.”10                                                                        in bold), most common reasons why each risk arises,
    The World Bank toolkit for hiring advisors for pri-                             and details of how to allocate the risk. The table also
vate participation in infrastructure11 provides more                                clarifies differences, if any, between the risks of late-
details on the hiring process. The toolkit includes                                 stage and early-stage tenders.
guidelines for setting realistic timelines, preparing
the budget to pay for advisors, selecting advisors, and                             7.5.3 Design the contract
paying for advisors.                                                                The government should design an IPT contract
    Hiring advisors can be expensive. The government                                that clearly specifies the rights and obligations
should consider contacting multilateral agencies—                                   between the government and private investor. The
like the World Bank, the African Development Bank,                                  IPT contract—also known as a Transmission Service
and others—to help fund its hiring of advisors. Alter-                              Agreement (TSA)—should be drafted in a way that is
natively, these agencies can also provide technical                                 enforceable and consistent with any other associated
assistance for the transaction process. This is also dis-                           agreements (like guarantees or other credit enhance-
cussed in the World Bank toolkit for hiring advisors.                               ment mechanisms).
                                                                                        A well-defined TSA is key to making the project
7.5.2 Manage the risks                                                             bankable. The contract should include provisions to
The government should identify the main risks asso-                                 mitigate some of the risks identified in Task 7.5.2. In
ciated with the project, evaluate which party is best                               all cases, the terms and clauses in the TSA must be
placed to carry each risk, and analyze how to mitigate                              drafted in clear and measurable terms, ensuring that
them. Risks should be allocated to the party that can                               they can be legally enforceable. Table 7.3 summarizes


Table 7.1 Risk matrix

          1. What is the risk?                          2. How does the risk arise?                      3. How should the risk be allocated?




Source: Adapted from Table 3.2. M. Kerf et al., “Concessions for infrastructure. A guide to their design and award,” Technical Paper no. 389, (1998), https://
tinyurl.com/zgamefg (accessed March 13, 2017).
66   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Table 7.2 Main risks of an IPT project

              What is the risk?                                                              How should the risk be
            (Risk category; risk)                 How does the risk arise?                        allocated?
     Preliminary works;                       Landowners along the route refuse        Can be allocated to government
     Failure or delay in obtaining            to grant the necessary ROW rights        (late-stage) or IPT (early-stage).
                                              to the developer; or Government          Where the risk allocated to IPTs
     ROW, permits, or other approvals         agencies unreasonably withhold the       Government should ensure timely
     (not applicable to late-stage tenders)   granting of permits                      decision making/arbitration
                                                                                       processes and provide reasonable
                                                                                       relief measures to IPT in case ROW,
                                                                                       or necessary permits, or approvals
                                                                                       cannot be secured by the IPT
                                                                                       developer, despite best efforts.
     Construction risk;                       Within IPT’s control (for example,       Contractor to carry the risk through
     Cost overrun                             due to inefficient construction          fixed-price construction contract
                                              practices)                               (typically an EPC contract)
     Construction risk;                       Within IPT’s control (for example,       IPT faces penalties for late
     Delay in completion                      due to lack of coordination of           commissioning
                                              subcontractors)
                                              Outside IPT’s control (for example,      Force Majeure risk borne by
                                              due to force majeure events)             government, dependent on detailed
                                                                                       design of Force Majeure clauses
     Construction risk;                       Required geotechnical studies are        IPT to carry the risk
     Finding adverse soil conditions          generally not available during the
                                              early stages of project development
                                              (for example, before construction)
     Operating risk;                          IPT mismanaging operating costs          IPT to carry the risk
     Operating cost overruns
     Off-taker;                               Off-taker faces cash flows constraints   Government to carry the risk. To
     Nonpayment by off-taker (due to          and cannot cover payment                 mitigate this risk the government
     commercial causes)                       obligation with IPT                      can provide, for example, escrow
                                                                                       arrangements, credit enhancement
                                                                                       mechanisms, or engage DFIs.
     Financing;                               A committed lender or sponsor of         IPT to carry the risk
     Funds needed to finance the project      the IPT project decides to abandon
     are not obtained                         project, faces, for example,
                                              insolvency issues or bankruptcy, etc.
     Exchange rate;                           Devaluation or fluctuations of local     Government to bear risk if revenues
                                              currency                                 defined in US$. IPT to bear risk if
                                                                                       portion of revenues defined in local
                                                                                       currency—IPT may hedge against
                                                                                       this risk.
     Regulatory;                              The general legal framework              Normally, IPT to carry the risk
     Changes in law                           changes (taxes, or environmental         (government could carry the risk
                                              standards)                               when changes are fundamental
                                                                                       and completely unforeseeable; for
                                                                                       example, switch from free market to
                                                                                       central planning)
                                              Changes in legal or contractual          Government to carry the risk
                                              framework directly and specifically
                                              affecting the project company

                                                                                                 (table continues on next page)
                                                        TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                                              67



Table 7.2 Continued

              What is the risk?                                                                                       How should the risk be
            (Risk category; risk)                             How does the risk arise?                                     allocated?
 Force Majeure;                                         Through Acts of God, which include                    Insurer risk, if risk was insured;
 Acts of God                                            (but are not limited to) floods,                      otherwise, Force Majeure risk borne
                                                        earthquakes, riots, and strikes                       by government, dependent on
                                                                                                              detailed design of Force Majeure
                                                                                                              clauses
 Environmental and social;                              Communities are engaged too late                      Early-stage: IPT to bear the risk
 Consultations with affected                            in the process                                        which can be mitigated by engaging
 communities are not successful (not                                                                          local consultants with experience in
 applicable to late-stage tenders)                                                                            this process
                                                                                                              Late-stage: Government to bear risk.
 Environmental and social;                              Upon the completion of the                            Early-stage: IPT to bear the risk.
 Environmental and Social Impact                        Environmental and Social Impact                       Mitigation will generally entail
 Assessment studies discover                            Assessment                                            changes to the preferred route.
 sensitive areas along the route (not                                                                         Late-stage: Government to bear risk.
 applicable to late-stage tenders)
 Political                                              Through actions such as breach                        Insurer’s risk (PRI), if risk was
                                                        or cancellation of contract;                          insured; otherwise the IPT will carry
                                                        expropriation, creeping                               the risk; if the contract terminates,
                                                        expropriation, etc.                                   the government will pay a
                                                                                                              compensation
 Transfer;                                              Quality transfer specifications were                  Detailed quality and price
 Disputes when asset is transferred to                  not (or poorly) defined                               specifications should be included in
 government                                                                                                   the contract


Source: Adapted from Table 3.2. M. Kerf et al., “Concessions for infrastructure. A guide to their design and award,” Technical Paper no. 389, (1998), https://
tinyurl.com/zgamefg (accessed March 13, 2017).



Table 7.3 Summary of key provisions to include in the TSA and associated agreements

                 Provision                                                                       Description
Output specifications                              Exact specification of the output—whether a transmission line, substation, or
                                                   both; location; length; voltage; transmission capacity, etc. Exceptions are also
                                                   clearly stated.
                                                   This provision determines the output that society will obtain from the privately
                                                   financed transmission project. It must be drafted in clear and measurable
                                                   terms, ensuring that it is legally enforceable.
Validity and term                                  Definition and specification of project timeline, key milestones, contract term,
                                                   and expected end date.
Key performance indicators (KPIs)                  KPIs need to be defined and clearly specified in the contract. The main KPIs in
                                                   a TSA are requirements on:
                                                   •	 Commissioning (for example, an obligation to commission the line by a
                                                      defined date), and
                                                   •	 Line availability after commissioning (as opposed to energy delivered or the
                                                      usage of the line). The availability target is typically close to 98 percent.
Monitoring and enforcement                         How KPIs will be monitored, the auditing arrangements, and the consequences
arrangements                                       of performing outside the levels required by the KPIs. Consequences may
                                                   include penalties and bonuses.
                                                   For example, the contract should impose penalties if the investor does not meet
                                                   the obligation to commission the line by a defined date. Prolonged failure to
                                                   achieve commissioning should also lead to contract termination.
                                                                                                                          (table continues on next page)
68   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Table 7.3 Continued

                     Provision                                                                  Description
      Payment mechanisms                             How the private party will be paid for providing the output, and by whom.
                                                     Payments to IPTs are generally largely determined by the winning bid
                                                     and are based on line availability. The IPT receives annual payments,
                                                     typically in monthly instalments. Payment starts once the line is successfully
                                                     commissioned.13
                                                     In addition, the design of payments mechanisms typically specifies:
                                                     •	 How payments may be adjusted in response to performance,
                                                     •	 Currency of payments,
                                                     •	 Indexation arrangements and parameters to be used, and
                                                     •	 Frequency of payments.
      Response to changes outside the                The contract should specify how the rights and obligations of the parties will
      contract                                       change in response to changes outside the contract, including:
                                                     •	 If and under which circumstances a change in law that changes project
                                                        costs would trigger a change in payments to the private party,
                                                     •	 If and how changes in economic variables that could affect the project costs
                                                        (like interest rates or exchange rate) would be treated,
                                                     •	 What would happen if the private party refinances its debt—if potential
                                                        savings are, or are not, passed on to the public sector, and
                                                     •	 Provisions to evaluate changes unspecified in the contract.
      Dispute resolution mechanisms                  The contract should specify the dispute resolution process. Generally, this
                                                     involves defining a series of steps before any interested party invokes
                                                     arbitration to resolve the dispute or terminates the contract.
                                                     Steps may include notification at a working level, escalation to a senior
                                                     management level, issuance of formal notice, and submission of a plan by a
                                                     non-performing party.
      Other government obligations                   Definition and specification of the Government’s obligations. These may
                                                     include project functions that the Government retains (for example, operating
                                                     the system, assisting in land acquisition, or waiving of taxes or duties).
      Termination provisions                         The TSA should clearly state what happens when the contract ends, including:
                                                     •	 Clauses of contract close. Procedure for end-of-term arrangements, including
                                                        (but not limited to) transfer obligations if BOOT or similar contract type, or
                                                        termination payments.
                                                     •	 Clauses of early termination. The TSA should clearly specify the conditions
                                                        for contract termination (by either of the parties or force majeure), the
                                                        compensation payments in case of, for example, early termination.

     Source: Development Bank of Jamaica, “Privatisation Policy Framework & Procedures Manual,” http://dbankjm.com/services/ppp-and-privatisation-division/
     privatisation/privatisation-policy-framework-procedures-manual/ (accessed March 15, 2017).




     the key provisions to include in the TSA and associ-                          included in the analysis. For this reason, the table does
     ated agreements.                                                              not include management, O&M, or lease contracts.
        The government should also evaluate and define                                 There is not one unique or best structure for
     which is the best alternative to structure the IPT—                           IPTs. Rather, “designers of PPP projects need to
     whether the private company will own the transmis-                            consider advantages offered by numerous projects
     sion assets, if these will be transferred at the end of                       and approaches. The analysis of what is needed for
     the term, etc. Table 7.4 presents the main PPP struc-                         a particular project or program needs to be made
     tures to consider when designing the most applicable                          on a country-by-country, sector-by-sector and pro-
     IPT contract for a country. PPP structures where the                          ject-by-project basis.”14
     private company is not responsible for financing and                              The selected countries reviewed for this report did
     building all new transmission investments are not                             not have identical structures for IPTs but they were
                                         TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                    69



Table 7.4 PPP structures for IPT contracts

                                 Who funds
                                 the capital          Who bears            Who bears              Who owns
  #       PPP structure         investment?        construction risk?    operation risk?          the assets?
 1     Build, Own,           Private company       Private company      Private company       Private company
       Operate, Transfer
       (BOOT)
 2     Build, Own,           Private company       Private company      Private company       Private company
       Operate (BOO)
 3     Build, Transfer,      Private company       Private company      Private company       Government/SOE
       Operate (BTO)
 4     EPC+Finance           Private company       Private company      Government/SOE        Government/SOE




all successful in attracting private finance to invest in   traditional IPT contracts. However this requires that
new transmission assets. One point of difference is         the transfer of ownership is purely on paper and does
the stage at which the asset is transferred.                not lead to any intervention by the new owner that
    In Brazil, Peru, and India tenders are for BOOT         affects cost or performance. It also requires that secu-
contracts (type 1 in Table 7.4). The asset is transferred   rity is provided in some way other than the ultimate
at the end of the contract term. As transmission assets     security which arises from ownership of the asset.
are long lived assets they will have a remaining use-           A final option is that the private developer finances
ful life at the end of the term. The transfer condition     the transmission asset; transfers ownership after
therefore requires measures such as valuation of the        commissioning and has no further operating respon-
asset condition, or requirements for minimum main-          sibility; and is paid back over, for example, 30 years.
tenance spend towards the end of the contract term          We refer to this model as EPC+Finance (type  4 in
to ensure the asset is transferred in good condition.       Table 7.4) There are no efficiency gains from this
    Chile’s IPT contracts are BOO (type 2 in Table 7.4).    approach as the developer does not bear whole-of-life
The private companies own the assets indefinitely           performance risk.
and do not transfer the transmission assets at the
end of the contract term. In Chile’s case the contract      Credit enhancement arrangements
establishes revenue certainty for an initial period         may be needed
and is followed by regulatory determinations later in       During this task, the government should also consider
the asset life. This was the only example in the case       if credit enhancement arrangements are needed.
studies of indefinite private ownership of the trans-       These mechanisms may be necessary to make the
mission asset financed under an IPT tender.                 project bankable. If so, the government should design
    An alternative is that the private company              these arrangements during this task. These arrange-
finances the asset; receives long term payments             ments are typically governed by separate documents
based on operational performance; and transfers the         supporting the TSA.
asset ownership at a much earlier stage. We have                Examples of credit enhancement arrangements
referred to this as Build, Transfer, Operate, or BTO        include Government Support Agreements, Partial
(type 3 in Table 7.4). For example, the asset could be      Risk Guarantees (PRG), and credit guarantees. Gov-
transferred to the government-owned transmission            ernments may be interested to contact institutions
company immediately after commissioning, while              like the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
the capital costs would be recovered over a contract        (MIGA), or other multilateral organizations that offer
term of 30 years.                                           and provide support in designing credit enhance-
    The selected countries did not present examples         ment products. The World Bank and other multilat-
of the BOT type. An early transfer of ownership is          eral organizations also provide model templates for
also not a usual approach under project finance. It         these arrangements, which the government can also
may in theory be able to provide similar incentives to      consult as reference.
70   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     7.5.4  Design the Tender Process and Draft                        Governments or contracting entities typically pre-
             Bidding Documents                                       qualify bidders to ensure that they only receive bids
     The government should design the tender process by              from well-qualified parties. Bidders are also likely to
     which bidders will be qualified and then invited to             invest more in their bids if the number of comparable
     bid. In this task the government should:                        bidders is limited. This is generally the case with IPT
                                                                     tenders.
     •	 Define the evaluation process and the criteria to               To prepare the prequalification phase, the gov-
        qualify bidders,                                             ernment should define the qualification criteria and
     •	 Define the timeline of the tender, and                       the method to assess the applications to prequalify.
     •	 Draft the bidding documents.                                 The qualification criteria generally include meeting
                                                                     technical and financial requirements, providing bid
        To complete this task successfully, the government           bonds, and others—whether government-owned
     should consider appointing an Evaluation Commit-                companies would be allowed to bid or not (see discus-
     tee to carry out this and all tasks until financial close.      sion in Box 6.10). The assessment to prequalify appli-
     The Evaluation Team may be formed by members of                 cations can be pass-or-fail or through the scoring of
     the Committee, other governments officials, transac-            the criteria.
     tion advisors (those hired in Task 7.5.1, or others), or           To prepare the bidding phase, the government
     any combination of them.                                        should also develop the process and criteria to evalu-
                                                                     ate bids. This includes:
     Define the evaluation process
     and the criteria to qualify bidders                             •	 Defining the process by which to evaluate bids—
     The process can be designed in different ways. It                  this typically involves bidders restating their
     may involve one or two stages. Bidders may, or may                 qualifications, and presenting a technical and a
     not, be prequalified before bidding starts. To choose              financial proposal,
     the design process, the government should study the             •	 Developing the bid evaluation criteria—including
     different alternatives, review the international expe-             the method by which the technical proposals will
     rience, and take advantage of the publicly available               be weighted, whether the technical proposal must
     standardized templates.                                            meet minimum thresholds, and setting a price cap,
         The government will first have to decide whether               and
     to prepare a one-stage or two-stage tender process.             •	 Establishing how to present bids—format, delivery
     The main differences between these two approaches                  method, etc.
     are at the bidding stage, as described in Box 7.3.




     Box 7.3 One-stage and two-stage tender process

     The World Bank “Toolkit for PPPs in Roads and Highways”         undesirable or impractical to prepare complete technical
     defines the two approaches as:                                  specifications in advance. This is typical for large and
                                                                     complex PPP [Public Private Partnerships] projects. In
     •	 One-stage process: “When the Government has a pre-           such a case, a two-stage bidding procedure may be used.
        cise idea on the technical options and specifications to     In stage 1, unpriced technical proposals based on a con-
        be chosen. Prequalified firms are asked to submit bids       ceptual design or performance specifications are invited.
        in strict accordance with the specifications imposed by      They then are subject to technical and commercial clari-
        the Government. Final selection is made on a “financial”     fications and adjustments. In stage 2, amended bidding
        basis alone and little room for negotiation is left to the   documents are issued and final technical proposals and
        selected candidate.”                                         priced bids are submitted and evaluated.”
     •	 Two-stage process: “In particular when uncertainties
        remain on technical options to be retained, it may be

     Source: World Bank (2009).
                                         TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                   71


    The case studies included in Appendix A provide         required to meet the timeline above. This includes
examples of evaluation processes and qualification          assessing applications, evaluating bids, and finalizing
criteria used in IPT tenders internationally. For exam-     and approving the bidding documents. Some steps
ple, in Peru the bidder must have a minimum level           may require Ministerial or Cabinet approval—like
of equity and assets (which varies according to the         credit enhancement agreements generally—and the
specifications of the transmission project) and must        government should factor in these issues.
show experience operating electricity transmission
systems that satisfy minimum conditions regarding           Draft the bidding documents
length, voltage, and transmission capacity. Bids must       The package of bidding documents typically includes:
be quoted in US$ and the tender is awarded to the bid-
der that proposes the lowest service cost—­   calculated    •	 A draft of the TSA
as the sum of annual O&M costs and the annual               •	 The Request for Proposal (RFP), and
repayment of investment costs, calculated using a           •	 Other agreements. If the government decides to
12 percent real annual rate for a 30-year period.              provide credit enhancement arrangements, these
    Module  5 of the “Toolkit for PPPs in Roads and            should also be specified, and a draft included in the
Highways” provides further details on how to imple-            bidding package.
ment and monitor the procurement process, and
describes the steps to follow when designing the                The RFP generally contains a memorandum
tender process (see Stage 3: Procurement).15                of information to bidders, Instructions to Bidders,
                                                            description of the criteria to qualify bidders and eval-
Define the timeline of the tender                           uation process, and bid templates.
Defining a realistic timeline prepared in advance is            To draft the bidding documents, the govern-
key to running a smooth tender. The government              ment may find it useful to review the international
should define a timeline that includes all key mile-        experience or model templates from multilateral
stones for the investor until financial close, including:   organizations. Many countries publish their bidding
                                                            documents online. For example, the World Bank
•	 Invitation to applicants,                                offers online templates of standardized bidding doc-
•	 Deadline to submit applications,                         uments, guidelines to draft the documents, examples
•	 Notice to prequalified applicants,                       of project bidding documents from countries around
•	 Issuance of bidding documents,                           the world, and other useful references—like examples
•	 Bidding conference (if planned),                         of procurement laws or checklists for governments to
•	 Deadline to request clarifications (and changes to       use while running the tender process.16
   draft documents if allowed),                                 The government may also wish to hire legal
•	 Deadline to submit bids, and                             experts (if it has not done so yet) to draft the docu-
•	 Notification of contract award.                          ments (particularly the TSA).

    However, the government will also need to prepare
an internal timeline that includes all the internal steps



7.6 Run the tender

                                 Issue the            Evaluate          Award the             Reach
           Run tender             bidding                                                    ﬁnancial
                                                      the bids           contract
                                documents                                                     close



The government should run the tender according to                 Issue the bidding documents
                                                            7.6.1 
the timeline defined in Task 7.5.4. The government,         The government will issue the bidding documents to
assisted by its transaction advisor, should issue the       the prequalified bidders. To do so, all bidding docu-
bidding documents, evaluate bids, award the con-            ments need to be finalized and approved before the
tract, and reach financial close.                           agreed date for the “Issuance of bidding documents”
                                                            milestone.
72   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




         The government can choose whether or not to             and the procedure to reach financial close. In some
     charge bidders for these bidding documents. If the          cases, those tasked to evaluate the process may be
     government decides not to charge, it may wish to            empowered to decide who the preferred bidder is.
     publish the documents on the webpage of the entity              The recommendation should build on the Evalu-
     in charge of the tender process.                            ation Report (prepared in Task 7.6.2), but should also
         The timeframe given to bidders to prepare their         include:
     bids will depend on whether the government decided
     on an early-stage tender or late-stage tender. During       •	 A detailed description of the project presented by
     this period, the government should manage inter-               the preferred bidder—and how it meets the evalu-
     actions with bidders. This includes responding to              ation criteria
     requests for clarification (and changes to draft docu-      •	 The main project risks and estimated costs
     ments if allowed) and providing additional informa-         •	 A statement recommending the project and the
     tion. Sometimes, governments create a virtual Data             preferred bidder—including opinion statements
     Room where bidders can access and obtain all the               from other related and interested government
     relevant information in one centralized place.                 entities (for example, the Ministry of Energy and
         The government will also be responsible for                Ministry of Finance)
     receiving and handling the bids. This involves ensur-       •	 The main negotiating items that the government
     ing that bidders will be able to submit their bids in          should consider, and
     line with the Instructions to Bidders. For example, if      •	 The procedure to reach financial close.
     bidders need to provide hard copies, the government
     must ensure that a tender box is available at the date          The main negotiating items can include various
     and place specified. The government should also plan        aspect of the project—issues regarding the ROW or
     a secure place to keep the bids until evaluation.           land, the concession term, renegotiation alternatives,
                                                                 technical and financial parameters included in the
     7.6.2 Evaluate the bids                                    RFP, and other items. However, it is recommended the
     The government should evaluate the bids by follow-          government limits the number of negotiating items
     ing the criteria and process included in the RFP. This      and focus on, generally, two or three of the items
     task generally involves various steps, such as:             listed above.17

     •	 Checking that the bids include all required forms        7.6.4   Reach financial close
        and these are fully completed. Otherwise, the bid(s)     Many steps need completing between awarding the
        should be rejected,                                      contract and the private investor starting work. The
     •	 Confirming that the bidders continue to meet             government needs to ensure that contract negoti-
        qualification criteria. Otherwise, the bid(s) should     ations are finalized and the contract—as well as all
        be rejected,                                             other related agreements—are signed, and all permits
     •	 Reviewing the technical proposal and evaluating it       and approvals obtained. But this is not sufficient. The
        against the technical criteria defined in Task 7.5.4.    funds needed for the project must be secured. This
        If a threshold was defined for technical proposals,      step is referred to as “financial close.”
        bids that score below it should be rejected, and             Financial close “means that the project’s entire
     •	 Reviewing the financial proposal and evaluating it       equity has been unconditionally committed, all loan
        against the financial criteria defined in Task 7.5.4.—   documents have been signed, and disbursement of
        for example, ranking the bids from lowest to high-       the loans can start without further problems.” How-
        est bid price.                                           ever, this definition may vary according to the coun-
                                                                 try and contract or project type—some also refer to
        Once evaluation is completed, the government             it as “financial closure.” A definition more specific to
     should prepare an Evaluation Report. This should            financial close of greenfield projects and concessions
     specify if bids were rejected (which, how many, and         is: “the existence of a legally binding commitment
     why); and include a list that ranks all bidders, clearly    of equity holders or debt financiers to provide or
     stating which bidder was evaluated highest.                 mobilize funding for the project. The funding must
                                                                 account for a significant part of the project cost,
     7.6.3 Award the contract                                    securing the construction of the facility.”18
     The Team should recommend to the government who
     the preferred bidder is, the main negotiating items,
                                           TOOLKIT TO INTRODUCE INDEPENDENT POWER TRANSMISSION TENDERS                            73




   Box 7.4 Contract management

   Designing the Contract Management Plan includes:                •	 Defining the responsibilities of the private investor and
                                                                      the government entities, and how they will be made
   •	 Establishing the main rules—such as:                            accountable,
      •	 How the contract management committee will ensure         •	 Monitoring and managing contract risks, and establish-
         that the required quality and technical specifications       ing an early warning system to inform the Ministry of
         are met during construction,                                 Finance if necessary, and
      •	 The process to monitor and report the project’s per-      •	 Planning how to address changes in the TSA.
         formance during operation, and
      •	 Which party pays the monitoring costs.
   •	 Defining the communication and reporting protocols
      between the private investor, the government, and all
      other parties,




   This task involves:                                               As described in Task 7.3.1, the contract management
                                                                  committee should be responsible for monitoring and
•	 Securing all necessary permits and approvals (par-             managing all contract issues. This committee will be
   ticularly in early-stage tenders),                             key to, for example, supporting the TSO in managing
•	 Securing land and ROW if not completed (particu-               the IPT (including all communication and reporting
   larly in early-stage tenders),                                 between the parties), or establishing an early warning
•	 The stakeholders’ agreement—among the stake-                   system to inform the Ministry of Finance of any risks
   holders forming the project company (most likely               that could eventually trigger a government guarantee.
   an SPV),                                                          The government can find further information,
•	 The credit enhancement agreement (if planned),                 and guidelines, to prepare and implement the Con-
•	 The financing agreements—the project lenders                   tract Management Plan in Module  5 of the “Toolkit
   typically prepare their own due diligence (where               for PPPs in Roads and Highways” (see Stage 5: Con-
   they review the main agreements, especially the                tract Management). Box 7.4 summarizes the main
   TSA and credit enhancement agreement) before                   activities the government needs to consider when
   ensuring and providing their funding sources, and              designing the Contract Management Plan.
•	 The agreements with sub-contractors, insurers, and
   others—including, for example, the EPC contract
   with the sub-contractors in charge of the construc-
                                                                  Notes
   tion and the O&M contract with sub-­contractors in              1.	 Preliminary works do not necessarily involve the
   charge of operation and management.                                 actual acquisition of the ROW. This can be left for
                                                                       the IPT developer to conclude. The government
Designing and agreeing on a Contract                                   generally reaches an agreement with the land-
                                                                       owners and the IPT (after tender is awarded) pays
Management Plan and its implementation
                                                                       for the land or ROW. However, this may vary by
The government also needs to design and agree
                                                                       country.
on the process to manage and monitor the contract                  2.	 The n-1 criteria involves, among other things,
arrangements. This will constitute the Contract Man-                   that: (1) no system equipment operates outside its
agement Plan.                                                          long-term design capability and no system voltage
    Designing the Contract Management Plan needs                       is outside safe limits, under “normal” operating
to start during Task 7.6.4, but its implementation will                conditions (for example, if the system is intact);
continue until the end of the contract—throughout                      and (2) unscheduled outages will not cause circuit
the construction phase of the project, operation and                   loadings to exceed applicable ratings, instability or
maintenance, and the transferring of the assets (if the                cascading outages, excessive voltage variation, or
case).                                                                 widespread interruption of load.
74   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     3.	 Ideally, the feasibility study should not be older                bQeTXIeuSYUxbPFWlysuyNI5rL6b2Ms/PPP
         than two years, but this may vary by project and                  ReferenceGuidev02Web.pdf (accessed March 17, 2017).
         country.                                                    9.	   Section 3.2.3. “Assessing Value for Money.”
     4.	 It is not possible to evaluate the feasibility of a        10.	   World Bank, “A guide for hiring and managing
         transmission project in isolation. It must be evalu-              advisors for private participation in infrastructure,”
         ated as part of a transmission expansion plan. The                Volume 3, PPIAF (2001), http://documents.worldbank
         feasibility study should validate that the project can            .org/curated/en/347941468766772652/pdf/multi0page
         be financed or, more accurately, that the time slice              .pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).
         of the transmission expansion plan can be financed.        11.	   World Bank (2001).
     5.	 The Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd (PGCIL),           12.	   M. Kerf et al. (1998), See Section 3.
         a utility owned by the national government, acts as        13.	   IPT contracts vary in whether payment is made
         the Central Transmission Utility (CTU). The CTU                   after early commissioning (before the due date in
         acts as an intermediary, receiving and distributing               the contract).
         the revenues from wheeling charges.                        14.	   Delmon, J., “Understanding Options for Public-­
     6.	 World Bank, “Toolkit for PPPs in Roads and High-                  Private Partnerships in Infrastructure. Sorting
         ways: Market Sounding,” Public-Private Infrastructure             out the forest from the trees: BOT, DBFO, DCMF,
         Advisory Facility (2009), https://ppiaf.org/sites/ppiaf.          concession, lease . . . ,” Policy Research Working
         org/files/documents/toolkits/highwaystoolkit/6/                   Paper 5173, World Bank, 2010, http://documents.
         pdf-version/5-92.pdf                                              worldbank.org/curated/en/999661468323693635/
     7.	 World Bank, “Toolkit for PPPs in Roads and High-                  pdf/WPS5173.pdf (accessed May 10, 2017).
         ways: Market Sounding.”                                    15.	   World Bank (2009).
     8.	 International Bank for Reconstruction and                  16.	   Public-Private-Partnerships in Infrastructure
         Development, the World Bank, Asian Develop-                       Resource Center, “Procurement Processes and Bid-
         ment Bank, and Inter-American Development                         ding Documents,” Last updated August 2016, https://
         Bank, “Public-Private Partnerships. Reference                     ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/
         Guide,” Version 2.0, Public-Private Infrastructure                overview/practical-tools/procurement-bidding#
         Advisory Facility (2014), http://api.ning.com/                    guidelines (accessed March 15, 2017).
         files/Iumatxx-0jz3owSB05xZDkmWIE7GTVY                      17.	   World Bank (2009); see Module 5, Stage 4.
         A3cXwt4K4s3Uy0NtPPRgPWYO1lLrWaTUqy                         18.	   World Bank (2009); see Module 5, Stage 4.
Appendix A

Case studies

This appendix provides five case studies that describe      Government2 set both wholesale and retail rates.
the experience of Brazil (A.1), Chile (A.2), India (A.3),   The Government used rates as a means of curbing
Peru (A.4), and the Philippines (A.5) introducing pri-      inflation, and non-cost-reflective tariffs led to severe
vate investment in transmission. The first four coun-       underinvestment.
tries provide examples of countries that scaled up              The Government embarked on a major reform
transmission investments through the Independent            program in 1995. The sector was unbundled and pri-
Power Transmission (IPT) business model, while the          vatized. A new regulatory framework was established
last country introduced private sector participation        to bring in private investment to deliver services that
(PSP) through a whole-of-grid model.                        Brazil could not otherwise afford.
    The structure of each case study is:                        One key objective for reform was the need for
                                                            expansion to ensure adequate supply. Other objec-
•	   Motivations for private investment in transmission,    tives included improving the efficiency of utilities,
•	   The structure of the power sector,                     enhancing economic competitiveness, and improv-
•	   Overview of PSP in transmission,                       ing quality of service. To meet these objectives,
•	   Legislative and regulatory framework,                  initial reforms included establishing “free” (large)
•	   Transmission planning,                                 consumers who could negotiate contracts directly
•	   Contract form,                                         with generators, conditions to allow for independent
•	   Procurement process, and                               power producers, and equal access to distribution and
•	   Outcomes.                                              transmission grids.

                                                            A.1.2   The structure of the power sector
    Case 1: Brazil
A.1                                                        Hydropower accounts for 75  percent of Brazil’s
This section describes the motivations for private          installed capacity and almost 80 percent of the energy
investment in the power sector in Brazil; the structure     produced.3 The hydro plants are spread across 12 main
of the sector; the overview of PSP in transmission; the     river basins and often have large reservoirs with
legal and regulatory framework that enabled PSP; the        multi-year storage capacity. Brazil’s hydro resource
                                                            ­
contract form and procurement process for tender-           has heavily influenced the development of the power
ing transmission lines; and the outcomes of PSP in          system. The generator mix also includes natural gas,
transmission.                                               coal, oil-fired, and nuclear power.
                                                                Ownership of transmission and generation assets
A.1.1 Motivations for private investment                   is split between state-owned companies belonging
       in transmission                                      to the federal or state Governments, and private
Until the mid-1990s, Brazil’s power sector was              ownership. Eletrobras, the largest federal-owned
vertically integrated under state management.               utility, owns 37 percent of total installed capacity. The
All distributors were owned by the state in which           64 distributor–retailers are either owned by the state
they operated. Generation and transmission com-             Governments or the private sector.
panies were state-owned, belonging to either the                The customer base is divided into regulated and
federal Government or the states of Brazil.1 The            unregulated (large) customers. Large customers
76   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     consume a fourth of the demand. They have the right                              ensuring continuity, quality and cost-efficient
     to contract directly with generators. Regulated clients                          supply of power for the national interconnected
     have to buy electricity from distribution companies.                             system (SIN) users,
                                                                                   •	 Empresa de Pesquisa Energética (EPE), the energy
     Government stakeholders                                                          research company responsible for conducting stra-
     The main government stakeholders in the power sec-                               tegic research in the electricity and energy sectors.
     tor are:                                                                         EPE’s research supports the MME in its role of
                                                                                      devising sector programs, and
     •	 The Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), respon-                            •	 The Cámara de Comercialização de Energia Elétrica
        sible for power sector policy. The MME is also in                             (CCEE) is the electricity commercialization cham-
        charge of planning, granting hydro and transmis-                              ber, the market operator.
        sion line concessions, and issuing bidding process
        guidelines for public services concessions,                                    Figure A.1 illustrates the relationship structure of
     •	 The Conselho Nacional de Política Energética                               the power sector public instructions. The president’s
        (CNPE), a council for energy policy under the                              energy advisory group, CNPE, is the highest author-
        MME. The CNPE advises the President on energy                              ity, although MME formulates and implements pol-
        matters. It also formulates policies and guidelines                        icy. EPE and ANEEL are constituted under the MME,
        for energy, which help the Government develop                              while ANEEL regulates and supervises ONS and
        national energy resources,                                                 CCEE.
     •	 Agência Nacional de Energia Elétrica (ANEEL), the
        Energy Regulatory Agency, a Government agency                              A.1.3 Overview of PSP in transmission
        responsible for administering and supervising                              Brazil has approximately 65 transmission companies
        power sector concessions, regulating tariffs, set-                         (including private and state-owned companies).4
        tling administrative disputes among agents of the                          Federal-owned Eletrobras is the largest and owns
        power industry, and defining the criteria and meth-                        approximately 57  percent of transmission assets.
        odology for the determination of transmission and                          The Government of Brazil owns almost 54  percent
        distribution tariffs,                                                      of Eletrobras. Several companies have a mix of public
     •	 The Operator of the National Electricity System                            and state government ownership. For example, the
        (ONS), the system operator, is responsible for                             private sector owns 89.5 percent of the transmission


     Figure A.1 Brazil’s power sector main institutions


                                                                           CNPE




                                CMSE                                        MME                                        EPE




                                                                          ANEEL



                                 ONS                                                                                  CCEE


     Source: Data sourced from ONS webpage, “Relacionamentos,” http://www.ons.org.br/institucional_linguas/relacionamentos.aspx (accessed March 15, 2017).
     CMSE refers to Comitê de Monitoramento do Setor Elétrico.
                                                                                                      CASE STUDIES       77


company of São Paulo (Companhia de Transmissâo             A.1.6 Contract form
de Energia Elétrica Paulista, CTEEP); the state of São     Transmission companies enter into BOOT contracts
Paulo owns the rest.                                       for 30 years. Companies sign contracts with all trans-
   Almost 70 percent of investments in transmission        mission network users. Transmission service users
between 2000 and 2010 came from the private sector.        include generation companies, distribution compa-
Private investors are both local and international.        nies, and large customers located within the region
Foreign companies invested 30 percent, local private       where the transmission line is located.
companies invested 39 percent, and federal and state-          The contract is awarded to the bidder that proposes
owned companies invested 31 percent.                       the lowest AR. The transmission company will receive
                                                           the AR in monthly payments, for the entire contract
A.1.4  Legislative and regulatory framework               term. The price is defined in the local currency (the
Liberalization reforms undertaken in the mid-1990s         real), and subject to indexation.7 The price is largely
were the first step to shape Brazil’s current power sec-   set by the outcome of the tender. However, the regu-
tor. Concessions for public utilities were introduced      lator can review aspects of the price during five-year
by Law 8.987 in 1995. The law sets out the main rules      price determinations. Revisions are set every fifth
for the concession and permission for tendering pub-       July after the concession contract is signed. ANEEL
lic services and specifies that concessions must be        reviews the cost of capital, adjustments for efficiency
awarded through a competitive process.5                    gains, and other items.8
    The Government also introduced legislation in              Adjustments in the way ANEEL reviews tariffs
2004 as a response to major supply shortages in 2001.      have increased perception of regulatory risk since
Law 10.847 (2004) created EPE and established EPE as       2012. These adjustments include ANEEL’s review of
the main entity in charge of transmission planning.        compensation of assets and renewal of concessions,
Law 10.848 of 2004 and Decree 5.163 of 2004 defined        how sub-transmission assets owned by transmission
energy trading between the various sector agents by        companies are transferred to distribution companies,
establishing two markets (regulated and unregulated)       and minimum schedules and procedures for O&M
for the negotiation of PPAs.                               costs.9
    Brazil uses a revenue cap scheme to regulate               Network users provide financial guarantees to
transmission. Transmission lines are subject to a reg-     transmission companies. Network users establish a
ulatory cap on AR. This annual cap is mainly set by        revolving fund holding three months of transmission
the outcome of the tenders. As described below, there      charges. If the account falls below the three-month
is also limited scope for regulatory review of aspects     threshold, users may be disconnected from the
of the AR.                                                 network.
                                                               The contract specifies that the transmission
A.1.5 Transmission planning                               company:
Planning is centralized by the MME, through research
and input from EPE and ONS. The three types of plan-       •	 Is responsible for obtaining the environmental per-
ning reports are:6                                            mit. The contract only comes into force once the
                                                              permit is obtained,
•	 A long-term plan (10 years) prepared by EPE,            •	 Must provide access to third parties who may want
•	 A short-term plan (5 years) prepared by EPE, and           to connect to the transmission line,
•	 A three-year document prepared by ONS listing           •	 Will be paid on availability, and are required to
   reinforcement and extension transmission needs.            meet 97 percent availability. If the availability of the
                                                              transmission line falls below the target, the trans-
    The long-term plan is indicative. The short-term          mission company will be penalized and will receive
plan determines the required investment in new                a lower payment. However, penalties are capped to
transmission lines. This plan is updated each year            12.5 percent of the permitted AR,10
and forms the basis of the tenders. In addition, the       •	 Will be penalized for delays to commissioning after
ONS is responsible for identifying reinforcement and          the Commercial Operation Date (COD), and
extension projects.                                        •	 Must post a bid guarantee equivalent to 1  per-
    The MME has to approve all plans. When the plan           cent of the estimated investment needed. ANEEL
is approved, ANEEL carries out the tendering process          returns the bid guarantee to all except the winning
to procure the transmission projects approved in the          bidder within five business days after publication
short-term plan.
78                        LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




                             of tender adjudication. The winning bidder has to                               maintaining, and operating transmission systems
                             substitute the bid guarantee with a performance                                 and substations with a voltage equal to 220 kV or
                             guarantee equal to 10 percent of ANEEL’s estimated                              higher, and
                             cost for the project. This replaces the bid bond and                         •	 Financial: The bidder must have a minimum level
                             is repaid in installments subject to meeting set                                of liquidity, equity and capital. The bidder must also
                             milestones and timelines.                                                       fulfill fiscal requirements such as tax compliance
                                                                                                             with the federal government and state treasury.
                             In addition, the contract includes a termination
                          clause that specifies the conditions under which the                               In addition, transmission companies that have
                          Government may buy the transmission asset.                                      had delays in past tenders cannot participate in ten-
                                                                                                          ders for a certain period.
                          A.1.7 Procurement process                                                          ANEEL publishes details of all auctions, including
                          ANEEL runs the tendering process. ANEEL starts the                              size, location, winning party, price, and construction
                          process by publishing a tender notice and the techni-                           costs. It also publishes the contracts. The data are
                          cal specifications.                                                             published in Portuguese.
                              The evaluation of bids is done through reverse
                          bidding and has one stage. The award is subject to a                            A.1.8 Outcomes
                          price cap defined by ANEEL. ANEEL sets a benchmark                              ANEEL has held 38  public auctions of multiple
                          maximum AR. This parameter is calculated based                                  lots since 1999. These have resulted in the award of
                          on various factors, including the cost of equipment,                            211  transmission line concessions. The line conces-
                          the depreciation rate of equipment, O&M costs, and                              sions total 69,811 km in length. The average length is
                          the cost of capital. Bidders must propose a price at or                         295 km. Projects range from 2 km to over 2,500 km.11
                          below the benchmark AR.                                                             Competitive tendering has also reduced costs.
                              Bidders must comply with the following                                      The average weighted discount on the winning bid
                          requirements:                                                                   stood at 22.8 percent of ANEEL’s estimated AR, for all
                                                                                                          awarded tenders between 2000 and 2015. Individual
                          •	 Technical: The bidder must be registered in the                              line discounts reached 59.2 percent. However, various
                             CREA (a regional council that that registers and                             tenders have been unsuccessful during the last few
                             regulates which companies and individuals are                                years, and others postponed for later. Thirty-seven
                             qualified in their area of work). The bidder must                            percent of the lots tendered from 2012 to 2015 were
                             provide proof of contracts or commitment let-                                unsuccessful (there were no bids). In contrast, all
                             ters with all relevant subcontractors. The bidder                            tenders between 2005 and 2009 were successful.
                             must also provide proof of experience building,                              Figure  A.2 shows the number of lots that were




Figure A.2 Successful and unsuccessful tenders (2005–2015)

         40
                                                                                                                                                Removed for later
         35
                                                                                                                                                Unsuccessful
         30
                                                                                                                                                Successful
         25

         20

          15

          10

           5
           0
                2005        2006 2007             2008 2009              2010        2011      2012        2013       2014       2015

Source: Data sourced from ANEEL, “Resultados dos Leilões de Geração.” Resumo dos resultados dos leilões de transmissão até, 2015, http://www.aneel.gov.br/resultados-de-leiloes
(accessed January 10, 2017).
                                                                                                    CASE STUDIES       79


unsuccessful, the lots that were removed to a later       Central or SIC) is the largest electric system, corre-
tender, and the number of lots that were successfully     sponding to 79  percent of Chile’s installed capacity,
tendered, from 2005 to 2015.                              located in the central and southern regions of Chile.13
    Tenders have been unsuccessful due to various         The northern system, the North Interconnected Sys-
factors. First, the weighted average cost of capital      tem (Sistema Interconectado del Norte Grande or
(WACC) used by ANEEL to define the maximum AR             SING), has 20  percent of the installed capacity. The
was too low, discouraging investors to bid. Second,       generation mix is primarily hydro and thermal in the
implementation risks have increased, mainly related       SIC, and thermal in the SING.
to environmental issues. Several projects have faced         Customers are divided between regulated and non
delays in the start of operations due to delays in        -regulated customers. Regulated customers are retail
obtaining the environmental permit. ANEEL released        consumers with a connected capacity less than or
details in mid-2016 that 62  percent of the late proj-    equal to 2,000 kW. Non-regulated (“free”) customers
ects at the time had faced delays when obtaining the      are large customers with a connected capacity greater
environmental permit.12 Third, from Banco Nacional        than 2,000  kW. Free customers are mainly mining
de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social (BNDES),            companies and other industries.
the national development bank, has provided fewer
low-cost funding as Brazil’s economy has slowed in        Government stakeholders
recent years. Brazil’s GDP annual growth decreased        The main actors in the power sector are:
3.8 percent in 2015 and forecast growth for 2016 was
–3.3 percent.                                             •	 The Ministry of Energy (MINENERGIA), respon-
                                                             sible for policy design and planning, as well as
                                                             providing concessions for hydroelectric plants,
    Case 2: Chile
A.2                                                         transmission lines, substations, and electricity dis-
This section describes the motivations for private           tribution areas,
investment in the power sector in Chile; the structure    •	 The Comisión Nacional de Energía (CNE), the
of the sector; the overview of PSP in transmission; the      Government’s National Energy Commission in
legal and regulatory framework that enabled PSP; the         charge of setting tariffs and defining the technical
contract form and procurement process for tender-            norms of the system. The CNE depends on the
ing transmission lines; and the outcomes of PSP in           MINENERGIA,
transmission.                                             •	 The Centro de Despacho Económico de Carga
                                                             (CDEC), the system operator. The CDEC is divided
A.2.1  Motivations for private investment in                in two, with separate operators in the SIC and the
        transmission                                         SING. Each CDEC is composed by representatives
During the 1970s the power sector in Chile was verti-        of generation and transmission companies, free
cally integrated and mostly state-owned. Investment          customers, and owners of facilities connected to
in the sector was low and inflation high. In 1982            the system, and
Chile’s economy decreased at an annual rate of 10 per-    •	 The regulator (SEC), responsible for overseeing the
cent. Given the economic situation, the Government           legal and regulatory norms, and technical stan-
introduced a reform in the power sector in early 1982        dards for liquid fuels, gas, and electricity.
to unbundle the sector and attract investment with a
market-oriented approach. Today, Chile is seen as a       A.2.3   Overview of PSP in transmission
leading example of power sector reform.                   Chile has about seven main transmission companies
                                                          in Chile. Transelec is one of the main companies in
A.2.2  The structure of the power sector                 the transmission sector, operating most of the trans-
The main characteristics of the Chilean power sector      mission lines in the SIC. The company has 6,682 km
are a result of the Law of General Power Services         of transmission assets, divided as follows: 548  km
introduced in 1982 (Ley General de Servicios Eléctri-     of 110  kV lines, 1,163  km of 154  kV lines, 3,961  km of
cos or LGSE) to privatize and vertically and horizon-     220 kV lines, and 1,010 km of 500 kV lines.
tally unbundle the power sector.                              Other companies include Compañía Transmisora
    Chile has about 25  generation companies, and         del Norte Chico, Transchile, Transnet, Sistema de
the total installed capacity is 20,662  MW. The Cen-      Transmisión del Sur, Transquillota, Transemel, and
tral Interconnected System (Sistema Interconectado        ISA Colombia.
80   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     A.2.4 Legislative and regulatory                          revision evaluates whether to include new lines, or to
            framework                                           delay or eliminate some of the projects in the long-
     The regulatory framework for electricity in Chile is       term plan. The lines included in the short-term plan
     based on the LGSE and the following laws:                  are tendered out.

     •	 The Ley Corta from 2004 and Ley Corta II from 2005,     A.2.6 Contract form
        introduced to ensure an efficient development of        When the Government awards the tender to a
        the power sector. The Ley Corta I was particularly      transmission company, the company obtains the
        important to regulate the remuneration of the lines     rights to build and operate the transmission line, by
        included in the SIC and SING, according to an effi-     a Ministerial decree. The decree also gives the com-
        cient model. It also created a “Panel of Experts” to    pany rights to transmission revenues. Transmission
        resolve controversies between parties, and              companies do not sign a concession contract with any
     •	 In July 2016, the Government approved the Law of        counterparty.
        Transmission and Interconnection (LTI), introduc-           Tenders are awarded according to the lowest
        ing various changes.                                    annual transmission value per segment (Valor Anual
                                                                de Transmisión por Tramo, or VATT). The VATT is
        The new legal framework states that:                    equal to the sum of annual value of investment (Anu-
                                                                alidad del Valor de la Inversión or AVI) and the main-
     •	 The Government must create a new independent            tenance, operation, and administration cost (Costos
        entity in charge of coordinating the national elec-     de Operación, Mantenimiento y Administración, or
        tric system (Coordinador Independiente del Sis-         COMA), calculated using a 10 percent real annual rate
        tema Eléctrico Nacional, or CISEN). CISEN started       for 20 years. The VATT and indexation formula agreed
        functioning on January 2017 and:                        with the winning bidder are fixed during five “tariff
        •	 Is a non-profit entity,                              periods” (20  years).14 After that, the transmission
        •	 Carries out the functions previously managed         assets are reviewed and updated during each tariff
           by the CDEC, and                                     period.
        •	 Is financed by the national annual budget, sub-          Transmission companies are paid against timely
           ject to approval by the CNE.                         commissioning and availability of the line. Transmis-
     •	 The transmission charge will be paid directly by        sion companies do not incur demand risks or other
        end users, both regulated and unregulated custom-       risks related to the operation of the whole grid.
        ers, twice a year.                                          Until the end of 2016, generation companies paid
     •	 The MINENERGIA will prepare a Strategic Envi-           transmission tolls in proportion to their use of the
        ronmental Evaluation (EAE) to define a preliminary      transmission lines. However, since 2017, the transmis-
        strip of land where the transmission projects could     sion charge is paid directly by end users, both regu-
        be located. The EAE will consider land, environ-        lated and unregulated, twice a year.
        mental, social, technical, and economic aspects. In         The Government does not own power sector
        the previous regulatory framework, the winning          assets, and transmission companies never transfer
        bidder had to define the final route of the transmis-   the assets to the Government.
        sion line and arrange the corresponding ROW.
                                                                A.2.7 Procurement process
     A.2.5 Transmission planning                                The procurement process can be summarized as
     Until mid-2016 the CDEC developed a long-term              follows:
     transmission plan every four years, to define the
     main transmission lines needed to guarantee a well-­       •	 The procurement uses an international and public
     functioning system. The LTI states that, starting in          competitive tender process,
     2017, the MINENERGIA will develop a long-term plan         •	 CISEN will run the competitive tender process. The
     for the electricity sector every five years. The long-        CDEC ran the process before the law changed in
     term transmission plan will be based on different sce-        2016,
     narios of expansion of generation and consumption,         •	 The bidding documents include reference values of
     for a 30-year horizon or longer.                              the investment and O&M costs (the latter defined
         In addition, every year the CNE develops a short-         as a percentage of the investment costs), and con-
     term transmission plan with a timeframe of at least           struction time (in months), and
     20  years based on the long-term plan. The annual
                                                                                                     CASE STUDIES      81


•	 The bidding process has one stage. First, CISEN         best technical offer. If a tie occurs again, CISEN will
   will evaluate if the bidder complies with the mini-     apply a mechanism to select one bid randomly.
   mum requirements (financial, technical, and legal).
   Then, CISEN will select the compliant bidder that       A.2.8 Outcomes
   offers the lowest VATT.                                 Chile has organized at least seven tenders since 2007.16
                                                           Ten projects were awarded for more than 1,200  km,
    Bidders can be Chilean citizens and foreign-           under build, own, and operate (BOO) contracts. This
ers. They can be individual citizens, companies, or        includes a recently awarded 140  km, 500  kV line to
consortiums, and must comply with the following            interconnect the country’s two main transmission
requirements:                                              systems.17

•	 Have experience in the power sector,
•	 Be registered with CISEN (previously with CDEC),
                                                           A.3 Case 3: India
•	 Have a risk rating of at least BB internationally and   This section describes the motivations for private
   at least BBB locally,15 and                             investment in the power sector in India; the structure
•	 Have a minimum amount of net assets.                    of the sector; the overview of PSP in transmission; the
                                                           legal and regulatory framework that enabled PSP; the
   Bids must be prepared in Spanish. Prices must be        contract form and procurement process for tender-
in US$ and valid for 120 days. Every bid must include      ing transmission lines; and the outcomes of PSP in
three proposals:                                           transmission.

•	 An administrative offer. This offer must include the    A.3.1  Motivations for private investment in
   legal, commercial, and financial documents of the               transmission
   bidder. This offer must also include:                   The economic crisis of 1991 led to wide-ranging eco-
   •	 A bank guarantee equal to 2.5 percent of the ref-    nomic reform, including of the power sector. The
      erence value of the investment (the percentage       crisis was mainly driven by unsustainable fiscal
      may vary according to the tender). The guaran-       imbalances. Chronic losses in the power sector were
      tee must be issued by a bank incorporated in         a large contributor. The Government set electricity
      Chile and addressed to the MINENERGIA, and           prices, which were often below costs. The resulting
   •	 Records proving the bidder’s experience and          financial inadequacy heavily constrained public
      technical skills working in transmission-related     investment in the sector. Power sector reform was
      projects. The bidder must have had a share of at     intended to draw in private sector investment and
      least 30 percent in the reference projects,          management capability.
•	 A technical offer. This offer must include the proj-
   ect schedule in detail, a warranty that the bidder      A.3.2   The structure of the power sector
   will comply with the schedule, and a technical          India has a federal structure. Electricity is a concur-
   description of the project, and                         rent issue, managed by both the Central and State
•	 An economic offer. This offer must include the          Governments. The Central Government has limited
   VATT, detailing the AVI and COMA.                       influence on energy policy at the state level. State Gov-
                                                           ernments are responsible for implementing national
     The evaluation process has the following steps:       laws, but can also issue state laws and regulations.
                                                               The Central Government is responsible for HV
•	   Opening of the administrative offer (step 1),         inter-state transmission and large-scale power proj-
•	   Opening of the technical offer (step 2),              ects providing power to several states. The generation
•	   Evaluation of the administrative offer (step 3),      projects are all privately owned. Transmission has
•	   Evaluation of the technical offer (step 4), and       been developed by a government-owned company
•	   Opening and evaluation of the economic offer          and by private developers.
     (step 5).                                                 The State Governments are responsible for gener-
                                                           ation, transmission, and distribution within the state.
   Steps 3 and 4 are performed on a pass-or-fail basis.    The majority of this capacity remains state owned,
   The contract is awarded to the bidder that proposes     but some private investment has occurred across the
the lowest VATT. If two or more economic offers tie,       supply chain.
the winning bidder will be the one that presents the
82   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Government stakeholders                                    dominate at the state level and are owned by the State
     The main actors in the power sector are:                   Governments.
                                                                    Historically the Government-owned companies
     •	 The Ministry of Power (MoP) is responsible for          undertook transmission projects on an un-competed
        designing and implementing power sector policies        basis. The 2003 Act laid the basis for private invest-
        and for developing a National Electricity Policy.       ment in transmission. Investment began in 2006
        State Ministries set policy at the state level,         when the National Tariff Policy (NTP) established
     •	 The Central Electricity Authority (CEA) prepares        that tariffs would be set by multiyear, tariff-based
        National Electricity Plans (NEP) consistent with        competitive bidding (TBCB).20
        the National Electricity Policy,18                          The NTP required that all transmission be on the
     •	 Regulatory Commissions operate at the central           basis of competitive bidding “after a period of five
        and state levels. The Central Electricity Regulatory    years or when the Regulatory Commission is satis-
        Commission (CERC) regulates generation owned            fied that the situation is ripe to introduce such com-
        or controlled by the Central Government, and reg-       petition.”21 Since 2006 inter-state transmission has
        ulates and licenses inter-state transmission and        mainly been tendered, although exceptions remain
        trading. The State Electricity Regulatory Commis-       for projects of “strategic importance or time-bound
        sion (SERC) regulates generation, transmission,         delivery.” These are given to PGCIL on a nomination
        distribution, and supply at the state level. Each       basis.22 STUs have undertaken most projects at the
        SERC also issues licenses for transmission, trading,    state level. Some projects have been tendered and pri-
        and distribution within the state,                      vately financed, and that share is likely to grow.
     •	 The Central Transmission Utility (CTU) is respon-           The private sector can only participate in trans-
        sible for developing the inter-state transmission       mission through competitive bidding (TBCB). The
        network and for ensuring open access to the net-        procurement process and contract form are described
        work. PGCIL is currently the CTU. Each State has a      below. In addition to bidding in their own right, pri-
        State Transmission Utility (STU) with a similar role    vate bidders can form JVs with PGCIL for tendered
        for the intra-state transmission network. The CTU       projects. Until recently, the private sector could also
        and STUs also prepare shorter-term plans consis-        be part of a JV for projects provided to PGCIL on a
        tent with the NEP, and                                  nomination basis. This is no longer the case.
     •	 System Operation is managed at the central,                 PGCIL is involved in 13  JVs, with private compa-
        regional, and state levels. POSOCO manages the          nies (some with IPPs to evacuate power from genera-
        central and regional dispatch centers. These cen-       tion centers) and state-owned utilities for intra-state
        ters coordinate with State Load Dispatch Centers.       projects.23 The longest transmission JV with a private
        POSOCO is currently a wholly owned subsidiary of        partner is PowerLinks. This is a 1,200 km HVDC line
        PGCIL.                                                  from Siliguri to a substation close to Delhi, enabling
                                                                the export of power from the Tata-owned Tala hydro
     A.3.3  Overview of PSP in transmission                    plant in Bhutan. PGCIL owns a 51 percent interest in
     The transmission network covers five regional grids,       PowerLinks and Tata owns 49 percent.
     recently integrated into one synchronous grid. That            Eight JVs are with private businesses. They make
     grid has 347,741 circuit kilometers (ct km) of transmis-   up a small share of PGCIL’s network, yet account for
     sion lines of 220 kV or above. Inter-state transmission    13 percent of privately developed transmissions since
     provides HV connection between two or more states          2002.24
     at 400 kV or 765 kV. Transmission within the states is         Low tariffs and high losses in some states can
     mostly at 400 kV or below, although there have been        create problems in funding private transmission. If
     recent state transmission investments at 765 kV.           revenues are insufficient, the state can obtain sup-
         Transmission is mainly owned by ­      government-     port from the Central Government through VGF.
     owned companies. PGCIL dominates the transmis-             The transmission tariff is determined up front rather
     sion sector. It owns 131,728ct km of transmission lines    than being determined by bids. The bids determine
     and nearly 265,663  MVA transformer capacity as at         the level of additional funding required. Bidders
     the end of July 2016.19 PGCIL is 57.9 percent owned by     sign a Model Transmission Agreement developed
     the Government of India and 42.1  percent listed on        by the Planning Commission. Three projects to date
     the Bombay and National Stock Exchanges. The STUs
                                                                                                   CASE STUDIES      83


have used the VGF mechanism, in Haryana, Madhya              The approach to regulating inter-state transmis-
Pradesh, and Rajasthan.                                   sion charges is closely related to the contracting
    About ten private companies are involved in pri-      arrangements:
vate provision of transmission in India.25 Some are
transmission specialists. Others are integrated power     •	 Currently, the transmission developer signs a
companies or part of broader industrial conglomer-           Transmission Service Agreement (TSA) with Long
ates. The largest private investors are Sterlite Power,      Term Transmission Customers (LTTCs). These are
Reliance Infrastructure, Essel Infrastructure and            generators, distribution businesses, and major
Adani Transmission.                                          loads in the states concerned. Transmission charg-
    Sterlite and Reliance are exploring the possibility      ing is on a “postage stamp” basis, effectively charg-
of wrapping their assets into investment trusts to           ing these users for their contracted capacity, and
reduce the cost of borrowing.26 The government is also    •	 Under new arrangements, transmission charges
considering relaxing rules to allow investment funds         will be based on use of the network, drawing on
to participate directly in transmission projects.27          load flow analysis. Developers will sign the trans-
                                                             mission agreement with Designated Inter-State
A.3.4   Legislative and regulatory                          Customers (DICs). As India now operates as one
         framework                                           synchronous grid, this will be a much larger set of
Power sector reform started in 1991, with the pri-           customers (including more than 80  distribution
vate power policy, and legislative amendments to             businesses). Given the large numbers involved, the
liberalize generation and introduce IPPs. The main           CTU will become responsible for collecting and
obstacle was the financial weakness of the State             settling transmission charges from all transmis-
Electricity Boards (SEBs) as counterparties. Orissa led      sion users, on behalf of all the transmission service
the reforms at the state level. These reforms included       providers.
unbundling, the establishment of independent regu-
lators and, in some cases, privatization. The central
government also sought large-scale private genera-        A.3.5 Transmission planning
tion and established the Power Trading Corporation        The transmission network is divided into five syn-
as an intermediary between investors and the SEBs.        chronously interconnected regions—Northern, North
    In 1998 the Government passed the Electricity         Eastern, Eastern, Western, and Southern—each oper-
Regulatory Commissions Act, which led to the estab-       ated by Regional Load Despatch Centres.
lishment of SERCs and greater regulatory consistency          Transmission planning is done centrally under
between states. In 1999 Orissa privatized distribution,   the direction of the CEA. The CEA issues a NEP every
followed in 2002 by Delhi.                                five years, with annual updates. The current 12th NEP
    Despite the reforms in the 1990s, the economic        runs from 2012 to 2017.
performance of the sector worsened and arrears                The NEP has a 5–15 year perspective. The CTU and
grew. The Electricity Act 2003 introduced comprehen-      STUs are responsible for shorter-term transmission
sive reforms in the sector and consolidated various       planning and development based on the NEP.
national and state initiatives. That Act unbundled            Developers are able to propose lines that are not in
the SEBs, and introduced competition across the           the NEPs. These proposals can be included in annual
value chain and open access in transmission and           amendments to the current Plan if the CEA approves
distribution.                                             the result of relevant studies. Studies are funded by
    Following these reforms, private investment in        the developer and conducted either by the developer
transmission was slow to materialize due to tar-          or by the CTU.
iff uncertainty. This was addressed by the NTP in
January 2006.28 The policy mandated that a TBCB           A.3.6 Contract form
process determine tariffs for transmission projects.      Currently, the winning transmission developer signs
The winning bid set the annual charge, which cre-         a TSA with all concerned utilities (LTTCs). These may
ated price certainty. The use of TBCB became man-         include the utilities falling in the region where the
datory for all privately financed projects in 2006.       load is located, any intervening region, and the inter-
Government-owned ­
­                      companies—PGCIL and the            regional transmission lines between the regions. In
STUs—were given a five-year transition period to 2011.
84   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     the future, the transmission developer will sign the          managed by state or central Government-appointed
     TSA with DICs.                                                Bid Process Coordinators (BPCs). While the process is
          The contract is awarded to the bidder that pro-          the same, inter-state and intra-state projects are man-
     poses the lowest transmission tariff. Lines are built         aged by different bodies:
     on a build, own, operate, maintain (BOOM) basis for a
     35-year period. The term was shorter (25 years) before        •	 Inter-state lines: Tenders are managed by one of
     2008.                                                            two BPCs preselected by the EC (PFCCL and RECT-
          The minimum line availability is defined in the             PCL). Both are state-owned enterprises, and
     contract in accordance with CERC regulations. The             •	 Intra-state lines: The relevant state government
     minimum line availability for AC systems is 98  per-             may appoint an organization or the central Gov-
     cent and 95 percent for HVDC. Availability above this            ernment may appoint one of its BPCs to be the BPC
     level is rewarded with a percentage premium on the               for the state.
     agreed tariff for the period of excess availability. Pen-
     alties are incurred if availability falls below the target.       PGCIL can bid in auctions on an equal basis as
     If line availability is below this target for six consecu-    private developers. All bidders must demonstrate
     tive months, the Transmission Service Provider (TSP)          experience in the sector and financial strength. The
     risks having its license revoked. TSPs are not penal-         bidder quoting the lowest levelized tariff is consid-
     ized for outages due to factors beyond their control,         ered for award. The proposed levelized tariff must
     such as problems with lines or substations owned by           be below a reserve price set by CERC. If PGCIL (the
     other providers.                                              CTU) is bidding for a project, the CTU members on
          Obtaining the ROW for the transmission line is           the committee are excluded from discussions related
     critical. The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) grants the       to bidder selection.
     ROW. BIA revised the ROW rules in 2015 to accelerate              The TSP must seek a license within a month from
     the approval process. Even so, projects still face delays     selection. Once the license is granted, the TSP must
     related to approval of the ROW.                               commission the project within the stated timeframe.
          As one of the first steps to obtaining the ROW, the      The BPC is responsible for helping the successful bid-
     winning bidder has to survey the potential location.          der secure any necessary ROWs.
     Until 2015, BIA had to approve the survey. However,               According to the MoP guidelines, the time between
     surveys no longer demand BIA’s approval, which                the publication of a Request for Qualification (RFQ)
     helps to speed up the process. In addition, BIA has to        and contract signing should ordinarily be no more
     act on an ROW application within 60 days of receiv-           than 240  days. This is condensed to 180  days if the
     ing a complete application, with a one-month exten-           RFQ and Request for Proposal (RFP) are combined.
     sion. Even so, completing an application requires                 In August 2016, the Government created a new
     gathering various documents (including reviewed               online bidding portal for generation and transmis-
     environmental studies) that can take time to approve.         sion projects and medium-term power purchasing.
                                                                   This also provides a central source of information to
     A.3.7 Procurement process                                     track transmission projects.29
     The Ministry of Power has constituted an Empow-
     ered Committee (EC) chaired by a representative of            A.3.8 Outcomes
     the CERC, with other members drawn from the CEA,              Private investment in transmission lines has grown
     MoP, Planning Commission, CTU, plus two sector                rapidly since the late 2000s. Figure 6.2 illustrates the
     experts nominated by the Ministry. The purpose of             length of new transmission lines by source of finance
     the Empowered Committee is to:                                and the percentage of privately financed new lines.
                                                                   The share of private investment—including JVs with
     •	 Identify projects to be developed,                         PGCIL—has grown in each plan period:30
     •	 Facilitate evaluation of bids, and
     •	 Facilitate development of projects.                        •	 In the 10th five-year NEP (2002–2007), the private
                                                                      sector developed 2,284ct km31 of new transmission
        Once projects have been identified by the EC, they            lines, 5  percent of total investment during the
     are put out to competitive bidding. The process is               period,32
                                                                                                  CASE STUDIES      85


•	 During the 11th plan period (2007–2012), privately     and almost three-quarters (72 percent) accrued to the
   developed lines were 6,131ct km, 10 percent of total   private sector. PSP in the power sector can be summa-
   new developments, and                                  rized as follows:35
•	 Four years into the 12th plan (2012–2017), new lines
   developed by the private sector have more than         •	 The generation sector has almost 60  privately
   doubled to 12,719ct  km or 14  percent of total new       owned companies. Those companies account for
   construction.                                             83 percent of the installed capacity and 77 percent
                                                             of the annual generation. The country’s installed
    Privately financed and owned lines at 220 kV and         capacity is 11,711 MW. The majority of the capacity
above now total 21,134ct km, equivalent to 6.1 percent       (87 percent) is part of the National Interconnected
of the national network. The private sector invested         System, SEIN (Sistema Eléctrico Interconectado
a total of US$5.5 billion in transmission lines up to        Nacional). The rest is located in isolated systems
2015, and there is a pipeline of US$5 billion worth of       around the country,36
projects for the following years.33                       •	 The transmission sector is entirely private, oper-
                                                             ated by 13 companies. The public sector owns a few
                                                             MV—to LV transmission lines, in isolated areas of
A.4 Case 4: Peru                                             the country. Red de Energía del Peru (REP) and Con-
This section describes the motivations for private           sorcio Transmantario (CTM) have 40  percent and
investment in the power sector in Peru; the structure        20 percent of the market share, respectively, and
of the sector; the overview of PSP in transmission; the   •	 The distribution sector has 11  private companies,
legal and regulatory framework that enabled PSP; the         representing 66  percent of the revenues. These
contract form and procurement process for tender-            companies provide electricity to 40  percent of
ing transmission lines; and the outcomes of PSP in           the customers. The customer base is divided into
transmission.                                                regulated and unregulated (also known as “free”)
                                                             customers. Unregulated customers are those with
A.4.1 Motivations for private investment in                  an installed capacity of at least 1 MW, or a demand
transmission                                                 of at least 20 percent of the maximum demand by
Before 1993, the Peruvian state had a monopoly over          the distribution concessionaire in the customer’s
the power sector. Two vertically-integrated state-           region.
owned companies, Electrolima and Electroperu,
served the capital, Lima, and the rest of the country.    Government stakeholders
The power sector was characterized by power short-        The main Government stakeholders in the power
ages and low quality of service, and imposed a finan-     sector are:
cial burden on the state.
    In the 1990s, the Government of Peru undertook        •	 MEM, in charge of designing the policies of the
a series of economic reforms to reduce the size of           energy sector and granting concessions,
the state and privatize state-owned enterprises.          •	 OSINERGMIN, the regulator, a Government entity
The transmission sector was privatized as part of a          responsible for the control and supervision of
broader wave of reform to attract private capital to         electricity- and hydrocarbon-related companies,
the power sector and to improve the efficiency of the        regulating tariffs, ensuring service quality, and
sector.34                                                    protecting the consumers,
                                                          •	 COES, the system operator, is made up of represen-
A.4.2  The structure of the power sector                    tatives of agents in the SEIN (generation, transmis-
Since 1993 Peru has undergone a process of unbun-            sion, and distribution companies, and unregulated
dling and privatization in the power sector. This            customers). COES is in charge of planning and
started with generation and distribution, and was            operating the system using merit order (least cost)
later extended to the transmission sector. Transmis-         criteria and administering the spot market, and
sion was fully privatized by the early 2000s.             •	 PROINVERSIÓN, a Government entity responsible
    Today, the power sector is mostly private. The           for promoting investment and privatization, and in
revenues of the sector were US$6.37  billion in 2015         charge of tendering concessions.
86   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     A.4.3  Overview of PSP in transmission                       In 2006 the LGE was introduced, modifying the
     PSP in transmission has come about in two main             legal framework of the transmission sector. Three of
     stages. The first stage started with the introduction of   the main changes were as follows:
     the “Law of Power Concessions” (Ley de Concessiones
     Eléctricas, or LCE) in 1992. The sector was unbundled      •	 COES became the entity responsible for under-
     and two public transmission companies were cre-               taking the planning of transmission nationwide.
     ated, Etecen and Etesur. These companies owned and            COES prepares a transmission plan that OSINERG-
     operated the north-central system and the southern            MIN then reviews and MEM approves,
     system.                                                    •	 The LGE established the “Guaranteed Transmis-
        Etecen and Etesur entered Public Private Part-             sion System” (Sistema Garantizado de Transmi-
     nerships (PPPs) to expand the transmission system             sion, or SGT). The SGT includes transmission
     by tendering single lines. This was done through              projects identified in the transmission plan, and
     international tenders for 30-year BOOT contracts.             the law requires those projects to be tendered in
     The transmission companies retained 15  percent of            competitive and public processes, and
     ownership of the tendered lines. Once the south and        •	 The contract price of transmission lines included
     north system interconnected (creating one main                in the SGT is defined during the tender process
     transmission network for the country), the residual           (by the winning bid), and is not subject to periodic
     public assets were privatized in 2002, under 30-year          review.
     concessions.37
        The second stage started once the “Law to Ensure           These changes helped encourage investment
     the Efficient Development of Electricity Generation”       again. Total investment in greenfield transmission
     (Ley para Asegurar el Desarrollo Eficiente de la Gen-      projects from 2006 to 2015 was US$1.5 billion. This is
     eración Eléctrica or LGE) was introduced in 2006, to       85 percent of the greenfield transmission projects in
     complete the regulatory framework. At this stage,          the 1998–2015 period.38
     the transmission system was expanded by tender-
     ing lines in competitive and international tenders,        A.4.5 Transmission planning
     according to a transmission plan prepared by the           The transmission plan is prepared by COES, accord-
     Government.                                                ing to criteria and a methodology developed by
                                                                OSINERGMIN, and approved by MEM.39
                                                                ­
     A.4.4   Legislative and regulatory                            Each plan has two products: (1) a short-term plan;
              framework                                         and (2) a long-term plan. The short-term plan includes
     The LCE and LGE were key to establishing the current       the transmission lines to be tendered out within the
     legislative and regulatory framework for transmis-         first two years. Projects in the long-term plan are
     sion in Peru. The LGE was introduced to complete the       indicative and reviewed every two years when the
     framework shaped by the LCE.                               transmission plan is updated.
         The LCE unbundled the power sector and created             COES prepares the transmission plan with a
     the COES and OSINERGMIN. The LCE aimed to                  10-year horizon and taking into account:
     promote competition in the market and established
     the basic principles that still exist today. The LCE       •	 Generation plant in operation, generation being
     also established that the OSERGMIN established                tendered or under construction, and planned new
     transmission revenues according to: (i) the Net               generation,
     Replacement Value of existing lines; and (ii) O&M          •	 Demand projection according to three different
     costs calculated based on an “economically adapted”           scenarios, and
     model (based on simulating a hypothetical efficient        •	 Technical and economic criteria. The economic
     transmission system), with a 15-year timeframe.               criteria include, for example, that the plan must
         However, this exposure to regulatory risk led to          satisfy conditions related to economic dispatch and
     a reduction in private investment by the mid-2000s.           the level of unserved energy.
     Private investment fell from more than US$160 mil-
     lion in 1999 to about US$10 million in 2003, as shown          Once the regulator accepts the plan, COES sends
     in Figure 6.1. By then it was clear that the legal         it to MEM for final approval. MEM transfers it to
     framework was not enough to promote private sector         PROINVERSIÓN, which tenders the transmission
     investment.                                                lines.
                                                                                                    CASE STUDIES      87



A.4.6 Contract form                                       between the parties up to 60 days from the date one
Private investors enter into BOOT contracts for            party communicates the dispute to the other. If the
30 years. Investors sign the contract with MEM and         dispute is not resolved, the parties will go to inter-
obtain rights to operate as a transmission company         national arbitrage. Second, the contract includes a
and obtain transmission revenues.                          clause called “Economic-Financial Equilibrium” that
    Distribution companies charge end users a tariff       provides an additional protection for the investor. If
that includes three components: generation, trans-         an unexpected event modifies the market conditions
mission, and distribution. Distribution companies          (not a force majeure event) and the tariff becomes
and large customers have contracts with generation         significantly affected, this clause allows for a rene-
companies where they pay a fee that includes charges       gotiation of the contract terms. Third, concession
for generation and transmission. Generators, through       contracts in Peru have the force of law, providing
money collected from distribution companies, then          additional guarantees for private investors.
pay transmission companies.
    The contract is awarded to the bidder that pro-        A.4.7 Procurement process
poses the lowest Total Service Cost. This cost is equal    PROINVERSIÓN runs the tenders to procure
to the sum of annual O&M cost and the annuity of           transmission lines. The process has only one stage:
investment costs, calculated using a 12  percent real      PROINVERSIÓN does not issue a RFQ before the
annual rate for a 30-year period. The price is subject     RFP. During the first phase of the evaluation, PROIN-
to indexation.40                                           VERSIÓN assesses whether bidders comply with the
    The contract specifies that the concessionaire:        minimum technical and financial requirements, on a
                                                           pass/fail basis. PROINVERSIÓN then ranks the pro-
•	 Must define the path and alignment of the trans-        posals of bidders that passed the technical and finan-
   mission line. During the contract term the con-         cial criteria and awards the contract to the bidder that
   cessionaire owns the transmission line and other        proposes the lowest transmission charge. The award
   project-related assets. The concessionaire must         is subject to a price cap defined by PROINVERSIÓN.
   transfer them at the end of the concession,                 Bidders (single firm or consortium) must assign
•	 Is responsible for obtaining environmental per-         up to two people who reside in Lima, must quote
   mits, licenses, etc.,                                   the bid in US$, and must comply with the following
•	 Must provide access to third parties who may want       requirements:41
   to connect to the transmission line (as long as their
   access does not affect the performance of the line),    •	 Financial: The bidder must have a minimum
•	 Will be paid on availability, and are required to          level of equity and assets (the levels required vary
   meet 97 percent availability,                              according to the specifications of the line), and
•	 Will be penalized for delays to commissioning           •	 Technical: The bidder must show experience oper-
   after the Commercial Operation Date (COD),                 ating electricity transmission systems that satisfy
•	 Must comply with technical requirements                    minimum conditions regarding length, voltage,
   throughout the lifetime of the contract. For exam-         and ability to transform a minimum level of MVAs
   ple, lines are subject to a maximum proportion of          in substations.
   losses. This figure varies between 2  percent and
   5 percent,                                              A.4.8 Outcomes
•	 Will become a member of COES,                           The Government of Peru has organized 18 transmis-
•	 Must pay several compulsory insurance policies          sion tenders since 1998. These tenders have resulted
   during the contract period (such as civil respon-       in US$1.8  billion of investment and more than
   sibility, and covering the value of the concession      6,000  km of transmission lines (and associated sub-
   assets), and                                            stations) designed, built, and operated by the private
•	 Must provide a letter of guarantee to assure the        sector under BOOT contracts.42
   concessionaire’s obligations.

   Contracts also include provisions to resolve con-
                                                               Case 5: Philippines
                                                           A.5 
troversies between parties and provide protection for      This section describes the motivations for private
investors. First, the contract specifies that disputes     investment in the power sector in the Philippines;
between the parties will first be resolved directly        the structure of the sector; the overview of PSP in
                                                           transmission; the legal and regulatory framework
88   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     that enabled PSP; the contract form and procurement          in charge of monitoring competition within the
     process for tendering the national grid; and the out-        power sector,
     comes of PSP in transmission.                           •	   TransCo, a Government agency created in 2003
                                                                  under EPIRA. TransCo owns all transmission assets,
     A.5.1 Motivations for private investment in                  including those financed by the concessionaire,
     transmission                                            •	   The Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Manage-
     The state-owned National Power Corporation (NPC)             ment Corporation (PSALM), a Government agency
     was indebted and had to be recapitalized various             overseeing the privatization of state-owned power
     times during the 1960s and 1970s. The Government             assets. PSALM also manages the liabilities of NPC,
     embarked on a reform to attract private sector funds.   •	   NGCP, a private consortium holding the transmis-
     The reform started with the introduction of IPPs in          sion concession. NGCP is owned 60  percent by
     the late 1980s.                                              Monte Oro Grid Resources Corporation and Calaca
         Generators had to contract with NPC. Demand              High Power Corporation (both incorporated in the
     continued to exceed supply. A power crisis in the            Philippines) and 40 percent by the State Grid Cor-
     early 1990s prompted radical reform. In 1990 the             poration of China, and
     Government enabled generators and end users to          •	   The Philippines Electricity Market Corporation
     negotiate supply contracts. In 2001 it introduced the        (PEMC), in charge of managing the Wholesale
     Electric Power Industry Reform Act (EPIRA). EPIRA            Electricity Spot Market (WESM). WESM began
     was intended to bring in private investment and              operations in 2006.
     improve electrification rates.
         The Government used a grid-wide concession          A.5.3  Overview of PSP in transmission
     as the means of attracting private participation in     Under the concession, NGCP is responsible for O&M,
     transmission. In 2007, the National Grid Corporation    planning, financing of network expansion, and sys-
     of the Philippines (NGCP) won the concession. NGCP      tem operations. NGCP develops new assets and trans-
     started operations in 2009.                             fers ownership to TransCo upon commissioning. The
                                                             concessionaire also acts as system operator.
     A.5.2  The structure of the power sector                   NGCP paid an up-front fee for the rights to reve-
     Under EPIRA, the Government unbundled the               nues from the existing transmission assets. Its costs
     electricity sector into generation, transmission,       of financing new investments are recovered through
     distribution, and supply. Generation and supply to      changes to the maximum allowed revenues under
     large customers operate under a competitive environ-    periodic regulatory determinations.
     ment. The transmission and distribution sectors are         The Philippines has three regional interconnected
     regulated.                                              grids: Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. Table A.1 shows
         Ownership or interests in more than one sub-        the evolution of the transmission lines in each region
     sector is precluded under EPIRA. A number of distri-    from 2011 to 2015. Luzon is the largest region and
     bution companies have structured their holdings to      accounts for over 80 percent of the national electric-
     enable them to move into generation. The regulator      ity demand. Manila, the national capital, is located in
     is trying to push back, but is facing resistance from   Luzon and accounts for 53 percent of Luzon’s demand.
     business groups.43                                          National power demand has grown at an annual
                                                             rate of 3.4  percent. Even so, the national transmis-
     Stakeholders                                            sion network shrank between 2012 and 2014, despite
     The main stakeholders in the power sector are:          investment over the period. This shrinkage was due
                                                             to divestment of sub-transmission lines to distribu-
     •	 The Department of Energy (DoE), responsible          tion companies.44
        for managing all activities related to energy
        exploration, development, use, distribution, and     A.5.4  Legislative and regulatory
        conservation,                                                framework
     •	 The Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC), the          EPIRA is the main legislation governing the power
        regulator, responsible for setting regulations,      sector. EPIRA introduced unbundling and privatiza-
        guidelines, policies, and rates; enforcing regula-   tion; established a new regulator, retail competition,
        tions (including issuing permits and licenses);      and rules of open access and power trading; and man-
        and resolving cases and disputes. The ERC is also    dated the privatization of TransCo.
                                                                                                                                      CASE STUDIES         89


Table A.1 Transmission lines by region, 2011–2015 (ct km)

       Region                     2011                     2012*                    2013*                     2014*                     2015
 Luzon                             9,529                    9,374                     9,439                     9,370                    9,428
 Visayas                           4,918                    4,971                     4,840                     4,821                    4,821
 Mindanao                          5,257                    5,257                     5,146                     5,272                    5,832
 Total                          19,704                   19,490                    19,425                    19,463                   20,073

Source: NGCP, “Transmission Development Plan 2014–2015,” Volume I. Major network development, December 2015, http://www.ngcp.ph/beta/cms/
Attachment-Uploads/TDP_2014-2015_Vol_I%20-_Draft.pdf (accessed March 15, 2017). *The number of lines do not sum to the total, as total transmission line
length in circuit-km decrease. This was because various sub-transmission assets were modified or divested.




    In 2003, the ERC issued the Transmission Wheel-                            of transmission projects that must be a least-cost
ing Rate Guidelines (TWRG) for the 2003–2027                                   transmission expansion option, and has to meet the
period. In 2009, ERC updated and renamed the TWRG                              Grid Code performance standards and the ERC per-
to Rules for Setting Transmission Wheeling Rates                               formance targets.
(RTWR). The RTWR outline the methodology for set-
ting the maximum transmission wheeling rates that                              A.5.6 Contract form
TransCo or its concessionaire can charge customers.                            NGCP won the 25-year concession in 2007. The Gov-
Under these rules, NGCP proposes the Maximum                                   ernment tendered the concession through an open,
Annual Revenue (MAR) and the performance bonus                                 public, and competitive bidding process. NGCP began
(or penalty) for each year, to be approved by ERC. The                         operations as the power transmission service pro-
RTWR also states that ERC has to approve the pro-                              vider in 2009.
posed capital investment program for each regulatory                               Congress approved a franchise period of 50 years.
period (5 years).                                                              The concession contract is for 25 years, with an option
    ERC produces a Grid Code that establishes the                              to extend.
basic rules, procedures, and standards that govern                                 The rights and responsibilities of NGCP under the
the operation, maintenance, and development of the                             terms of the concession are:45
transmission system, as well as the obligations of the
grid owner, grid operator, and system manager.                                 •	 To construct, install, finance, manage, improve,
    The Open Access Transmission Service Rules                                    expand, operate, maintain, rehabilitate, repair, refur-
cover the rules and regulations related to open access.                           bish, and replace TransCo’s transmission assets,
The rules define the responsibilities of the transmis-                         •	 To prepare the TDP and to implement the projects
sion provider, the functions of the system operator,                              included in the TDP (after authorization from the
and the conditions accepted by transmission custom-                               ERC),
ers for receiving the transmission services.                                   •	 To provide transmission services and enter
                                                                                  into connection agreements with transmission
A.5.5 Transmission planning                                                      customers,
NGCP is responsible for network planning. NGCP                                 •	 To procure Ancillary Services necessary to support
prepares a Transmission Development Plan (TDP) on                                 a safe and reliable operation of the transmission
an annual basis with a 10-year time horizon. The ERC                              assets, and
has to approve the TDP. Once approved, it is incorpo-                          •	 To collect the universal charge payable by end users
rated into the DoE’s annual Philippine Energy Plan                                and self-generating entities not connected to a dis-
(which covers the whole energy sector) and submit-                                tribution utility, and remit this to PSALM.
ted to Congress every September.
   The TDP must include power demand projec-                                       NGCP won the concession with a bid of US$3.95
tions, network performance parameters, current                                 billion, representing the Net Present Value of future
and projected generation capacity, and identified                              cash flows. NGCP paid 25  percent (US$987  million)
transmission constraints. The TDP provides a list                              immediately, with the balance to be paid in US$
90   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     denominated installments converted to Philippine           Performance criteria
     Pesos (PHP) at exchange rates prevailing on the trans-     NGCP calculates the performance levels, for review
     action dates, over the next 15  years. NGCP funded         by the ERC. Rewards and penalties may take the form
     the down payment through loans and equity, with            of increases or decreases in the MAR for a regulatory
     the remaining 75  percent to be financed using the         year.
     company’s earnings.46 By mid-2013, NGCP had paid               Performance is measured against eight criteria for
     US$1.5 billion of the outstanding fee.                     quality and reliability (set out in Chapter 3 of the Grid
                                                                Code).50 Each criterion is weighted as follows:
     Regulation of transmission revenues
     NGCP proposes the MAR that NGCP can receive as             •	 System Interruption Severity Index, 25 percent,
     revenues. The MAR is made up of three components:          •	 Frequency of Tripping, 20 percent,
                                                                •	 System Availability, 10 percent,
     •	 Power Delivery Service: The cost of transporting        •	 Frequency Limit Compliance, 10 percent,
        electricity through the grid, payable by generators     •	 Voltage Limit Compliance, 10 percent,
        and load customers,                                     •	 Congestion Availability for Luzon grid, 10 percent,
     •	 System Operation: The costs associated with sys-        •	 Ancillary Services Availability Indicator, 5 percent,
        tem operation as defined under the WESM Rules,             and
        paid by both generators and load customers, and         •	 Customer Satisfaction Indicator, 10 percent.
     •	 Metering Service Provider: The cost of metering,
        testing, maintaining, and reading the meters, paid          For each criterion, ERC sets targets and bands (a
        by all connected transmission customers accord-         lower and upper cap). The reward or penalty is lim-
        ing to the voltage level.                               ited to 3 percent of the MAR. Last, NGCP is not liable
                                                                for performance failures beyond its control, such as
         In addition to these three components, NGCP            interrupted generation.
     earns (and collects on behalf of other organizations)
     other revenues and charges, such as connection             A.5.7 Procurement process
     charges or rental of assets. The additional revenue is     The transmission concession was awarded to NGCP
     used to reduce customer rates.                             in 2007 through an open bidding process, after three
         ERC has to make a determination on the proposed        previous failed attempts.
     MAR. The MAR is converted to a per unit wheeling               The first attempt was in 2003. The process failed at
     rate. Rates are set in PHP per kW per month. Cus-          the prequalification stage as only one party submitted
     tomers are charged based on the per unit wheeling          a proposal when a minimum of two were required.
     rate. NGCP collects revenues directly from large           Soon after, a second attempt failed for the same
     customers, distribution companies, and electricity         reason. PSALM tried again between 2006 and 2007,
     cooperatives (member-owned utilities that provide          attracting three prequalified bidders. However, only
     the majority of power in rural areas). Transmission        one of these proceeded to make a formal bid when a
     accounts for around 10 percent of a consumer’s bill.47     minimum of two were required. PSALM decided to
         The MAR is developed on a standard ­      building-    re-tender rather than negotiate directly, eventually
     block approach. NGCP is compensated for O&M costs,         awarding the concession to NGCP.
     depreciation, return on capital for the regulatory
     asset base (including adjustments to the regulatory        A.5.8 Outcomes
     asset base for new investment), and under- or over-re-     NGCP has invested in new transmission lines and
     covery in the previous year. The MAR is recovered          reached performance targets. Between January 2014
     from users through the charges for the three services      and December 2015, NGCP developed 647  ct  km of
     described above. The Philippines has fully cost-reflec-    new lines, 1,350  MVA, and 600  MVA of substation
     tive tariffs, without a need for subsidy.48                capacity over 28  projects. Twenty-six projects (lines
         In October 2015 NGPC sought an increase from           and substations) were due for completion by the end
     PHP43.08bn in 2015 (equivalent to PHP308.67                of 2016, and another 19 projects by the end of 2019.51
     per  kW), to PHP45.3bn in 2016. NGCP referred to               NGCP has met its performance targets since 2011.
     the need to create a buffer to cover the risk of under-­   NGCP has consistently exceeded grid loss thresholds
     recovery of revenue form customers.49 However, in          and reduced losses by reducing tripping frequency
     February 2016 the ERC recommended lowering the             and improving availability. Availability for Visayas
     MAR to PHP41.65 billion.                                   and Mindanao held at 99.8 percent and 99.7 percent
                                                                                                           CASE STUDIES      91


respectively in 2016, and in Luzon it improved from                   the rating must have been obtained within the
99.4  percent to 99.6  percent. Availability of critical              last 12 months.
lines also improved from 99.6 percent to 99.7 percent.52       16.	   Six projects included in the World Bank and PPIAF,
                                                                      PPI Project Database (ppi.worldbank.org) (accessed
                                                                      September 1, 2016), plus the SIC-SING interconnec-
Notes                                                                 tion project.
                                                               17.	   Transelec, “Transelec se adjudica proyecto de expan-
  1.	 E. Melo, et al. “The New Governance Structure of
                                                                      sión complementario para la interconexión SIC-
      the Brazilian Electricity Industry: How Is It Possible
                                                                      SING por US$174 millones,” March 12, 2016, http://
      to Introduce Market Mechanisms?,” Section 3, (2009),
                                                                      www.transelec.cl/transelec-se-adjudica-proyecto-de-
      http://www.usaee.org/usaee2009/submissions/
                                                                      expansion-complementario-para-la-interconexion-
      OnlineProceedings/papermeloelbia.pdf (accessed
                                                                      sic-sing-por-us-174-millones/ (accessed March 15,
      March 15, 2017).
                                                                      2017).
  2.	 “Government” in the Brazil case study refers to the
                                                               18.	   Ministry of Power, India, “Statuory bodies,” http://
      central (federal) Government.
                                                                      powermin.nic.in/en/statutory-bodies (accessed
  3.	 IEA, “Brazil (Partner country),” https://www.iea.org/
                                                                      March 15, 2017).
      countries/non-membercountries/brazil/ (accessed
                                                               19.	   PowerGrid, “Our Network,” http://www.powergrid
      October 20, 2016).
                                                                      india.com/_layouts/PowerGrid/User/ContentPage
 4.	 F. Salcedo and K. Porter, “Regulatory framework
                                                                      .aspx?PId=80&LangID=English (accessed Septem-
      and cost regulations for the Brazilian national grid,”
                                                                      ber 12, 2016).
      Final Report, RAP, (2013), http://www.raponline.org/
                                                               20.	   S. Mishra, “A Comprehensive Study and Analysis of
      wp-content/uploads/2016/05/exeter-salcedoporter-
                                                                      Power Sector Value Chain in India, Management
      braziltransmissioncostregulationreport-2013-
                                                                      & Marketing,” Challenges for the Knowledge Society,
      october.pdf (accessed March 15, 2017).
                                                                      Vol. 8, No. 1, (2013): 25–40, http://www.management
  5.	 The regulator can authorize minor upgrading
                                                                      marketing.ro/pdf/articole/299.pdf (accessed
      of existing transmission lines to incumbent
                                                                      March 15, 2017).
      concessionaires.
                                                               21.	   National Tariff Policy January 2006, Clause 5.1.
  6.	 Mercados, “Current practices in electricity trans-
                                                               22.	   “Power Grid to close central transmission utility
      mission. Case studies,” Global Power Best Practices
                                                                      status,” Business Standard, http://www.business-
      Series, RAP, (2013), http://www.raponline.org/wp-
                                                                      standard.com/article/economy-policy/powergrid-
      content/uploads/2016/05/rap-globaltransmission
                                                                      to-lose-central-transmission-utility-status-
      practices-2013-dec.pdf (accessed March 15, 2017).
                                                                      115051800029_1.html (accessed July 20, 2016).
  7.	 Indexation index: WPSFD4131 (Finished Goods
                                                               23.	   PGCIL, “JVs & Subsidiaries. Powergrid Group,”
      Less Food and Energy Seasonally Adjusted), or one
                                                                      http://www.powergridindia.com/_layouts/
      that substitutes it, published by the Department
                                                                      PowerGrid/User/ContentPage.aspx?PId=81&
      of Labor, United States Government. This index is
                                                                      LangID=english (accessed September 12, 2016).
      agreed at the contract stage, and does not change.
                                                               24.	   Castalia. “Growth in transmission network (ckm),”
 8.	 F. Salcedo and K. Porter (2013).
                                                                      Data sourced from Ministry of Power of the Gov-
  9.	 R. Ferreira, “Private Participation in Transmission
                                                                      ernment of India, http://powermin.nic.in/en/
      Expansion: the Brazilian Model,” Presentation from
                                                                      content/growth-transmission-sector (accessed
      consultation workshop, Nairobi, Kenya, September
                                                                      March 10, 2017); * To end-July 2016.
      26, 2016.
                                                               25.	   Other industrial groups have also bid on projects,
10.	 Mercados (2013).
                                                                      but have so far been unsuccessful.
 11.	 Data sourced from ANEEL, “Resultados dos Leilões
                                                               26.	   “Reliance Infrastructure files papers with Sebi for
      de Geração.” Resumo dos resultados dos leilões de
                                                                      InviT” (interview with Ajay Bhardwaj, President of
      transmissão até 2015, http://www.aneel.gov.br/
                                                                      Sterlite), Economic Times, http://economictimes.
      resultados-de-leiloes (accessed January 10, 2017).
                                                                      indiatimes.com/news/economy/infrastructure/
12.	 “Aneel aponta atraso em 60% das obras de trans-
                                                                      reliance-infrastructure-files-papers-with-sebi-for-
      missão de energia,” Globo Economia, http://g1.globo.
                                                                      invit/articleshow/54428336.cms (accessed Septem-
      com/economia/noticia/2016/05/aneel-aponta-atraso-
                                                                      ber 26, 2016).
      em-60-das-obras-de-transmissao-de-energia.html
                                                               27.	   “Transmission sector needs investment and mon-
      (accessed October 20, 2016).
                                                                      etization can be used: IS Jha, Power Grid,” Economic
13.	 Energia Abierta, CNE, “Capacidad instalada (MW),”
                                                                      Times, http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/
      http://energiaabierta.cne.cl/visualizaciones/
                                                                      opinion/interviews/transmission-sector-needs-
      capacidad-instalada/ (accessed March 15, 2017).
                                                                      investment-and-monetisation-can-be-used-is-jha-
14.	 A “tariff period” equals four years.
                                                                      power-grid/articleshow/52880178.cms (accessed
15.	 The bidding documents include an annex with a list
                                                                      December 9, 2016).
      of the acceptable risk rating companies. In addition,
92   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     28.	 KPMG, “Power Sector in India. White Paper on                    Elaboración del Plan de Transmisión,” December
          implementation challenges and opportunities,”                   2007, http://www2.osinerg.gob.pe/Proyecto_
          Infrastructure & Government, January 2010,                      Normas/2007/CritMetElabPlanTransm/071203-
          https://www.kpmg.de/docs/PowerSector_2010.pdf                   INF-0403-Norma-Plan-de-Transmision.pdf
          (accessed March 15, 2017).                                      (accessed March 15, 2017).
     29.	 “New steps to enhance transparency in Power              40.	   Indexation index: WPSFD4131 (Finished Goods
          Sector,” Ministry of Power (India), http://pib.nic.in/          Less Food and Energy Seasonally Adjusted), or one
          newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=148982 (accessed                that substitutes it, published by the Department
          August 17, 2016).                                               of Labor, United States Government. This index is
     30.	 The share of private investment includes JVs with               agreed at the contract stage, and does not change.
          PGCIL, but not investments by PGCIL without JVs.         41.	   According to information obtained in bidding docu-
     31.	 Circuit kilometer is a measure of distance between              ments and contracts in PROINVERSIÓN, “Procesos
          two points multiplied by the number of circuits. A              concluidos,” http://www.proyectosapp.pe/modulos/
          double circuit line means that two cables run the               JER/PlantillaStandard.aspx?ARE=0&PFL=2
          length. For example, a 50 km double circuit line will           &JER=1593 (accessed March 15, 2017).
          be 100ct km.                                             42.	   PPI Project Database. Greenfield projects, Peru.
     32.	 “Growth in transmission sector,” Ministry of             43.	   Interview with Dennis Ibarra of Enfinity Philip-
          Power (India), http://powermin.nic.in/content/                  pines Renewable Resources, October 8, 2016.
          growth-transmission-sector (accessed July 20, 2016).     44.	   NGCP. TDP 2014–2015.
     33.	 PPI Project Database. Greenfield projects, India. See    45.	   ESMAP (2015).
          also A. Bhardwaj, “Indian Power Transmission: A          46.	   “The Privatization of the National Transmission
          success story of PPP,” Presentation from consulta-              Corporation,” PSALM, https://www.psalm.gov.ph/
          tion workshop, Abuja, Nigeria, September 29, 2016.              transmissionassets (accessed October 10, 2016).
     34.	 World Bank, “International Experience with Private       47.	   ESMAP (2015).
          Sector Participation in Power Grids: Peru Case           48.	   KPMG, “The energy report: Philippines, Growth
          Study,” (Energy Sector Management Assistance                    and opportunities in the Philippines electric power
          Program), 2012, http://documents.worldbank.org/                 sector,” KPMG Global Energy Institute, 2013–2014
          curated/en/498461468000021182/pdf/101753-WP-                    edition (2013).
          P146042-Box393265B-PUBLIC-Private-Sector-                49.	   “NGCP seeks higher revenue target,” Philstar
          Participation-in-Power-Grids-Peru.pdf (accessed                 Global, http://www.philstar.com/business/2015/
          March 10, 2017).                                                10/06/1507470/ngcp-seeks-higher-revenue-target-
     35.	 Ministerio de Energia y Minas de Peru, “Anuario                 p45.3-b-2016 (accessed October 8, 2016).
          Estadístico de Electricidad 2015,” Parte 9, http://      50.	   NGCP, “Regulatory Reset of the Regulated
          www.minem.gob.pe/_estadistica.php?idSector=6                    Transmission Services for 2016 to 2020: Issues
          &idEstadistica=10179 (accessed March 10, 2017).                 Paper,” 4th Regulatory Period Reset Process,
     36.	 Ministerio de Energia y Minas de Peru, “Anuario                 May 2014, http://www.erc.gov.ph/Files/Render/
          Estadístico de Electricidad 2015,” Anexo 1, http://             media/2014.05.30_4thRPTransmissionIssues
          www.minem.gob.pe/_estadistica.php?idSector=6                    Paper_NGCP_FINAL_forsubmissiontotheERC.pdf
          &idEstadistica=10179 (accessed March 10, 2017).                 (accessed March 15, 2017).
     37.	 World Bank Group (2012).                                 51.	   NGCP TDP 2014–2015.
     38.	 PPI Project Database. Greenfield projects, Peru.         52.	   “NGCP exceeds performance targets for 7th straight
     39.	 OSINERGMIN, “Resumen de los Estudios para                       year,” NGCP, http://ngcp.ph/article-view.asp?
          Establecer los “Criterios y Metodología para la                 ContentID=8360 (accessed September 26, 2016).
Appendix B

Pipeline of IPT projects in Kenya
and the Southern African power
pool

The IPT is the most broadly applicable business
                                                                Overview of Kenya’s
                                                            B.1 
model for attracting privately financed transmission
investments in Africa. This model can bring addi-               Power Sector
tional sources of finance, compared to the dominant         The power sector in Kenya is partially unbundled.
case in Africa in which government-owned utilities          Transmission and distribution have been bundled,
finance all transmission investments.                       but separate from generation, since the late 1990s.
    African governments should consider procuring           IPPs have been able to invest and participate in
transmission investments through IPT tenders,               the generation sector since the mid-1990s, and in
alongside the existing business model. Section 6            2008 the Government of Kenya created a separate
discusses the steps to realize the potential of IPTs        ­
                                                            government-owned transmission company. Box  B.1
in Africa and Appendix B includes a guide for gov-          describes the main companies in Kenya’s power
ernment officials and policymakers in Africa who            sector.
are considering whether to seek private finance for             In addition, the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum
investments in transmission using the IPT model.            designs and implements the energy policy, the Energy
    This appendix presents a potential pipeline of          Regulatory Commission (ERC) is the sector’s single
transmission projects to be implemented in Kenya            regulatory agency (dealing with technical and eco-
and the SAPP, using the IPT model. The pipeline             nomic issues), and the Rural Electrification Authority
focuses on one country and one power pool that have         is responsible for scaling up rural electrification.
a relatively developed legal and regulatory framework
in the power sector, and have defined interest in con-      Financial viability of the power sector
sidering a privately financed model for transmission.       The financial viability of Kenya’s power sector is rel-
With time, this pilot project could demonstrate that        atively weak. The World Bank study “Making power
the IPT business model is applicable in all African         affordable for Africa and viable for its utilities”1 shows
countries, creating further investor interest in the        that Kenya’s utility (where KPLC is used as reference)
sector and in the region.                                   collects enough cash to recover its capital costs, but
    This appendix provides an overview of the power         not its operational costs. The study also estimates that
sector in Kenya (Section B.1), and the SAPP (Section        Kenya’s quasi-fiscal deficit—defined as “the difference
B.2), and identifies a pipeline of potential IPT projects   between the net revenue of an efficient electricity
in Kenya and the SAPP (Section B.3).                        sector covering operational and capital costs and the
94   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Box B.1 Main companies in Kenya’s power sector

     The main companies are divided between the generation             Companies in the transmission and distribution sector
     and transmission and distribution sectors, as summarized      include:
     below.
        Companies in the generation sector include:                •	 The state-owned Kenya Power and Lighting Company
                                                                      (KPLC, also known as “Kenya Power”)—owns and oper-
     •	 The state majority-owned Kenya Electricity Generation         ates the existing transmission and distribution network,
        Company (KenGen)—responsible for all public power             and
        generation activities except those related to geothermal   •	 The state-owned Kenya Electricity Transmission Com-
        resources,                                                    pany (Ketraco)—mandated to plan, design, construct,
     •	 The state-owned Geothermal Development Company                and maintain new transmission lines and associated
        (GDC)—responsible for all public geothermal generation        substations.
        activities, and
     •	 Almost 10 IPPs.

     •	 Source: A. Eberhard et al. (2016).




     net cash collected by the utility—is US$486 million, or        hydropower generation, 26  percent geothermal,
     41 percent of the cash collected by the utility.               and 21  percent fuel oil—and the government owned
         However, Kenya has attracted US$2.4  billion in            70 percent of the capacity.
     private investment in IPPs since 1996, in more than                Though IPPs currently account for 30 percent of the
     10  projects.2                                                 installed electricity generation, the share of IPP capac-
                                                                    ity has increased considerably since 2005 when IPPs
     Demand and electricity generation are                          had 12 percent. Electricity production from IPPs rep-
     expected to grow substantially by 2030                         resents around a third of the total energy generated—
     Kenya has a target of 100  percent electricity access          31 percent in the July 2013–June 2014 period.6
     by 2022—more than four times the 23 percent access
     level in the baseline year, 2012. By 2015, 37  percent         Transmission lines will also be needed
     of the population had access to electricity.3 Improve-         to transport the electricity and connect
     ments have been achieved, though reaching the                  consumers
     target will be challenging. Those with access also use         Kenya currently uses 220 kV and 132 kV lines for its
     relatively little. Kenyans consume 168 kWh per capita          transmission network. The length of transmission
     a year of electricity.4                                        lines in Kenya in 2015 was 4,054  km, compared to
         Demand for electricity has shown a rising trend            3,443  km in 2009. This represents an overall 18  per-
     since 2004, and is expected to continue growing in the         cent increase. Figure B.1 shows the evolution of
     next decade. Estimates suggest that energy demand              100–200  kV and 200–300  kV transmission lines in
     will increase by almost four times by 2022, and ten            the period, as well as the accumulated increase (in
     times by 2030—compared to the baseline year. Energy            percentage) over the period. Kenya had no in-country
     demand would increase from 8,010  GWh in 2012 to               transmission lines above 300 kV.
     32,150 GWh in 2022 and 81,352 GWh by 2030.5                        MV lines (between 1–100  kV) increased faster.
         Kenya’s installed generation capacity is projected         Lines between 1 kV and 65 kV increased by 45 percent
     to increase by almost nine times by 2030—from                  in the 2009–2015 period (up to 1,212 km), while lines
     1,645  MW in 2012 to 14,676  MW in 2030. Installed             between 66 kV and 99 kV increased by 87 percent in
     generation in 2015 was 2,298  MW—36  percent                   the same period (up to 54,193 km).
                                         PIPELINE OF IPT PROJECTS IN KENYA AND THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN POWER POOL                        95



Figure B.1 Evolution of transmission                                          Currently transmission services are not separately
lines, by voltage (2009–2015)                                             regulated. ERC sets “just and reasonable” tariffs. Retail
                                                                          tariffs are determined at economically efficient levels,
                                                                  20%     to recover the costs of generation, transmission and
2,500
                                                                          distribution. Retail tariffs are reviewed every three
2,000                                                                     years.
                                                                              KPLC collects revenues from consumers. KPLC
                                                                  15%     keeps part of these revenues to recover its own trans-
 1,500
                                                                          mission and distribution costs. However, KPLC also
 1,000                                                                    pays transmission charges to Ketraco, generation
                                                                          charges to KenGen, GDC, and IPPs, and distribution
   500                                                                    charges to the Rural Electrification Authority.
                                                                              The introduction of IPTs might require some
       0                                                                  modification to regulatory arrangements. The ERC
            2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                                          needs to set charges which it considers are just and
            200–300 kV lines                   100–300 kV lines           reasonable. This requires periodic consideration of
Source: Castalia. Data sourced from Trimble, C. et al., “T&D Data—State
                                                                          the efficient costs of providing transmission services
owned national grid T&D data,” 2016, http://data.worldbank.org/data-      to enable the three-yearly review of retail tariffs.
catalog/affordable-viable-power-for-africa (accessed October 30, 2016).
                                                                          Once IPTs are introduced, the review process will be
                                                                          simplified. The tender process will have revealed the
    Despite these increases, Kenya still has a low level                  efficient costs of the services the IPT will provide.
of transmission per capita (see Section 2.2). Combined                    However, the ERC may play a role in ensuring that
transmission and distribution losses were 17.5  per-                      the tender process is well conducted and can form
cent in 2015.7 Transmission will also be needed to                        a sufficient basis for passing the costs on to final
meet Kenya’s electricity access targets and generation                    consumers.
expansion plans.
    Ketraco expects to develop approximately
7,000  km of transmission lines by 2020—including                             Overview of the
                                                                          B.2 
2,200  km of 132  kV lines, 2,400  km of 220  kV lines,                       Southern Africa Power
2,000 km of 400 kV lines, and 612 km of 500 kV High
Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) lines.8
                                                                              Pool
                                                                          SAPP is a membership of electricity utilities of
ERC is tasked with sector planning and                                    Southern Africa, created in 1995. SAPP currently has
regulation                                                                16  members from 12  different countries, as listed in
The ERC is the entity responsible for power sector                        Table B.1. All members, except CEC, are (majority)
planning in Kenya since the Energy Act 2006. Pre-                         ­government-owned companies.
viously, the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum was                              To be a member, the utility must be located in
in charge of planning. ERC prepares the Least Cost                         a country that was a member of the South Africa
Power Development Plan (LCPDP) with a 20-year                              Development Community in September 1994. Utili-
horizon, and updates the LCPDP every two years—                            ties located in countries that are not members of the
including demand forecasts, generation and trans-                          Community could also be members. The SAPP Exec-
mission planning, and an investment plan. The most                         utive Committee would need to approve the utility’s
recent plan covers the 2015–2035 period.                                   membership.9
   ERC is also responsible for regulating prices in the                        SAPP has operated for over 20 years, with impor-
power sector. Part 3 of the Energy Act 2006 requires                      tant results in the generation and transmission
ERC to license transmission. The license shall include                    sector. Over 15,000  MW were commissioned in the
charges for the transmission of electrical energy.                        2004–2015 period, as well as a diverse range of trans-
Contracts for the sale of transmission services (such                     mission interconnection projects—including the
as a Transmission Services Agreement with an IPT)                         400  kV interconnector between Mozambique and
require ERC’s prior approval.                                             Zimbabwe (commissioned in 1997), the 400  kV line
96   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Table B.1 Members of SAPP

                                     Name of the utility                                                                  Country
      Botswana Power Cooperation                                                                   Botswana
      EDM                                                                                          Mozambique
      Electricity Supply Commission of Malawi                                                      Malawi
      HCB                                                                                          Mozambique
      CEC                                                                                          Zambia
      ESKOM                                                                                        South Africa
      Nam Power                                                                                    Namibia
      Swaziland Electricity Company                                                                Swaziland
      Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority                                                        Zimbabwe
      Empresa Nacional de Electricidade                                                            Angola
      ZESCO                                                                                        Zambia
      Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited                                                     Tanzania
      Société National d’Électricité                                                               Democratic Republic of the Congo
      Lesotho Electricity Corporation                                                              Lesotho
      Mozambique Transmission Company10                                                            Mozambique
      Lunsemfwa Hydro Power Company                                                                Zambia

     Source: Southern Africa Power Pool, “Annual Report 2016,” http://www.sapp.co.zw/areports.html (accessed March 13, 2017).




     between South Africa and Mozambique, via Swazi-                                The planning subcommittee prepares the
     land (commissioned in 2000), and the 350 kV HVDC                               transmission plan
     line between Namibia and Zambia (commissioned in                               SAPP is based on an inter-governmental agreement.
     2012).                                                                         It is supported by a Memorandum of Understanding
        Figure B.2 illustrates the interconnections                                 between the utilities participating in SAPP. Article
     between the SAPP member countries, by voltage. It                              13 of that Memorandum sets out the representation
     also specifies the transmission capacities of the inter-                       on the planning subcommittee and the duties of the
     connections lines, and the available peak generation                           subcommittee.
     capacity of each country.                                                          The duties included an overall Pool Plan that draws
                                                                                    on the plans prepared by individual members of SAPP.
     SAPP’s current generation and                                                  A Regional Generation and Transmission Expansion
     transmission capacity                                                          Plan Study was developed by SAPP in 2009 and pre-
     SAPP has an installed generation capacity of                                   pared by Nexant. The plan identified several major
     61,959 MW, and 75 percent of this installed capacity                           transmission investments with major benefits to
     is considered available for operations. SAPP members                           the region—including projects to link nonoperating
     plan to commission 32,695  MW of new generation                                members of SAPP (for example, the Zambia–Tanzania
     capacity by 2022. Over 60  percent of the installed                            and Mozambique–Malawi interconnections), reduce
     generation capacity in 2016 comes from coal, while                             congestion (for example, the Kafue–Livingston
     hydropower was the second source of generation,                                Upgrade in Zambia), or related to generation projects
     with 21 percent.                                                               (for example, the Mozambique Backbone–STE Proj-
         SAPP is the most developed power pool in Africa.                           ect).11 The World Bank and other DFIs are supporting
     As described in Box B.2, its market structure can pro-                         SAPP with these transmission projects, by providing
     vide useful information to help those planning future                          technical assistance and grant funding.
     transmission investments.
                                         PIPELINE OF IPT PROJECTS IN KENYA AND THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN POWER POOL                       97



Figure B.2 The SAPP grid

                                                SNEL
                                                                                           TANESCO
                                                DRC
                                                                                           TANZANIA
                                            Pk = 1317 MW
                                                                                          PK = 935 MW


                                       280 MW                             1000 MW
                                                                                             ESCOM
                                                    ZESCO                                    Malawi
                                                    Zambia                                Pk = 326 MW
                    RNT                          Pk = 2287 MW
                  Angola
               Pk = 1599 MW
                                                    1400 MW                                         400 MW


                                                     ZESA             500 MW
                                                  Zimbabwe                              HCB/EDM
                                                 Pk = 1589 MW                          Mozambique
                                                                                     EDM Pk = 880 MW
                               300
                                            250        350 MW                       MOZAL Pk = 900 MW
                               MW
                                            MW         600 MW
                                                                                 250
                                                      BPC                        MW
                                                   Botswana                                 150
                                                                                                      1450
                                                  Pk = 610 MW                               MW
                                                                                                      MW
                                                                                                                1450 MW
                                              150 MW          650
                                                                             2000
                                                              MW
                                            500 MW                           MW

                    NAMPOWER                                        ESKOM                               SEC
                       Nambia                  250               South Africa                        Swaziland
                    Pk = 629 MW                MW               Pk = 34481 MW                       Pk = 227 MW

                                                                    230 MW
                                                                                                    1450 MW
                 533 kV DC                         275 kV                         LEC
                 400 kV                            220 kV                       Lesotho
                 330 kV                            132 kV                     Pk = 150 MW
                                                                                                  Pk = Peak demand
                 350 kV DC                         110 kV

Source: Southern Africa Power Pool, “Annual Report 2016.”




B.3 Pipeline identification                                            Selection criteria includes project stage,
                                                                       size, and degree of wayleave risk
Ketraco and SAPP are evaluating privately financed                     Ketraco and SAPP are identifying transmission proj-
models to attract investment to transmission projects.                 ects to pilot IPTs. To do this, they have developed cri-
The IPT business model is being considered as one                      teria to select the projects. The selection criteria are:
likely suitable model. Public finance will continue
being the dominant model, but alternative financ-                      •	 Project has undergone preliminary developments,
ing methods could help obtain additional sources of                    •	 Project size is sufficiently large to attract investors,
finance to the sector, and relieve the financing con-                     and
straint that these African countries face.                             •	 Risk of wayleave is appropriate.
98   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




     Box B.2 SAPP’s experience shows how regional power pools can assist
     transmission planning

     The market structure of SAPP can provide useful infor-            used for trade on the DAM, after allowing for the capacity
     mation to help those planning future transmission invest-         reserved for bilateral contracts.
     ments. SAPP operates a day-ahead, regional net market.                Bids and offers are submitted for each bidding area.
     These terms are explained below:                                  Generators can only bid where they are located (or where
                                                                       they are party to contracts relating to physical delivery).
     •	 “Day-ahead” means that bids are submitted 24  hours            Offers to purchase on the DAM are also based on the bid-
        before real time. This contrasts with some markets that        ding area where the purchaser is located.
        have intra-day trading nearer to real time,                        As is common in markets with this structure, the pric-
     •	 “Regional” means that SAPP is divided into several bid         ing rules result in a uniform price when constraints are
        areas. Those bid areas are determined by the location of       not binding. When transmission constraints between the
        grid constraints. As the networks were originally devel-       bidding areas occur, prices also separate. This is known as
        oped primarily to serve country demand, the borders            market splitting.
        of the bid areas are primarily the geographical borders            The price separation also results in settlement residues.
        between the countries in the SAPP area, and                    This means the market operator buys more power in bid
     •	 “Net” means that the transmission capacity between
                                                                       areas with a low price and sells more power in bid areas
        bid areas is first allocated to bilateral trades. SAPP rules
                                                                       with a higher price. While different markets use different
        state: “Firm Bilateral Agreements between Participants
                                                                       terms, the existence of these residues is a feature of all
        will be given priority [. . .] for transmission on the SAPP
                                                                       regional markets.
        interconnectors.”12 Where bilateral agreements exceed
                                                                           As a result the DAM provides a high level of transparency
        the transmission capacity, the allocation is based on the
        maturity of the agreements.                                    on the frequency of transmission constraints across the
                                                                       regional interconnections and on the materiality of those
        The transmission capacity remaining after the allocation       constraints. SAPP also provides a high level of certainty over
     to bilateral agreements is available for trade on the Day         access rights when transmission lines are constrained. The
     Ahead Market (DAM). The system operators determine the            information on the frequency and materiality of constraints
     available transmission capacity between the bid areas. The        does not remove the need for transmission planning, but
     market operator then calculates the capacity that can be          provides useful input to the planning process.




        The first criterion considers the stage of develop-              regional context. Investors will also evaluate if there
     ment of the project, and whether feasibility studies                are reasonable prospects of a future pipeline of other
     (ESIA) have been completed. Long-term or urgent                     investment opportunities.
     projects are also not prioritized, as both Ketraco and                  The third criterion requires that the risk associated
     SAPP aim to trial IPT tenders in the short term. Pilot-             to acquiring the land and ROW is appropriate, given
     ing urgent projects could also prevent focusing on the              the project characteristics. Selected projects can only
     learning process.                                                   have low to medium wayleave risks. Projects with
        The second criterion refers to the project size and              high wayleave risk were removed from the pipeline.
     whether projects are large enough to justify the trans-
     action costs (see related discussion in Section 6.8).               Six identified potential transmission
     To comply with this criterion, the pilot project may                projects to pilot IPTs in Kenya and SAPP
     have to bundle several projects into a single tender,               After applying these criteria to Ketraco’s overall trans-
     particularly for in-country projects. According to                  mission pipeline and SAPP’s priority transmission
     consultations with private investors and World Bank                 projects, six potential pilot projects are obtained—four
     experts, an estimated minimum threshold (for con-                   in Kenya and two interconnections within SAPP. The
     struction costs) would be around US$80–100 million.                 selected pipeline of IPT projects in Kenya is shown in
     However, this figure may depend on the project or
                                         PIPELINE OF IPT PROJECTS IN KENYA AND THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN POWER POOL                                                                     99



Table B.2 Pipeline of potential IPT projects in Kenya

                                        Est. cost14                                                                                                        Need to bundle
                                          (US$               Length           Voltage and                                                                   with another
        Project name13                   million)             (km)             line type                          Wayleave risk                              project(s)?
 Kiambere–Maua–Isiolo                        81                288          220 kV; double          Low: [Ketraco] had successful                                   No
                                                                            circuit                 wayleave experiences with these
                                                                                                    communities, despite high population
                                                                                                    density
 Kisumu–Kakamega–                            35                 72          220 kV; double          Low: [Ketraco] has had wayleave                                 Yes
 Musaga                                                                     circuit                 experiences with population
 Menegai–Nyandarua–                          21                 70          132 kV; double          Medium: Registered land but high                                Yes
 Rumuruti                                                                   circuit                 population density in Menengai
 Karbanet–Rumuruti                           20                111          132 kV; double          Partially Low, Partially High: privately                        Yes
 (Nyahururu)                                                                circuit                 owned land, but some pastoralists in
                                                                                                    Kabarnet

Source: Ketraco, “Support to develop a framework for transmission infrastructure through PPP,” Draft Report, March 2017, (pers. comm. with Samuel Oguah, March 6, 2017). Adapted from
Table 12. We need to select pilot line(s) from the shortlist of 11 lines.


Table B.3 Pipeline of potential IPT projects in SAPP

                                                                  Estimated cost                                                   Capacity
     Project name               Countries involved                 (US$ million)                   Length (km)                   and line type
 Zambia–Tanzania                Zambia and                                78015                          70016               400 MW; 330 kV;
                                Tanzania                                                                                     double circuit
 Mozambique                     Mozambique                              1,70017                        1,30018               3,100 MW; 800 kV;
 Backbone (STE)                                                                                                              HVDC line

Source: World Bank, “Project appraisal document on a proposed grant in the amount of SDR13.2 million to the Southern Africa Power Pool for a Southern
Africa Power Pool (SAPP)—Program for accelerating transformational energy projects,” (Report No: 86076-AFR), October 2014, http://documents.worldbank.
org/curated/en/988471468002999129/pdf/860760PAD0P126010Box385343B00OUO090.pdf (accessed March 15, 2017). Adapted from Table 5. Priority
Transmission Projects.



Table B.2 and the selected pipeline of IPT projects in
                                                                                Notes
SAPP is shown in Table B.3.
    As suggested in the last column of Table B.2, three                          1.	 M. Kojima and C. Trimble (2016).
                                                                                 2.	 A. Eberhard et al. (2016).
of the selected projects in Kenya would need to be
                                                                                 3.	 “National Workshop Targets Kenya’s Electrification
bundled to fulfill the criteria. Bundling the three proj-
                                                                                     Challenges,” Energy Sector Management Assistance
ects (those in the last three rows of the table) would
                                                                                     Program, https://www.esmap.org/node/55495
involve an estimated cost of US$76 million, which is                                 (accessed March 10, 2017).
almost the minimum suggested threshold.                                          4.	 World Bank, “Electric power consumption (kWh per
    The Zambia–Tanzania project shown in Table B.3                                   capita),” OEDC/IEA, 2013, http://data.worldbank.org/
is a priority transmission project for SAPP that will                                indicator/EG.USE.ELEC.KH.PC (accessed January
help relieve congestion in the power pool, and the STE                               10, 2017).
project is related to the development of low-cost gen-                           5.	 Sustainable Energy for all, “Kenya Action Agenda,”
eration. The STE project connects the Zambezi Basin                                  January 2016, http://www.se4all.org/sites/default/
hydropower region downstream of Cahora Bassa to                                      files/Kenya_AA_EN_Released.pdf (accessed March 14,
                                                                                     2017).
southern Mozambique and South Africa. The World
                                                                                 6.	 A. Eberhard et al. (2016).
Bank is currently updating feasibility studies of this
                                                                                 7.	 Trimble, C., et al., “T&D Data – T&D Network Losses
project.
                                                                                     (as percent of total dispatch),” 2016, http://data
100   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




             .worldbank.org/data-catalog/affordable-viable-        12.	 Southern Africa Power Pools, “Day Ahead Market.
             power-for-africa (accessed October 30, 2016).              Book of rules,” January 2009, http://www.sapp.co/
       8.	   Kenya Electricity Transmission Company (Ketraco),          zw/docs/SAPP%20DAM%20Book%20of%20Rules%20
             “Transmission System Planning and Implemen-                %final%20version%20January%202009.pdf (accessed
             tation: Planned Projects and Financing Gap,” Pre-          March 14, 2017).
             sentation at from consultation workshop, Nairobi,     13.	 New substations required for the project are shown
             Kenya, September 26, 2016.                                 in bold.
       9.	   “Membership,” Southern African Power Pool             14.	 This is the estimated construction cost.
             (webpage), http://www.sapp.co.zw/members.html         15.	 Lead2Business, “Project Details. Zambia–Tanzania–
             (accessed March 13, 2017).                                 Kenya Power Interconnector Project,” http://www
      10.	   The Mozambique Transmission Company is                     .l2b.co.za/Project/Zambia-Tanzania-Kenya-Power-
             an SPV formed by ESKOM (South Africa), EDM                 Interconnector-Project/9262 (accessed March 15,
             (Mozambique), and Swaziland Electricity Company            2017).
             (Swaziland). These three utilities each own a third   16.	 NEPAD-IPPF, “Zambia–Tanzania–Kenya Electricity
             of the shares.                                             Interconnection,” http://nepadippf.org/projects/
      11.	   World Bank, “Project appraisal document on a               energy/zambiatanzaniakenya electricity/ (accessed
             proposed grant in the amount of SDR13.2 million            March 15, 2017).
             to the Southern Africa Power Pool for a Southern      17.	 EDM, “Mozambique regional transmission
             Africa Power Pool (SAPP) – Program for accelerat-          backbone project. Non-technical summary for
             ing transformational energy projects,” (Report No:         draft ESIA,” April 2011, https://tinyurl.com/hxxrbss
             86076-AFR), October 2014, http://documents                 (accessed March 15, 2017).
             .worldbank.org/curated/en/988471468002999129/         18.	 M. Hussain (2015).
             pdf/860760PAD0P126010Box385343B00OUO090
             .pdf (accessed March 15, 2017).
List of References

African Development Bank (2013), “Interconnecting,       CEDA (2002), “Privatisation: A Review of the
   integrating and transforming a continent,”               Australian Experience” http://adminpanel
   Programme for Infrastructure Development in              .ceda.com.au/FOLDERS/Service/Files/
   Africa, https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/          Documents/15230~growth50.pdf (accessed March 17,
   afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/PIDA%20            2017).
   note%20English%20for%20web%200208.pdf                 Copperbelt Energy Corporation Plc webpage, https://
   (accessed March 10, 2017).                               cecinvestor.com/kabompo-hydro-power/ (accessed
Alberta Electric System Operator (2014), “AESO Awards       March 10, 2017).
   Alberta PowerLine Limited Partnership with Fort       Department of Energy and Climate Change (2016),
   McMurray West 500 kV Transmission Project,”              “Impact Assessment: Extending competitive
   http://www.marketwired.com/press-release/aeso-           tendering in the GB electricity transmission
   awards-alberta-powerline-limited-partnership-with-       network,” https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
   fort-mcmurray-west-500-kv-transmission-1978463           system/uploads/attachment_data/file/493712/
   .htm (accessed March 16, 2017).                          Impact_Assessment_-_Extending_competitive_
Australian Energy Market Operator (2013), “South            tendering_in_the_GB_electricit___.pdf (accessed
   Australia–Victoria (Heywood) Interconnector              March 10, 2017).
   Upgrade,” http://www.aemo.com.au/media/               Department of Trade and Industry (2007), “Government
   Files/Other/planning/RITTs/SA_VIC_Heywood_               Response to the joint DTI/Ofgem Consultation
   Interconnector_Upgrade_RIT_T_PACR.pdf (accessed          on Licensing Offshore Electricity Transmission,”
   March 16, 2017).                                         (Regulation of offshore electricity transmission),
Australian Energy Regulator (2009), “Electricity            http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http:/
   transmission,” State of the energy market, https://      www.berr.gov.uk/files/file38705.pdf (accessed
   www.aer.gov.au/system/files/Chapter%205%20%20            March 10, 2017).
   Electricity%20transmission%202009.pdf (accessed       Development Bank of Jamaica, “Privatisation Policy
   March 15, 2017).                                         Framework & Procedures Manual,” http://dbankjm.
Babcock & Brown Infrastructure (2006), “ASX                 com/services/ppp-and-privatisation-division/
   Announcement. Completion of Acquisition: New             privatisation/privatisation-policy-framework-
   England–New York Cross Sound Cable,” http://www          procedures-manual/ (accessed March 15, 2017).
   .crosssoundcable.com/doc/Acquisition.pdf (accessed    Eberhard, A. (2015), “Powering Africa: Facing the
   March 15, 2017).                                         Financing and Reform Challenges,” AFD Research
Bloomberg (2016), “Azura says Nigeria must expand           Paper Series, No. 2016-21, February. https://www
   grid to boost power supply,” http://www.bloomberg        .gsb.uct.ac.za/files/PoweringAfricaChallenges.pdf
   .com/news/articles/2016-01-28/azura-says-nigeria-        (accessed March 17, 2017).
   must-expand-grid-to-boost-power-supply (accessed      Eberhard, A., Gratwick, K., Morella, E., and Antmann, P.
   January 12, 2017).                                       (2016), “Independent Power Projects in
Castellano, A., Kendall, A., Nikomarov, M., and             Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons from Five Key
   Swemmer, T. (2015), “Brighter Africa: The growth         Countries,” World Bank Publications, https://
   potential of the Sub-Saharan electricity sector”         openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
   (Electric Power & Natural Gas, McKinsey&Co.)             handle/10986/23970/9781464808005.pdf (accessed
   www.mckinsey.com/industries/electric-power-and-          March 16, 2017).
   natural-gas/our-insights/powering-africa (accessed    Economic Consulting Associates (2010), “The
   March 7, 2017).                                          potential of power sector integration,”(Cahora
102   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




         Bassa. Generation case study) ESMAP, https://              IEA, “Understanding Energy Challenges in India:
         openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/                         Policies, Players and Issues.” (2012).
         handle/10986/17518/773070v30ESMAP0ora0                     IFC (2012), “Public-Private Partnership Stories.
         Bassa0Generation.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed                      Cameroon: SONEL,” http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/
         March 10, 2017).                                               connect/577489804a5b844a93e59f8969adcc27/
      EDM (2011), “Mozambique regional transmission                     PPPStories_Cameroon_SONEL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES
         backbone project. Non-technical summary for draft              (accessed March 10, 2017).
         ESIA,” April, https://tinyurl.com/hxxrbss (accessed        Institut de l’énergie et de l’environnement de
         March 15, 2017).                                               la Francophonie (2005), “Vers de nouvelles
      Energy Sector Management Assistance Program,                      organisations du secteur électrique : les réformes,
         “National Workshop Targets Kenya’s Electrification             les acteurs et les expériences : colloques 1998–2005,”
         Challenges,” https://www.esmap.org/node/55495                  Collection Actes 5, http://toolkits.reeep.org/
         (accessed March 10, 2017).                                     file_upload/296_tmpphpRZPikL.pdf (accessed
      ESMAP (2015), “Private Sector Participation in Electricity        March 10, 2017).
         Transmission and Distribution: Experiences                 International Bank for Reconstruction and
         from Brazil, Peru, the Philippines, and Turkey.”               Development, the World Bank, Asian Development
         Energy Sector Management Assistance Program                    Bank, and Inter-American Development Bank (2014),
         (ESMAP) knowledge series, no. 023/15;. World Bank,             “Public-Private Partnerships. Reference Guide,”
         Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank                Version 2.0, Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory
         .org/handle/10986/22750 (accessed March 10, 2017).             Facility, http://api.ning.com/files/Iumatxx-0jz3owS
      Federal Republic of Nigeria (2016), “Sustainable Energy           B05xZDkmWIE7GTVYA3cXwt4K4s3Uy0NtPPRgP
         for All Action Agenda (SE4ALL-AA),” http://www                 WYO1lLrWaTUqybQeTXIeuSYUxbPFWlysuyNI5r
         .se4all.org/sites/default/files/NIGERIA_SE4ALL_                L6b2Ms/PPPReferenceGuidev02Web.pdf (accessed
         ACTION_AGENDA_FINAL.pdf (accessed March 10,                    March 17, 2017).
         2017).                                                     International Energy Statistics. (2014), “Total Electricity
      Ferreira, R. (2016), “Private Participation in Transmission       Installed Capacity 2014,” https://tinyurl.com/hqe2nys
         Expansion: the Brazilian Model,” Presentation from             (accessed December 2, 2016)
         consultation workshop, Kenya.                              Kenya Electricity Transmission Company,
      Foster, V., and Briceño-Garmendia, C. (2010), “Africa’s           “Transmission System Planning and
         Infrastructure. A Time for Transformation,”                    Implementation: Planned Projects and Financing
         A co-publication of the Agence Française de                    Gap,” Presentation from consultation workshop,
         Développement and the World Bank http://                       Kenya (2016).
         siteresources.worldbank.org/INTAFRICA/Resources/           Kerf, M., Gray, D., Irwin, T., Levesque, C., and Taylor, R.
         aicd_overview_english_no-embargo.pdf (accessed                 (1998), “Concessions for infrastructure. A guide to
         March 16, 2017).                                               their design and award,” Technical Paper no. 389,
      Golumbeanu, R. and Barnes, D., “Connection Charges                https://tinyurl.com/zgamefg (accessed March 13,
         and Electricity Access in Sub-Saharan Africa,” World           2017).
         Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 6511, (2013).          Kojima, M. and Trimble, C. (2016), “Making
      Government of India (2015), “Order No. 15/1/2013,”                Power Affordable for Africa and Viable for
         Ministry of Power, http://www.powermin                         Its Utilities,” World Bank Group, https://
         .nic.in/sites/default/files/webform/notices/                   openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
         policy_for_incentivizing_early_Commissioning_                  handle/10986/25091/108555.pdf?sequence=7
         of_Transmission_Project_0.pdf (accessed March 10,              (accessed March 17, 2017).
         2017).                                                     KPMG, “The energy report: Philippines, Growth and
      Heddenhausen, M. (2007), “Privatisations in Europe’s              opportunities in the Philippines electric power
         liberalized electricity markets—the cases of the               sector,” KPMG Global Energy Institute, 2013–2014
         United Kingdom, Sweden, Germany, and France,”                  edition, (2013).
         Research Unit EU Integration, https://www                  Lead2Business, “Project Details. Zambia-Tanzania-
         .swp-berlin.org/fileadmin/contents/products/                   Kenya Power Interconnector Project,” http://www
         projekt_papiere/Electricity_paper_KS_IIformatiert              .l2b.co.za/Project/Zambia-Tanzania-Kenya-Power-
         .pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).                                Interconnector-Project/9262 (accessed March 15,
      Hussain, M. (2015), “Republic of Mozambique -                     2017).
         Energy Sector Policy Note,” World Bank, (2015).            Littlechild, S. (2003), “Transmission regulation,
         http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/                        merchant investment, and the experience of SNI and
         en/135711468180536987/pdf/ACS17091-REVISED-                    Murraylink in the Australian National Electricity
         PUBLIC-Mozambique-Energy-Sector-Policy-Note                    Market”, https://www.hks.harvard.edu/hepg/Papers/
         .pdf (accessed March 11, 2017).
                                                                                                LIST OF REFERENCES         103


   Littlechild.Transmission.Regulation.Australia.pdf           the project’s Initial Needs Case and suitability
   (accessed March 17, 2017).                                  for tendering,” https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/
Melo, E., et al., “The New Governance Structure of the         publications-and-updates/north-west-coast-
   Brazilian Electricity Industry: How Is It Possible to       connections-consultation-project-s-initial-needs-
   Introduce Market Mechanisms?”, Section 3 (2009).            case-and-suitability-tendering (accessed March 10,
MIGA. “Political Risk Insurance and Credit                     2017).
   Enhancement Solutions,” Note provided to Castalia        Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (2017), “RIIO-ET1.
   (2016).                                                     Annual Report 2015–2016,” https://www.ofgem
Miketa, A. and Saadi, N. (2015), “Africa power sector:         .gov.uk/system/files/docs/2017/02/riio-et1_annual_
   Planning and prospects for renewable energy,”               report_2015-16.pdf (accessed March 16, 2017).
   (International Renewable Energy Agency), http://         Oguah, S. and Sanchez, P. (2015), “Private Sector
   www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/               Participation in Transmission Systems: Making
   IRENA_Africa_Power_Sector_synthesis_2015.pdf                It Work. Live Wire.” World Bank Group,
   (accessed March 1, 2017).                                   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
Ministry of Power of the Government of India, http://          en/337861467990990322/pdf/100989-BRI-VC-
   powermin.nic.in/en/content/growth-transmission-             PUBLIC-ADD-SERIES-Box393254B-Knowledge-
   sector, (accessed March 10, 2017).                          Notes-LW52-OKR.pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).
Mishra, S., “A Comprehensive Study and Analysis of          Ouedraogo, N., “Modeling sustainable long-term
   Power Sector Value Chain in India, Management &             electricity supply-demand in Africa,” Applied Energy
   Marketing,” Challenges for the Knowledge Society,           190 (2017): 1047–1067.
   Vol. 8, No. 1 (2013): 25–40.                             Pfeifenberger, J. et al. (2014), “Contrasting Competitively-
National Grid, Our UK Profile, http://investors.               Bid Transmission Investments in the U.S. and
   nationalgrid.com/about-us/our-markets/uk-profile.           Abroad,” Presented at UBS conference call, http://
   aspx (accessed March 17, 2017).                             www.brattle.com/system/news/pdfs/000/000/719/
NEPAD-IPPF, “Zambia–Tanzania–Kenya Electricity                 original/Contrasting_Competitively-Bid_
   Interconnection,” http://nepadippf.org/projects/            Transmission_Investments_in_the_U.S._and_
   energy/zambiatanzaniakenyaelectricity/ (accessed            Abroad.pdf?1408140050 (accessed March 16, 2017).
   March 15, 2017).                                         Plane, P. (2004), “Privatisation et réseaux d’électricités
Nepal, R. and Foster, J., “Electricity Networks                en Afrique de l’Ouest,” CERDI-CNRS, Université
   Privatization in Australia: An Overview of the              d’Auvergne, http://publi.cerdi.org/ed/2003/2003.22
   Debate,” School of Economics, University of                 .pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).
   Quensland, http://www.uq.edu.au/economics/               PPI Database, World Bank and PPIAF, ppi.worldbank.org
   abstract/541.pdf (accessed March 16, 2017).                 (accessed September 9, 2016).
NERA Economic Consulting (2012), “US Transmission           Salcedo, F. and Porter, K., “Regulatory framework and
   Planning Arrangements—Competitive Procurement               cost regulations for the Brazilian national gird,” Final
   and Independent Planner Model. A report for Grid            Report, RAP, (2013).
   Australia,” http://www.nera.com/content/dam/nera/        Scottish Power, “About Us,” http://www.scottishpower
   publications/archive2/PUB_GridAustralia_1112.pdf            .com/pages/sp_energy_networks.aspx (accessed
   (accessed March 16, 2017).                                  March 15, 2017).
NGCP (2014), “Regulatory Reset of the Regulated             South African Power Pool, “Membership,” http://www
   Transmission Services for 2016 to 2020: Issues              .sapp.co.zw/members.html (accessed March 13, 2017)
   Paper.”                                                  Southern Africa Power Pool (2009), “Day Ahead Market.
NGCP (2016), “NGCP exceeds performance targets                 Book of rules,” http://www.sapp.co.zw/docs/
   for 7th straight year,” http://ngcp.ph/article-view.        SAPP%20DAM%20Book%20of%20Rules%20final%20
   asp?ContentID=8360 (accessed 26 September, 2016).           version%20January%202009.pdf (accessed March 14,
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (2015),                  2017).
   “Extending competition in electricity transmission:      Southern Africa Power Pool (2016), “Annual Report 2016,”
   arrangements to introduce onshore tenders,”                 http://www.sapp.co.zw/areports.html (accessed
   Consultation                                                March 13, 2017).
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (2015), “Integrated   Starwood Energy Group (2007), “Neptune transmission
   Transmission Planning and Regulation (ITPR)                 system, financed by energy investors funds and
   Project: final conclusions,” https://www.ofgem              Starwood Energy Group, begins delivering power to
   .gov.uk/publications-and-updates/integrated-                Long Island,” http://starwoodenergygroup.com/
   transmission-planning-and-regulation-itpr-project-          wp-content/uploads/2014/06/6_Neptune
   final-conclusions (accessed March 10, 2017).                Announcement.pdf (accessed March 15, 2017).
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (2017), “North        Sustainable Energy for all (2016), “Kenya Action
   West Coast Connections—Consultation on                      Agenda,” http://www.se4all.org/sites/default/files/
104   LINKING UP: PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN POWER TRANSMISSION IN AFRICA




         Kenya_AA_EN_Released.pdf (accessed March 14,             World Bank (1999), “Sub-Saharan Africa Benefits from
         2017).                                                     the first IDA Guarantee for Azito” (Project Finance
      Tchatat, G., “Contribution a la preparation du rapport        and Guarantees), http://siteresources.worldbank.
         national pour la formulation du livre blanc regional       org/INTGUARANTEES/Resources/Azito_PFG_Note.
         sur l’acces universel aux services energetiques            pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).
         integrants le developpement des energies                 World Bank (2001), “A guide for hiring and managing
         renouvelables et de l’efficacite energetique,” Rapport     advisors for private participation in infrastructure,”
         Final, Cameroun, PNUD (2014).                              Volume 3, PPIAF, http://documents.worldbank.org/
      Transmission Company of Nigeria, “Appraisal of                curated/en/347941468766772652/pdf/multi0page.pdf
         Transmission Projects” (2014).                             (accessed March 10, 2017).
      Tribal Energy and Environmental Information, “Energy        World Bank (2009), “Toolkit for PPPs in Roads and
         Transmission in the United States,” https://teeic          Highways: Market Sounding,” Public-Private
         .indianaffairs.gov/er/transmission/restech/dist/           Infrastructure Advisory Facility, https://ppiaf
         index.htm (accessed May 15, 2017).                         .org/sites/ppiaf.org/files/documents/toolkits/
      Trimble, C., Kojima, M., Perez Arroyo, I.,                    highwaystoolkit/6/pdf-version/5-92.pdf
         Mohammadzadeh, F. (2016), “Financial Viability of        World Bank Group (2012), “International Experience
         Electricity Sectors in Sub-Saharan Africa: Quasi-          with Private Sector Participation in Power Grids:
         Fiscal Deficits and Hidden Costs.” Policy Research         Peru Case Study” http://documents.worldbank
         Working Paper; No. 7788 http://data.worldbank              .org/curated/en/498461468000021182/pdf/101753-
         .org/data-catalog/affordable-viable-power-for-africa       WP-P146042-Box393265B-PUBLIC-Private-Sector-
         (accessed March 16, 2017).                                 Participation-in-Power-Grids-Peru.pdf (accessed
      Western Link Project, “Welcome page,” http://www              March 10, 2017).
         .westernhvdclink.co.uk/ and http://www.scottish          World Bank (2014), “Project appraisal document on a
         power.com/pages/our_major_projects.aspx (accessed          proposed grant in the amount of SDR13.2 million
         March 15, 2017).                                           to the Southern Africa Power Pool for a Southern
      World Bank (1998), “Project appraisal document on             Africa Power Pool (SAPP)—Program for accelerating
         a proposed IDA guarantee of up to US$35 million            transformational energy projects,” (Report No:
         of a syndicated commercial bank loan to Cinergy            86076-AFR), October 2014, http://documents
         for the Azito power project in the Republic de Cote        .worldbank.org/curated/en/988471468002999129/
         d’Ivoire,” (Report No: 1 8580-IVC), http://documents       pdf/860760PAD0P126010Box385343B00OUO090.pdf
         .worldbank.org/curated/en/990051468749754026/              (accessed March 15, 2017).
         pdf/multi-page.pdf (accessed March 10, 2017).
