CASE STUDY


Creating Healthcare Markets
Apollo: Better Care through an Integrated Network in India

May 2017
ABOUT IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on leveraging
the power of the private sector to tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. Working with private
enterprises in more than 100 countries, IFC uses its capital, expertise and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty
and promote shared prosperity.

ABOUT THE CASE STUDY
Expanding access to quality and affordable health care is a central element to eliminating extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity. The World Bank Group has a goal to end preventable deaths and disability through
Universal Health Coverage (UHC). In many developing countries, governments do not have the capacity to service the
entire population and private health care providers often play a critical role in meeting societal needs.

IFC’s health practice is developing case studies that demonstrate the ability of the private sector towards achieving
global and national health care goals. Through a focus on efficiency and innovation, certain business models can
provide better outcomes at a lower overall cost to society.

WRITTEN BY
This case study was authored by Ann M. Casanova with valuable inputs from IFC colleagues, Ioan Cleaton-Jones,
Jack Frew, James Morley, Andrew Myburgh, Chris McCahan and Elena Sterlin.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special note of appreciation is extended to Apollo Health and Lifestyle Limited (AHLL), especially to Ms. Sangita
Reddy and Mr. Neeraj Garg for sharing their experience and data with us. The author is grateful for the many insights
provided by IFC colleagues. Special thanks to Elizabeth Price and Irina Sarchenko for communications advice, Leticia
Crentsil for copy-editing and for the creative design.

DISCLAIMER
The findings, interpretations, views and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) or of the World Bank or the
governments they represent. While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided
on a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind. IFC may not require all or any of the
described practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or
projects that adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-
by-case basis with due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
© International Finance Corporation 2017. All rights reserved.

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law.

PHOTOS
@ AHLL
Table of Contents
  Every Minute is Precious when Saving a Life				 1

  Responding to Necessity									                                      5

  Healthcare as a Lifelong Journey—Not Simply an Episodic Event 				    7

  Selected Features of the Business Model						                        13

  The Role of IFC					                                                 19

  Conclusion							                                                    21
EVERY MINUTE IS PRECIOUS WHEN
SAVING A LIFE


One hot summer day in Chennai, India, Mr. Srinivas,1 who was 53 years old, was
experiencing chest pain. His family physician referred him to an Apollo Clinic
for a stress ECG test. As Mr. Srinivas was on the treadmill, he went into cardiac
arrest and lost consciousness. Code Blue procedures went into effect and the clinic
doctors immediately resuscitated him by performing CPR and administering shock.
He quickly regained consciousness. Apollo Clinic’s on-site cardiologist ordered
medications and advised that the patient be moved to Apollo Hospital.

As he was being transferred in an Apollo ambulance, the Apollo Clinic team
contacted the Apollo Hospital cardiac team to provide the complete background
on the patient and his case history. Upon arriving, Mr. Srinivas was wheeled into
the catheterization lab for a coronary artery angiography, an x-ray that uses a
radiologic contrast medium to image the arteries that supply blood to the heart
muscle. The angiogram established the extent and nature of the cardiac disease
and revealed a near total blockage of the left anterior descending artery, which
is a critical artery supplying blood to the heart. An angioplasty, a procedure
that unblocks clogged arteries, was performed that same day. The patient was
kept in the hospital ward for recovery and observation for two days and soon                               “The continuum of
returned to his daily activities
                                                                                                           care that Mr. Srinivas
Mr. Neeraj Garg, CEO of Apollo Health and Lifestyle Limited (AHLL),                                        received through
explained, “The key to Mr. Srinivas’ survival and full recovery was due to the                             Apollo’s integrated care
immediate attention he received at the Apollo Clinic and the angioplasty that
                                                                                                           network saved his life.”
he received soon after arriving at the Apollo Hospital. The continuum of care
that he received through Apollo’s integrated care network saved his life.”
                                                                                      Mr. Neeraj Garg
AHLL is a subsidiary of Apollo Hospitals Enterprise Limited (AHEL). AHEL
began operations in 1983 and is one of the largest integrated healthcare              CEO of AHLL
networks in the world, with nearly 10,000 beds in 70 owned or managed
hospitals, staffed by 7,000 doctors. It has a chain of 2,300 retail pharmacy
stores and partnerships with 12 academic institutions and it has a research foundation. Seven of its hospitals are
Joint Commission International accredited2. Over three decades, it has touched the lives of 45 million patients
from over 120 countries.


1
    The name has been changed to protect patient confidentiality.
2
    The Joint Commission, based in the United States, is a leader in the US and internationally in quality accreditation for hospitals and health
    services.
                                                                                                                  Creating Healthcare Markets | 1
In 2000, Apollo Hospitals established AHLL, with the vision of ensuring access across the continuum of care. Dr.
Prathap Reddy, the founder of Apollo Hospitals had a strong belief in the need to make healthcare more accessible
and to move care closer to the home. As a result, Apollo Clinics was set up as a community based, multi-specialty
chain of clinics that provides the neighborhood with easy access to specialist doctors, primary care diagnostics
services, treatment facilities (treatment room, physiotherapy, dentistry) and preventive healthcare (health checks and
vaccinations).

Apollo Clinics is now India’s largest chain of primary care clinics operated by the private sector, and it plays a
major role in bringing Apollo expertise closer to the home. As consumer behavior has changed and healthcare
models have evolved in India, AHLL has expanded the Apollo Clinics community concept and now operates a total
of seven business lines. AHLL has also been a leader in creating new models of hospital care with the creation
of Apollo Cradle, hospitals focused on maternity and women’s health with high-end neonatal care, and through
Apollo Spectra, short stay “planned surgery” centers. Primary care services have been broadened in the last two
years to include diabetes-focused clinics through Apollo Sugar, pathology testing labs with collection centers
through Apollo Diagnostics, dental clinics through Apollo White and dialysis units through Apollo Dialysis.

As of March 2017, the group had about 400 centers, including 163 sample collection points across seven business
lines. These formats are comprised of 75 clinics, 73 dental clinics, 44 diagnostics labs, 38 diabetes clinics, 12
Spectras, 12 maternal and infant centers, and 5 dialysis centers. Although still in an early growth stage, the
company has served nearly 1.3 million patients through about 2,800 doctors in the last 12 months. At the end of
its 2016 scal year, total unaudited revenues were estimated at Rs4.3 billion ($64 million).3

IFC has supported the growth of both AHEL and AHLL. In 2016, IFC and IFC’s Asset Management Company
took an equity stake of Rs 4.5 billion ($67 million) in AHLL to help it grow the network in locations that are closer
to where patients live. This marks IFC’s fth investment in the Apollo group over the last 20 years. Apollo and IFC
have partnered together on ve investments totaling nearly $190 million in equity and loans. The investments were
for the expansion of the network, purchase of equipment and expansion into smaller, less developed cities with
Apollo Reach—hospitals for low-income patients.




3
    Apollo’s scal year runs from April to March of the following year. The average foreign exchange rate was INR 67.07 : USD 1 between April 2016 and
    March 2017. Source: Reuters.

2 | Creating Healthcare Markets
TOP 3 SUCCESS FACTORS

AHLL is demonstrating that outpatient and specialized care can be a very effective approach for non-critical care
because it can still maintain high levels of quality through increased efficiencies at a cheaper cost for patients.


QUALITY: The Indian market suffers from a fair amount of poor medical quality. For over 30 years, Apollo
has differentiated itself by providing high-level clinical excellence. Apollo Spectra has nearly eliminated hospital-
acquired infection—a significant health problem in India. Out of 13,000 surgeries in 2016, it had near zero
hospital-acquired infection. It was able to achieve this because it has exclusive focus on surgery—it does not admit
medical cases and does not have a medical ICU from which infections can spread.

Across AHLL, medical staff are properly trained. At hiring, it confirms that doctors are properly qualified and
have earned the correct privileges to perform on patients. When it acquired hospitals that were not following
these norms, it took immediate action to bar the doctors from performing unauthorized procedures. For nurses,
it provides in-house training programs to overcome serious skills gaps. Better skilled health professionals have
improved health outcomes.

At Apollo Diagnostics, AHLL ensures treatments are more effective through reliance on significantly more accurate
diagnostics. Since nearly 70 percent of clinical decisions are based on pathology inputs, inaccurate diagnostic
results could undermine AHLL’s reputation for quality. As such, AHLL has invested in the latest equipment and
processes to ensure that doctors have the most needed tests, with rapid and precise results. AHLL continues to
cultivate a high-quality brand that patients can trust.

HIGHER EFFICIENCY: AHLL expands its network in clusters of different formats, which in turn allows
the company to leverage synergies across its integrated network. This promotes higher efficiency and leads to
better care for patients. For instance, when Clinics, Diagnostics, and Sugar are located in the same city, Sugar
can co-locate inside Clinics and Diagnostics takes over the pathological processing. The IT network integrates
the patient’s information across formats to efficiently facilitate timely and accurate information sharing. The
individual business formats benefit from the synergies from the group, as well as from referrals from the main
AHEL hospital network.


CHEAPER: AHLL identified a number of services that did not need to be based in expensive tertiary care
hospitals and shifted these into smaller facilities that are more cost effective. The small format model is nimbler
and has many advantages. It allows AHLL to locate facilities in neighborhoods that are closer to where patients
live and where leases for smaller spaces are typically cheaper, reducing overhead. It can focus on the services that
are most relevant to the local communities and equips it properly, also reducing fixed costs. By focusing on short-
stay surgery, it can manage its operating theaters more efficiently and can turn around patients faster. The Apollo
Spectra hospitals deliver surgery at 10 to 20 percent lower cost than that of multi-specialty in patient hospitals.
These efficiencies result in savings that are passed on to the patient.

Another way that AHLL is reducing costs is by placing a greater emphasis on preventative care, which is
significantly cheaper. Through Apollo Sugar it is helping diabetics manage and control their condition before it
becomes more serious and costlier. A diabetic patient who is treated for a medical condition in a hospital will
spend three times more than a non-diabetic patient. If Apollo Sugar can help prevent the onset of diabetes and
help prevent complications, it will save the patient thousands of dollars in care and extend his or her lifespan.




                                                                                          Creating Healthcare Markets | 3
4 | Creating Healthcare Markets
RESPONDING TO NECESSITY
In 1971, Dr. Prathap Reddy, a cardiologist with a flourishing medical practice in the United States, received a phone
call from his father urging him to return to India. India was in dire need of highly qualified doctors, many of whom
trained in India and then emigrated abroad, leaving behind a significant gap. “Upon his return he found the medical
landscape in the country was plagued by gaps in infrastructure, delivery and affordability.”4

Healthcare in India has long been underfunded. As recent as 2015, the
country of 1.3 billion—the second-largest population in the world—spent
only 3.8 percent of GDP on health. Of this amount, the government invested
1.4 percent of GDP on health, while the world average for government
spending was 8.6 percent. As such, India continues to be a very underserved
healthcare market that juggles 20 percent of the global disease burden.

It was against a context of a lack of resources that Dr. Reddy encountered a
difficult situation. A patient under his care needed a treatment that was not
available locally. India lacked the latest technology that was available in the
United States but the patient could not afford the $50,000 cost of treatment
overseas. The patient lost the battle. A devastated Dr. Reddy decided he                             Dr. Prathap Reddy
would do something bigger—he would bring quality healthcare to India—
with the latest technology and at the best cost.
                                                                                                     Apollo continues to be
In 1979, he founded AHEL. The decision to open India’s first multi-specialty                         a pioneer, strategically
private sector hospital was revolutionary. Nothing on this scale previously
                                                                                                     addressing important
existed. It opened its doors in 1983 to provide integrated care with a long-
term to vision of building a health ecosystem that would provide care across                         health problems in India.
a continuum. Thirty-four years later, Apollo has fundamentally changed
private healthcare in India.

Today, Apollo continues to be a pioneer, strategically addressing important health problems in India with its
latest venture, AHLL. Historically, healthcare in India has been largely hospital-centric because that is where the
specialists work. But this increases costs for services that can be provided in less expensive facilities. In 1995, AHLL
opened the first clinic, but it was not until 2002 that the first multi-specialty Apollo Clinic was established. Today,
its clinics offer healthcare services for more than 12 specialties.5

Around 2005, Apollo also realized that it could complement its offerings with centers that were specialized and
focused, much like what the retail sector has done. In 2006, recognizing that maternity is not an illness, it opened
“Cradle,” to shift maternal and neonatal care away from general hospitals that are focused on treating disease. It
followed in 2012 with “Spectra,” short-stay surgical centers which discharge surgery patients anywhere from the
same day to a maximum of two nights stay.6 Between 2014 and 2015, the company continued to focus on primary
care further and added diagnostics, “Sugar” for diabetes care, dental, and dialysis formats.

4
    www.apolloclinic.com Last visited on April 17, 2017.
5
    Apollo clinics attend to cardiology, internal medicine, gynecology, pediatrics, urology, orthopedics, neurology, dermatology,
    gastroenterology, dentistry, pulmonology, endocrinology and ENT.
6
    The specialties at Spectra include: Bariatrics, Orthopedics and Spine, ENT, General and Laparoscopic surgery, urology, ophthalmology,
     gynecology, vascular surgery, plastic and cosmetic surgery and pain management




                                                                                                             Creating Healthcare Markets | 5
6 | Creating Healthcare Markets
HEALTHCARE AS A LIFELONG JOURNEY—
NOT SIMPLY AN EPISODIC EVENT

The Reddy family noticed that they were seeing patients only after they had reached advanced stages of
development in cancer, cardiovascular disease and diabetes. They decided to focus more on preventative care,
rather than focus exclusively on late-stage treatment. This is a significant philosophical departure from how
hospital enterprises traditionally view patients.

HEALTH CHECKS

Apollo developed the “Health Check” to screen patients comprehensively
and to help them make lifestyle decisions before they become ill.
Apollo’s “Health Check” is a comprehensive investigation, through tests
and clinical examinations, that provides indicators of the status of an
individual’s health. The annual exam typically takes four-to-five hours
to complete at an Apollo Clinic. The Health Checks are segmented by
age and increase in coverage and complexity as the patient ages. The
results help participants, who may not yet know they have health issues,
to detect illnesses and treat diseases at an early stage. In 2016, six percent
of participants were found to have developed diabetes while nine percent
were diagnosed with hypertension.

AHLL targeted corporates, which already pay for some portion of
healthcare for employees, to pay for the annual Health Check. Last
year, Apollo Clinic performed about 200,000 Health Checks and these
accounted for roughly 17 percent of AHLL’s individual patients. When the          “Early screening,
annual Health Check program is sponsored by a corporate, the employer
                                                                                  compliance to
gets a summary report of aggregate scores and non-confidential health
information. If the indicators disclose a high propensity for diseases, for       medications, and
instance, employees who have been diagnosed with diabetes or those who            appropriate care at the
are at high risk for developing diabetes, AHLL will work with employers
                                                                                  appropriate time, all
to design interventions to improve their health at an early stage before it
becomes costlier.                                                                 bring down the costs of
                                                                                  healthcare.”
Ms. Sangita Reddy, one of Dr. Prathap Reddy’s daughters and Joint
Managing Director of Apollo Hospital Group explained, “If you invest in
early screening and you find a condition, it is far more likely to be treated     Ms. Sangita Reddy, Joint
with less invasive techniques that are cheaper. If it is detected at a later
stage, more aggressive treatment or surgery may be required, which is
                                                                                  Managing Director of
more painful for the patient and more expensive to treat.” She is a firm          Apollo Hospital Group
believer that early screening, compliance to medications, and appropriate
care at the appropriate time, all bring down the costs of healthcare.




                                                                                          Creating Healthcare Markets | 7
APOLLO SUGAR

Diabetes is one of the most significant rising health issues in India. According to the International Diabetes
Federation around 70 million people have diabetes in India. Many of those with diabetes receive poor quality
or no treatment.7 In addition, millions of Indian’s are not diagnosed until the disease has reached advanced
levels and more involved treatment is required. This leads to serious complications such as blindness, the need to
amputate the toe, foot or leg, and severe kidney disease requiring dialysis or a kidney transplant. When thinking
about how to address the diabetes epidemic, Apollo management spoke with endocrinologists, diabetologists,
general practitioners, patients, and nurses and realized that care was highly fragmented.

                                                 Ms. Sangita Reddy explained: “Patients did not have a common dialogue,
                                                 team, or care plan. Everyone was doing some portion of caring for the
                                                 patient but it could be far more integrated and far more uniform. That was
                                                 where the idea of the diabetes condition management program was born.
                                                 We piloted it and the first 3,000 patients were achieving greater compliance
                                                 and better results with HbA1c below 6.0 within the first three months.8
                                                 Although diabetes is not reversible, below 6.0 is considered under control.
                                                 Our doctors came back and said, ‘Wow! We are really excited about this
                                                 and see implications for population health to avert complications arising
        Given the rising                         from uncontrolled diabetes and we would like to scale this.’ It was then
        diabetes crisis                          that we decided to create a separate team and give it the required focus and
        worldwide, IFC has                       resources.”

        started to see an                        DIABETES CARE MANAGEMENT
        increase in similar                      AHLL adopted a holistic approach to treating diabetes at various stages
        efforts to Apollo Sugar                  of development, ranging from pre-diabetics to Type 2. Since diabetes is a
        starting up in other                     lifestyle disease, it combines integrated clinical care with improved behavioral
                                                 approaches. It provides counseling on diet, nutrition, food habits, sleep
        markets. For instance,
                                                 patterns and exercise to help patients cope better. The goal is to prevent
        Clinicas Azucar (Sugar
                                                 further complications and help diabetics lead a completely normal life.
        Clinics) was launched
                                       It has two tiers of care depending on the level of complexity of diagnosis.
        in Mexico.
                                       “Sugar Clinics” are simplified clinics that are geared at treating pre-diabetics
                                       or diabetics with minor complications. They range in size and are co-located
as a “Shop-within-a-Shop” at either Apollo Clinics or Apollo Hospitals. Its Advanced Diabetes Management
Centers are tertiary care centers, located at Apollo Hospitals, which address the major complications. It is staffed
by specialist doctors that care for complications of the foot, kidney, thyroid and eyes.




7
    	 International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas, 7 ed. Brussels, Belgium: International Diabetes Federation, 2015.
8
    	 According to the American Diabetes Organization, “HbA1c is a measure of glucose control over the prior 2 to 3 months. The test measures the
      amount of glucose that has attached to a portion of the hemoglobin molecule in the blood.” The indicator tells the doctor how well or poorly
      a diabetic’s glucose level has been controlled over a longer period of time. The higher the level of HbA1c, the greater the risk of developing
      diabetes-related complications. Below 6 is considered normal. 6.0 to 6.4 is considered pre-diabetes. Above 6.5 is considered diabetes.




8 | Creating Healthcare Markets
AHLL offers patients three packages of care. “Sugar One,” is a comprehensive diagnosis package performed in
one day. It checks for all the diabetes related complications, provides a doctor consultation, as well as diet and
lifestyle counseling. See Figure 1. “Sugar 90” helps patients to better control their diabetes, as evidenced by
reduced HbA1c levels and provides support to manage the condition for 90 days. “Sugar 360” helps patients
manage the condition for one year. The long term care programs have demonstrated the ability to significantly
improve the control of diabetes. For example, for patients enrolled in Sugar 360, HbA1c values come down by an
average of 34 percent between the enrollment and the third visit.

           FIGURE 1: SUGAR ONE - A COMPREHENSIVE DIABETES DIAGNOSIS PACKAGE




The incidence of diabetes varies across regions and is higher in the south of India, due to genetics and a very
high rice-eating population. Rice, having a very high glycemic index, has resulted in a much higher incidence of
diabetes in certain parts of India. As a result, AHLL commenced Sugar operations in Southern India.




                                                                                         Creating Healthcare Markets | 9
APOLLO DIAGNOSTICS

The Given the critical role that diagnostics play in accurately detecting, preventing and managing diseases, Apollo
wanted to upgrade the quality of diagnostics available in the market and expand its accessibility to a wider
network of doctors and patients.

The diagnostic laboratory market in India is highly fragmented and lacks a national provider. Almost 90 percent
of the market is comprised of small operators and a number of labs are of poor quality. AHLL also saw a critical
unmet need in the market—there was an absence of quality providers of the most commonly needed, basic tests
that were in high demand by doctors, such as the blood profile and glucose test.

Most large players avoided the basic tests because it raised costs. To provide the results within four to six hours
as doctors prefer, more labs were needed and the labs needed to be located in close physical proximity to the
collection point. As a result, the competition tended to focus on higher-end testing, such as specialty tests for the
thyroid, Hba1c and maternity markers, which could be turned around within 24 to 72 hours. Apollo Diagnostics
wanted to serve doctors and patients better and is creating a network that can to do both basic testing and
specialty tests with a turnaround time of 6 hours.

AHLL also wanted to raise the quality of the test results. The way that the local industry was collecting blood
samples was antiquated. It would draw the blood through a needle into a generic tube and later split up and label
the samples. This method is not as accurate and leaves room for human error as patient samples could easily
get transposed. AHLL adopted modern technology that is significantly more precise. It collects blood samples
in vacuum tubes that are specially coated with a substance that is appropriate for the test being performed and
ensures stability of the sample. It invested heavily in infrastructure and created a system that is highly-automated
and tech-enabled. It bar-codes samples at the collection point and they move through the network appropriately
labeled.

As of March 2017, AHLL has already established 44 labs in multiple cities and serves 500,000 patients per
year. It expects to grow to 70 labs next year. In addition, AHLL saw opportunities in offering hospital lab
management services for mid-sized hospitals that are typically managing 100 to 150 beds in smaller towns. The
smaller hospitals gained quality and economies of scale. It began this service a year and half ago and is currently
managing labs in 17 hospitals.

CROSS-MARKETING SYNERGIES

With the aim of providing patients with better care and positioning consumers for earlier preventative care, Apollo
has leveraged its network to mine data which can be used to improve care.

For example, AHLL connects with Apollo Pharmacy patients who purchase diabetic drugs and provides them
with information about Sugar’s disease-management solutions. Through Apollo Clinics, women who come to be
tested for pregnancy or to have monitoring ultrasounds are informed about Apollo Cradle’s “natural is priceless”
initiative. This helps women better manage pregnancy weight gain—a big problem in India—and increase their
chances of having a natural delivery with fewer complications. AHLL has used cross-marketing strategies to
generate leads with the belief that if something is detected, the probability that the consumer will seek successful
treatment at an Apollo facility is higher.




10 | Creating Healthcare Markets
Apollo Cradle’s “natural
is priceless” initiative,
helps women better
manage pregnancy
weight gain—a big
problem in India—and
increase their chances
of having a natural
delivery with fewer
complications.




                                                               Photo © AHLL




                            Creating Healthcare Markets | 11
12 | Creating Healthcare Markets
SELECTED FEATURES OF THE
BUSINESS MODEL

GROWTH STRATEGY

AHLL currently has a presence in 17 out of 29 states and seven union territories. See Figure 2. As it grows, it
takes into consideration city population, economic segmentation and buying behavior. It began in Chennai, in the
South of India, where the first Apollo hospital was established and has expanded regionally in clusters. The cluster
approach also allows AHLL to leverage synergies across formats. For instance, when Clinics, Diagnostics, and
Sugar are located in the same city, Sugar is embedded inside Clinics and Diagnostics takes over the pathological
processing.


                                     FIGURE 2: MAP OF AHLL’S FOOTPRINT




                                                                                           Creating Healthcare Markets | 13
Depending on the location, it will pursue a blend of franchise and organic growth. In large cities where it has the
potential to do multiple clinics, AHLL will establish and manage its own clinics as a network. In smaller, remote
towns, where it is only feasible to set up one clinic, it manages expansion through franchises.

FRANCHISE MANAGEMENT

AHLL currently manages 40 franchisee-owned clinics. Most of the clinics in India are single-doctor clinics, leaving
few opportunities for acquisition of multiple specialties in the primary clinic market. As a result, when AHLL
looks to expand, they seek entrepreneurs who have a strong service mindset, experience running medium-sized
businesses in the service industry and have a desire to get into healthcare. While this appears counterintuitive,
AHLL found that partners who are not doctors can integrate and manage the business aspects of multiple
specialties under one roof more effectively. They have found that multi-specialty franchise clinics that are run by
doctors survive but they do not thrive. As a result, AHLL prefers to rely on doctors for clinical management in
this this type of multi-specialty clinic.

For single specialties, such as Sugar, the approach is different. Here, AHLL prefers to enter into business
partnerships with doctors, typically endocrinologists and senior diabetologists. The advantage of working with a
senior doctor is that the physician already has an established business with a good reputation in that market. This
allows AHLL to scale up faster—without the complications of integrating it into a multi-specialty environment.

TARGET MARKET

AHLL found that it took some time for the market to evolve toward a concept that shifted primary care to a
branded corporate chain of clinics. Over time, it has seen that clinics in very large urban markets—where people
are younger, more mobile, and living in nuclear households—are more successful in attracting patients and
perform better financially. In markets where the population is older and already has an established relationship
with a long-time doctor, uptake has been slower. This is why AHLL is very selective about location.




14 | Creating Healthcare Markets
COMPETITION

Given that AHLL is pioneering new integrated formats, competition for Clinics, Sugar, Diagnostics and Dental is
largely fragmented at the individual doctor’s office level. AHLL’s advantage is (1) the assurance that the patient
will be seen by a quality doctor, (2) convenience of being able to access quality services in a single facility (3) the
holistic, versus episodic, nature of the disease management program and (4) significantly improved accuracy of
AHLL’s diagnostic tests

For Cradles and Spectra the main competitors are large multi-specialty hospitals and small nursing homes,
facilities that are licensed to do basic surgeries and other specialty hospitals. The main differentiators for Cradles
are clinical quality and the patient experience. It has Level 3, the highest end, Neonatal Intensive Care Units
(NICU). For Spectra, it has nearly eliminated hospital acquired infection.

AHLL is enjoying first mover advantage. While some elements of its formats are being copied on a stand-alone
basis, none of its competitors are replicating AHLL’s integrated strategy. None are in a position to benefit from
the synergies that the group is generating across the different business formats, or referrals from the main AHEL
hospital network.

NO INTRA-NETWORK CANNIBALIZATION

When AHLL was exploring adding the Spectra and Cradle concepts, it heard many concerns from its colleagues at
Apollo Hospitals about potential for cannibalization of lucrative services. Doctors asked: “If we set up diagnostics
centers or surgical hospitals that can deliver services at a lower price point than the hospital, wouldn’t we be
cannibalizing our hospital business?”




                                                                                               Creating Healthcare Markets | 15
AHLL management had a different view. Neeraj Garg explains, “The reality is that the Indian market is very large
and even though Apollo is one of the largest providers, it still has a small market share. By setting up Spectras
in the community and setting up services in a way that is complementary and most appropriate, we can lead the
market with convenience, affordability, clinical quality and a better experience. If we don’t do it, somebody else
will, because this is how healthcare is evolving. Further, if the hospital is able to increase its inpatient revenues at
the cost of shifting outpatient care to smaller formats, this would be better for patients and for the bottom line. So
a decision was taken to create processes and structures that reinforce each other to minimize that cannibalization.”

AHLL decided to focus the types of surgeries that Spectra offers around specialties such as: ear, nose and throat,
urology, general surgery; Apollo Hospitals concentrate on cardiovascular, neurology, oncology and cancer. There
is some overlap in orthopedic surgery but by ensuring that the doctors’ operating at Apollo Spectra are distinct
from those operating at Apollo Hospitals, the net effect has been largely additive and Apollo’s overall market share
in those cities has increased.

                                        SKILLS GAP

                                        The “War for Talent” is a challenge AHLL faces every day as it tries to
                                        grow the business. The biggest barrier to growth and performance is
                                        finding appropriate quality of talent at the right time and at the right
                                        cost. Even though Apollo runs 12 nursing schools and colleges, supply is
                                        inadequate and demand is so high that even Apollo Hospitals cannot fill
                                        vacant positions from these nursing colleges. Thus, AHLL is dependent on
                                        the open market. It has come to the conclusion that it is not possible to
                                        hire the right candidate with all the needed skill sets from outside, so it has
        AHLL has created                decided to aggressively upskill and upgrade talent internally until they are
        its own six-month               capable of achieving the standards AHLL is looking for.

        program to certify              Nurses, phlebotomists (technicians who draw blood), and diabetes
        nurses on more                  educators are the three most common positions that are highly skill
        advanced skills such            dependent and for which it has created structured programs. AHLL created
                                        its own six-month program to certify nursing superintendents and nurses
        as infection control.
                                        on more advanced skills. The course is offered on Sundays—the only day
        This has contributed            off nurses get but the interest in participating was high. It has created
        to near-zero hospital           regional in-house diabetes educators who train the staff at Sugar clinics. In
        infection rates at its          addition, it runs courses in partnership with Becton Dickenson, a very large
                                        provider of diagnostics’ consumables, for phlebotomists. This is over and
        Spectra hospitals.
                                        above on-the-job training that is provided, which is a continuous exercise.
                                        It places a lot of emphasis on making learning fun.


INTEGRATED IT PLATFORM

Integrating the flow of information across all the AHEL and AHLL platforms was a bigger challenge than
expected; however, AHLL has created a cloud-based, data efficient platform that is based on a unique patient
identification number that is common across all AHLL formats. Using a cloud-based data warehouse, Apollo has
now been able to integrate patient information across its’ tertiary care hospitals and the various AHLL formats
- Cradle, Spectra, Clinics, Diagnostics and Sugar. Dental and Dialysis will be phased-in later in 2017. For labs,
AHLL is creating a custom solution that is independent and will be subsequently integrated. This solution will
allow seamless flow of patient information across all the formats, including Apollo Hospitals.


16 | Creating Healthcare Markets
DIVERSIFICATION OF REVENUE STREAMS

The company is diversi ed through its integrated approach of portfolio concepts and formats. In addition, it
is continuously diversifying its service lines by format. For instance, in a clinic, there are consultation services,
diagnostics, preventative Health Checks, vaccinations, dental treatments, physiotherapy, all of which represent
different revenue streams for the company. AHLL tries to avoid looking at revenue as a single line item for a
format, rather it breaks each format into several different revenue streams and balances the focus around each of
those streams.

REVENUES

At the end of its 2016 scal year, total unaudited revenues were estimated at Rs4.3 billion ($64 million). In 2016,
AHLL’s two hospital formats, Spectra and Cradles, together brought in about 45 percent of revenues. Clinics and
Spectra were each responsible for about 30 percent of revenues. Although the youngest formats—Diagnostics,
Dental, Sugar and Dialysis are only about two years old—combined, they brought in a quarter of revenues. About
20 percent of Cradle’s and about 40 percent of Spectra’s revenues are paid by insurance. Corporate provided
health contracts account for about one third of Clinic revenues. All other services are paid on an out-of-pocket
basis because health insurance in India does not cover a large number of preventative care services.

                                  FIGURE : ESTIMATED FY                                 REVENUES
                                                    (April 2016 - March 2017)
                                                   AHLL FY 2016 Revenues
                                                           (April 2016 - March 2017)
                                                             Sugar Dialysis
                                                              5%     1%

                                              Dental
                                               11%
                                                                                                 Spectra
                                                                                                  31%


                              Diagnostics
                                  8%




                                   Cradles
                                     13%




                                                                              Clinics
                                                                               31%
                                    Spectra      Clinics   Cradles   Diagnostics    Dental   Sugar   Dialysis

FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY

The recent expansion in the network has driven a very rapid growth in revenues. Over the last three years
(FY13-FY16), it experienced a compounded annual growth rate of 49 percent. While the network is still young,
it has added about 75 percent of its facilities in the last three years, and is expected to become EBIDTA positive
asthebusiness matures in the next few years.9


9
    EBITDA is an acronym for Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization. It is a measure of a company’s cash ow
    and allows investors to see how much money a company is making before its deductions.
                                                                                                                Creating Healthcare Markets | 17
18 | Creating Healthcare Markets
THE ROLE OF IFC

Apollo and IFC have a long history of partnering together that began in 1998. Over a period of 20 years, IFC has
made five investments totaling nearly $190 million in equity and loans. Apollo’s reach and drive for quality has
made it an ideal long-term partner. The earlier investments achieved positive financial and social impact results and
helped to catapult Apollo into a major national and strong global player.

In 2016, when AHLL was raising capital for expansion, it ran a competitive process and received various offers,
including from IFC. Apollo values its longstanding strategic relationship with IFC and was interested in continuing
to cultivate and leverage it. Ms. Reddy explained, “AHLL decided to partner again with IFC not only because of its
wide reach in healthcare, but also because it was an ethical, long-term partner that appreciates the developmental
and innovative role our companies play. We knew that AHLL would of course achieve commercial results, but it
would need a little patience to get there and IFC was the right partner for that.”

In addition, AHLL was interested in leveraging the breadth of IFC’s global healthcare knowledge and experience.
AHLL believes that many of the models it is building in India have good potential for expansion into other
markets and once the operations have reached a comfortable growth stage, AHLL intends to expand its model
internationally.

IFC was interested in continuing the relationship with Apollo because the investment would promote broader
access to quality health services, would promote skill development of medical professionals and would create jobs.
In addition, its holistic approach to prevention and chronic disease management could provide a demonstration
effect.

The project was aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy for India to promote social
inclusion. Further, the WBG’s Private Participation for Health in India Initiative identified India’s hospital centric
healthcare delivery system as a poor fit for addressing India’s rising incidence of chronic diseases. It recommended
exploring other, lower cost, models of delivering care that foster stronger linkages between primary care facilities,
diagnostic centers, other providers and hospitals. By IFC investing in smaller format centers, this recommendation
could begin to be implemented.

For this deal IFC also brought in its Asset Management Company, who provided 50 percent of the financing
through a newly established private equity Asia Fund. Together, IFC and AMC took an equity stake of Rs 4.50
billion ($67 million) to help AHLL grow the small format concept and expand the network to locations that are
closer to where patients live.




                                                                                            Creating Healthcare Markets | 19
20 | Creating Healthcare Markets
CONCLUSION

For three decades, Apollo has stood for a brand that responds to the needs of patients by filling gaps in the market.
It is working to change the culture in India so that healthcare is not viewed through the lens of a single episodic
event, but rather over the entire lifecycle of the individual. Today, Apollo is providing a lifetime of care across
a continuum. It is imparting quality care to the tiniest of patients who need the highest-level neonatal care to
survive. It is helping adults to detect diseases earlier through regular screening. It is helping mid-lifers to manage
chronic lifestyle diseases and address targeted health issues through planned surgery and it is caring for seniors
who need critical services in tertiary care hospitals.

While it is still early days in AHLL’s journey, indications suggest that it will continue to play a defining role in a
number of transformations that are underway in India. Service delivery is moving away from the hospital and into
the clinic and the home. AHLL is leading a greater integration of care that is delivered by a team of professionals
from different disciplines to provide a more holistic and effective approach to care. As the role of the patient also
evolves from a passive recipient of care to that of an informed seeker of care, AHLL is helping patients to adopt
behavioral and lifestyle changes that prevent illness and help them to successfully manage chronic conditions over a
long term.

In many countries, insurance drives the changes in the marketplace but in India, AHLL is paving the way for a
greater acceptance of procedures that are delivered in a way that will improve health outcomes at earlier stages and
bring down costs both for the patient and for the overall healthcare system.

As Apollo works hard to provide healthcare solutions at each stage of human development, it is extending life
expectancy and improving quality of life for millions of patients – because life is priceless.




                                                                                           Creating Healthcare Markets | 21
STAY CONNECTED

WEB: www.ifc.org/health

LINKEDIN: www.linkedin.com/company/ifc-health

TWITTER: #ifchealth
For more information about IFC’s investments in health please contact:

Elena Sterlin                                     Chris McCahan
Global Manager, Health and Education              Global Lead, Health Care
Email: Esterlin@ifc.org                           E-mail: cmccahan@ifc.org
Washington, D.C., USA                             Washington, D.C., USA
www.ifc.org/education                             www.ifc.org/health
www.ifc.org/health




2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000
