        Trust Fund for Environmentally &
        Socially Sustainable Development
                                 (TFESSD)

             COMPLETION REPORT TO
DRAFT         DEVELOPMENT DONORS
                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




An online form of this report can be found on the TFESSD website at
http://worldbank.org/tfessd
May 2017




The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433




The Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development (TFESSD) is jointly
funded by the Governments of Norway and Finland. This Completion Report draws upon all the
contributions of the many task teams who have worked with TFESSD funding.




Photo Credits: Photographs used in this publication have been sourced from the World Bank
Flickr website and from task team leaders of the TFESSD funded grants.




2
                                                                                                            TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




CONTENTS
ACRONYMS ...................................................................................................................................... 4
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ................................................................................................................... 5
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................... 6
REFLECTIONS ON 15 YEARS OF TFESSD ........................................................................................... 7
    Mainstreaming Sustainable Development at the World Bank .................................................... 9
PORTFOLIO HIGHLIGHTS ............................................................................................................... 12
RESULTS BY WINDOW ................................................................................................................... 16
    Environment Window ................................................................................................................ 16
    Poverty Window ........................................................................................................................ 23
    Social Development ................................................................................................................... 27
    Social Protection and Labor ....................................................................................................... 32
LESSONS LEARNED ........................................................................................................................ 37
ANNEX 1: 2017 CLOSING FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR TFESSD ...................................................... 40
ANNEX 2: LIST OF PROJECTS, CLOSING DATES AND DISBURSEMENTS .......................................... 41
ANNEX 3: MULTIMEDIA SOURCES (YOUTUBE, INTERNET, PHOTOS) ............................................. 53
ANNEX 4: Key TFESSD Supported Reports and Media in 2014/2015 ............................................ 58




3
                                                               TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

ACRONYMS

    APEC     Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
    ARD      Agriculture and Rural Development
    ASPIRE   The Atlas of Social Protection Indicators of Resilience and Equity
    CDD      Community-driven Development
    DEC      Development Economics Group
    DFID     UK Department for International Development
    DIME     Development Impact Evaluation
    DPF      Development Policy Financing
    ECA      Europe and Central Asia
    ENR      Environment and Natural Resources
    FCPF     Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
    GIZ      German Agency for International Cooperation
    IE       Impact Evaluation
    IEG      Independent Evaluation Group
    LAC      Latin America and the Caribbean
    MDGs     Millennium Development Goals
    MDTF     Multi-Donor Trust Fund
    MENA     Middle East North Africa
    PSIA     Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
    PwC      PricewaterhouseCoopers
    SDC      Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
    SDGs     Sustainable Development Goals
    SDN      The World Bank’s Sustainable Development Network
    SP       Social Protection
    SSN      Social Safety Net
    TFESSD   Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development
    TTLs     Task Team Leaders
    WBG      World Bank Group
    WDR      World Development Report




4
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development (TFESSD) is jointly
funded by the Governments of Norway and Finland. This Final Report to the TFESSD donors
draws on the contributions of all the many task teams working with TFESSD funding. Based on
the inputs from the various Window managers, Task Team Leaders and others, this report has
been compiled to document the many activities and projects that this Trust Fund funded.




What is the TFESSD?
The Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development (TFESSD) was created
in December 1999, to support the World Bank’s fight for sustainable poverty reduction. The
Fund provides flexible additional financing for innovative analytical and project work, while
acting as a catalyst for encouraging Bank personnel to incorporate environmentally and socially
sustainable development issues in all their work. The Trust Fund originally began as a
Norwegian-endowed ‘umbrella’ trust, replacing many separate Norwegian trust funds to
streamline and increase efficiency and effectiveness of Norwegian trust funds in the World
Bank. In 2002, the Finnish Ministry of Foreign Affairs joined the trust fund as a funding partner.
Since inception in 1999, US$148.5 million have been received in donor contributions and more
than 500 activities have been approved, with US$30 million of this focused on climate change.
Half the funding is earmarked to Sub-Saharan Africa.

TFESSD provides grant resources for World Bank activities aimed at mainstreaming the
environmental, social and poverty-reducing dimensions of sustainable development into the
Bank work. It develops Bank and client country capacity, promotes inclusion of sustainable
development issues into Bank operations, and fosters cooperation between different units on
the World Bank and with external agencies and groups.

TFESSD activities are managed in four Windows which correspond to the four Sector Boards
(Environment, Social Development, Poverty and Social Protection) managing the Fund. TFESSD
is now in the process of phasing out its activities.




5
                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

INTRODUCTION

The journey of TFESSD is the journey of the Millennium Development Goal era,
setting the stage for a new focus on sustainable development.
In 1999, the Government of Norway established an umbrella trust fund to consolidate its
various thematic investments across the World Bank and strengthen the emphasis of
sustainability in development. In particular, Norway was interested in linking environment
more closely with social development and poverty. In 2002 Finland joined the fund, and the
Trust Fund for Environmental and Socially Sustainable Development (TFESSD) as we know it was
born.

Seventeen years later, TFESSD has closed down, with a portfolio of 531 projects worth over
US$145 million.

Looking back, TFESSD’s journey has followed that of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG)
era. TFESSD financed cutting-edge social and environmental projects, such as climate change
analysis, social protection, community-driven development, and poverty impact analysis. It was
a trailblazer in many areas, including knowledge, partnerships, and inclusive development. For
some time, TFESSD was the only World Bank unit providing funding for analysis on disability in
development.

The bulk of TFESSD’s activities took the form of analytic work, which helped the World Bank
reflect on, and mainstream, environmental and social issues as it geared up to deliver on the
MDGs. For example, on climate change adaptation, TFESSD activities helped the World Bank
integrate many new concepts, tools, approaches, and data into its work with low income and
lower-middle income clients.

Today, as the development world embarks on a new set of goals – the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) – it is clear that many of TFESSD’s activities have helped lay a strong
foundation at the World Bank to deliver on the SDGs. Many of the emerging issues that TFESSD
funded have taken on new prominence at the Bank, such as climate change adaptation, social
protection, poverty impact evaluations, and community-driven development. Donors are also
exploring options for further funding.

This report looks back at TFESSD’s impact over the years. With more than 530 projects, it is
impossible to cover them all. Rather, this report highlights key projects that give a snapshot of
the trust fund’s accomplishments over the years by window and lessons learned.




6
                                                                           TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

REFLECTIONS ON 15 YEARS OF TFESSD

TFESSD provided grant resources for World Bank Group activities aimed at mainstreaming the
environmental, social, and poverty-reducing dimensions of sustainable development into Bank
work. It developed World Bank Group and client country capacity, promoted inclusion of
sustainable development issues into Bank operations, and fostered cooperation between
different units on the WBG and with external agencies and groups.

The trust fund also provided funding for analysis in areas that weren’t yet prioritized by client
governments or country teams, filling an important gap. It operated through four windows,
each focusing on a specific theme and mirroring the World Bank’s sectors: Environment,
Poverty, Social Development and Social Protection and Labor.

TFESSD’s flexible nature allowed Bank country teams to experiment with innovative new
approaches, contributing over time to building a track record for social and environmentally
sustainable approaches.


BOX 1: Highlights of TFESSD’s impacts on the World Bank

       TFESSD projects have brought new mainstreamed approaches to development at the
        World Bank in the areas including poverty and social impact analysis, climate change, and
        community-driven development.
       Seed funding provided by TFESSD to develop a Social Protection database has helped the
        World Bank become a global leader in Social Protection.
       TFESSD funded studies that shifted the dialogue on issues, such as informality in the labor
        market, community-driven development, and land regularization in Liberia.
       TFESSD projects directly influenced the World Bank’s Social Development Strategy and
        the Social Policy, and contributed to rolling out the World Bank’s environment strategy.
       The trust fund has had an impact on country-level policies across regions by providing
        inputs to national policies through analysis and capacity building.
       In many cases, work funded by TFESSD set the stage for future Bank operations, such as
        community-driven development work in Indonesia.
       TFESSD enable the World Bank to fund analyses on climate change adaptation and
        disability.




7
                                                                           TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

 “TFESSD was a coalition of good intentions coming together and saying, ‘We have a vision of
what social and environmental development is. We want to make it a reality.’ These good
intentions came together with a lot of individual, very good activities and successes driven by
the talented and hard-working Bank staff and their excellent client relationships,” noted
Rasmus Heltberg, former Program Manager for TFESSD.

TABLE 1: Key milestones in TFESSD’s history

    TIMELINE


    Year        Milestone


       1999     Norway establishes The Norwegian Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially
                Sustainable Development (NTFESSD)
       2000     UN adopts Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to reduce extreme poverty
                by 2015.
       2000     The Social Protection Sector is established at the World Bank.


       2001     The Poverty Window is added to the trust fund.


       2002     Finland joins the trust fund and its name is changed to TFESSD.


       2002     TFESSD begins a trailblazing pilot activity to measure air pollution in China,
                which is now a major issue for the country.
       2004     The Social Protection Window is established.

       2004     The World Bank introduces a new operational policy focused on analytic work,
                which becomes one of TFESSD’s main focus areas
       2007     TFESSD begins adopting a thematic approach to its calls for proposals in
                response to growing demand at the World Bank and among donors
       2007     The World Bank establishes the Social Development Network, merging the
                Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development and Infrastructure
                networks.
       2008     Independent Evaluation by COWI finds that of TFESSD has influenced the
                mainstreaming of sustainable development approaches at the Bank
       2010     TFESSD funding for Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) leads to the
                establishment of a new PSIA trust fund.


8
                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

    2011       Indonesia launches its flagship countrywide poverty reduction program, which
               was based on ten years of successful CDD experience co-financed by TFESSD
               and the Urban Poverty Program.
    2012       Launch of the World Bank’s social protection database, The Atlas of Social
               Protection Indicators of Resilience and Equity (ASPIRE), for which TFESSD
               provided seed funding
    2012       Independent Evaluation by PwC finds that TFESSD has been an important
               vehicle for the Bank’s efforts to strengthen its approaches to socially and
               environmentally sustainable development, with the most apparent impact on
               Bank operations.
    2014       Influenced by analysis funded by TFESSD, the World Bank hires a Disability
               Advisor and prepares a new disability-inclusion and accountability framework
               for mainstreaming disability across its work.
    2015       TFESSD funds two events focused on knowledge sharing: the Second Asia
               Regional Conference on Scaling up and Mainstreaming Community-Driven
               Development March 24-27, 2015 in Cebu, Philippines; and a workshop on
               Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters in Livingstone,
               Zambia October 20-22, 2015.
    2016       UN adopts the SDGs, formally known as Transforming our World: The 2030
               Agenda for Sustainable Development – a set of 17 global goals with 169 targets
               between them to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure prosperity for all.
    2017       TFESSD formally closes.



Mainstreaming Sustainable Development at the World Bank
TFESSD was established with very broad goals in mind. According to its 2002 trust fund
agreement, TFESSD’s overall objective was to:

“Act as a catalyst for mainstreaming of environmental, social and poverty dimensions of
sustainable development and for inclusion of these cross-cutting issues into the Bank’s
operations, both at headquarters and in the field.”

There were also numerous sub-objectives, including: More effective donor support;
encouraging partner dialogue; promoting innovation; targeting poverty; nurturing collaboration
across sectors, countries, and regions; increasing cooperation within the World Bank and UN
agencies; increasing south-south cooperation; building networks; focusing on the Africa region
and a preference for IDA countries; creating synergy with World Bank activities; and influencing
the Bank’s portfolio.

The TFESSD approach for achieving its goal centered around providing seed funding for projects
and analysis that would lead to better lending projects, strategies and policies. In turn, these
better projects would result in better outcomes, such as more informed policies that would
create better governance and improved conditions.


9
                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

FIGURE 1: TFESSD’s Approach to Mainstreaming Sustainable Development at the World Bank




TFESSD’s impact on the World Bank

There is no question that TFESSD had a positive impact on World Bank operations and in many
ways succeeded in its objectives. A 2012 Independent Evaluation found that the ambitious trust
fund was an important vehicle for the World Bank’s efforts to strengthen its approaches to
socially and environmentally sustainable development; examples of successful mainstreaming
by TFESSD window are explored later in this report.

In addition, during its lifetime TFESSD contributed to strengthened analytical underpinnings and
innovative approaches in a number of sectors and countries.

Some of TFESSD’s effectiveness, however, may have been limited by several factors, including
the breadth of its mandate, the difficulty in monitoring long-term impact, and governance
issues, which are explored in the Lessons Learned section of this report.




10
                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT



 BOX 2: A Thematic Approach to Grants

 Each year, different priority areas were chosen in dialogue with donors, and a call for
 proposals was issued. The themes reflect the changing priorities among donors and the Bank
 over the years, including an increased focus on the environment, poverty, and social
 protection.

 2007:
     Natural disasters
     Inequality and barriers to inclusion, including a special focus on access to natural
       resources and vulnerable groups
     Crime, violence and access to justice, including tenure and usufruct rights
     Adaptation to climate variability and change

 2008:
     The role of institutions in protecting the productivity and resilience of ecosystems to
       enhance equity and sustainability
     Analyzing and mitigating environmental health risks to promote quality of life,
       productivity and equity
     Tenure security, livelihoods and access to municipal services for poor, urban slum
       dwellers
     Promoting decent work and social inclusion
     Promoting equity, addressing the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable, with
       particular focus on empowerment, promoting security and better livelihoods for
       marginalized groups

 2009: Adaptation to climate change

 2010:
     Climate change impacts and responses
     Food insecurity, financial shocks, and vulnerability

 2011: Shocks and Vulnerability

 2012: Reducing inequality and social exclusion




11
                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

PORTFOLIO HIGHLIGHTS

Through December 2015, TFESSD funded 531 projects across its four windows, disbursing more
than US$145 million.

The overview of approved budgets per window and per year show that the Environment and
Social Development windows received most funding overall, consistently over the course of the
program. While the Poverty window also saw proposals approved during all years except the
very first (2000), the annual portfolio was smaller than that of the Environment and Social
Development windows. From 2004 onwards, the Social Protection window saw a steadily
growing amount of proposals approved.

On a year-by-year basis, 2003 and 2008 clearly stand out with US$18–19 million of activity
approvals, while 2001 and 2006 are considerably lower at US$7–8 million. Towards the end of
the program the approved funding also decreased to the same level.

FIGURE 2: TFESSD window approvals by year, 2000– 12




12
                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Figure 3 shows the overall budget and number of activities per window. Both paint a similar
picture, with the Environment and Social Development windows close to equally accounting for
over 75 percent of the total TFESSD budget and over 65 percent of the number of activities,
leaving about 25 percent to 35 percent for the Poverty and Social Protection windows.

FIGURE 3: TFESSD total budget and activities per window




Regionally, TFESSD focused its activities mostly on Sub-Saharan Africa; US$49.3 million (equal to
34 percent) of the total TFESSD funding in 186 activities focus on this region. When taking into
account that the 132 global activities (US$46.8 million) also directly or indirectly addressed Sub-
Saharan Africa, 66 percent of the TFESSD funds and 61 percent of the activities have had an
impact on this region.

The five other regions received between US$8 million and US$13 million in funding, through 36
to 50 activities. In Europe and Central Asia (ECA), Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), and
the Middle East-North Africa (MENA) regions, the largest portion of the funds were spent
through regional activities, while in the East-Asia Pacific (EAP) region country-level activities
received more funding than regional ones.

The average regional activity costs were US$330,000, ranging from US$260,000 in ECA to
US$430,000 in SAR. The average country-level activity costs are considerably lower at
US$190,000, from US$100,000 in ECA to US$250,000 in LCR.




13
                                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

FIGURE 4: Geographic spread of TFESSD’s budget and number of activities




(This graphic does not include the 132 global activities amounting to US$46.8 million.)



MAP 1: Country-level TFESSD Projects

Map 1 depicts the allocation of funding by country with an aggregated total for each region. It
does not include the 132 regional or global activities. Africa received the bulk of funding as
intended, with the remaining regions receiving between US$9–13million in funding.

Overall, TFESSD projects in Africa demonstrate the value and impact that relatively small grants
can have across the region. Many of the projects in Africa with the highest measurable impact
were those where TFESSD-financed the collection of data, household surveys and maps that
were then used to pull together government leaders and others to directly change government
policies, or led to larger Bank-financed projects.




14
                                                                                  TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




(This map does not include the 132 global projects amounting to US$46.8million)




15
                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

RESULTS BY WINDOW

Environment Window

TFESSD supported the World Bank Group's overall efforts in helping client countries pursue
environmentally and socially sustainable development. The trust fund played an important role
in supporting the analytical foundation for mainstreaming environmental management efforts
in country dialogue and country assistance programs.

Through the Environment Window, environmental objectives were mainstreamed in
adjustment and investment operations, support to policy and institutional reforms was
expanded, and environmental health outcomes were more thoroughly emphasized.

TFESSD-financed projects also addressed linkages between poverty and environment by
investigating the relationships between poverty, environmental degradation, and health. In
addition, the trust fund financed studies intended to mainstream environmental considerations
into key private sectors such as agriculture, energy, and transportation.

FIGURE 5: Total environment window budget and number of activities, by region




Using TFESSD Funding Strategically

A 2012 Independent Evaluation conducted by professional services firm PwC found that the
World Bank’s Environment sector benefited most consistently from TFESSD funds. With a
strategy in place, the Environment sector used TFESSD funds to roll out the strategy and
combine innovation with operationally relevant analytical work that would have otherwise not
been funded.

TFESSD activities supported the overall objectives of the World Bank Group Environment
Strategy under the five key strategic themes:
16
                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

     1. Natural Resource Management

     2. Environmental Health

     3. Poverty-Environment Linkages

     4. Environmental Policies, Governance and Institutions

     5. Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change and Natural Disasters.




Featured Projects
Through the Environment Window, TFESSD funded 168 projects totaling US$53.4 million. Below
are some highlights:

 Project                       Impact
 The Hydro-Agronomic-            Introduced the concept of integration in addressing issues of
 Economic (HAE) Model for         climate change and water utilization in countries with a strong
 Mekong River Basin and           sectoral tradition.
 Local Adaptation in             Developed a methodological basis for model development that
 Thailand and Lao, PDR            is now being used in Thailand and Lao, PDR to help respond
 (TF093109)                       directly to the planning needs of various sectors such as
                                  irrigation, agriculture and energy.

 Economic Analysis of           Undertook a cost-benefit assessment and developed a
 Coastal Adaptation to           decision-making tool that improved the effectiveness of
 Climate Change in Senegal       strategies and investments of coastal adaptation to climate
 and the Gambia                  change in Senegal and the Gambia
 (TF095925)                     Helped initiate a process of long-term planning and resource
                                 mobilization for effective climate action.
                                Co-financed by grant resources from TFESSD and the Global
                                 Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR).

 Building the Analytical         Mainstreamed adaptation to climate variability and change
 Capacity to Mainstream           into the poverty-reduction strategies of Sub-Saharan African
 Adaptation to Climate            countries, and into the region’s country assistance strategies.
 Risk into Bank Operations       Helped operationalize the first two pillars of the World Bank
 in Africa: A Program             Africa Region’s Climate Change Strategy: to make adaptation a
 Approach (TF092659)              core component of development and to enable Bank and


17
                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

                               client countries’ capacity and fill gaps in knowledge related to
                               adaptation in rapidly expanding sectors such as transport.

 Impact and Process           Enhanced understanding of health, greenhouse gas, food
 Evaluation of Smallholder     security, and local environmental effects of smallholder
 Biogas in China               biogas and the factors leading to the successful
 (TF094735)                    implementation of projects.
                              Built knowledge aimed at helping scale up the use of biogas
                               and other clean fuels, and improve indoor air quality
                               initiatives in China, Sub-Saharan Africa, and other developing
                               countries.

 Using Forest to Enhance      Improved the understanding of the use of forests for
 Resilience to Climate         adaptation to enhance resilience to climate change.
 Change Project               Supported the data collection and an analysis on the role of
 (TF099814)                    forests for adaptation to changes caused by land use and
                               climate change specifically for the drinking water sector in
                               Honduras and the small holder agriculture sector in Lao PDR.
                              Disseminated knowledge to the relevant decision makers and
                               development practitioners to inform policy and project
                               development processes.

 The Economic and Social      Improved the understanding of the impacts of climate change
 Impacts of Climate Change     on agriculture in the MENA region and facilitated the
 on Agriculture in Middle      exchange of knowledge on policies and program supporting
 East and North Africa         adaptation.
 (MENA): A Regional           Delivered a coherent assessment through analytical models
 Analysis (TF093578)           and scenarios on the many threats posed by the changing
                               climate, specifically on agriculture.




18
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT


 CASE STUDY: Analytic Work with a Lasting Impact on the Natural Resource Management
 Community

 In Tanzania, TFESSD funds supported two components of a larger project to provide analytics
 of the charcoal sector. They were:

     1. A movie translating a previously completed
        Policy Note into a visual piece accessible to a
        broader community of stakeholders (in English
        and Swahili); and
     2. A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment and
        Political Economy Analysis of charcoal sector
        reforms.

 While the project’s immediate impact on Bank lending was limited, the impact on the Natural
 Resource Management community at large was quite significant and lasts to this day. The
 work undertaken with TFESSD funding continues to be acknowledged and referenced in
 studies on the topic of wood energy and charcoal in Africa, beyond Tanzania. Other
 development partners picked up the work and created projects around it (notably Swiss SECO
 and DFID in Tanzania).

 The theme of the analyses, wood-based biomass energy, has become a hot topic internally at
 the World Bank as well as other development partners, research institutions, and
 governments.

 “TFESSD is a much-missed source of funding for catalyzing innovative analytics that drive the
 frontier of the Bank’s – and other development partners’ – thinking on environmental and
 Natural Resource Management issues in client countries,” said Klas Sander, former TTL of the
 Tanzania charcoal analysis project.

 “My view is that by closing TFESSD we are missing out a lot on advancing the frontier of global
 ENR understanding and driving the debate and dialogue on how the Bank and other
 development partners can contribute to addressing those issues,” Sander added.




19
                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT


 CASE STUDY: Providing an Evidence Base for Reducing Inequality through Land Regularization

 TFESSD funded a project on Reducing Inequality through Land Regularization (TF010277) in
 Guatemala, which provided an evidence base on how land regularization can enhance equality
 and promoted a dialogue in Latin America on the issue.

 At the time, the World Bank was supporting the
 second phase of a Land Administration Program in         “We were very pleased and
 Guatemala and other countries in Latin America.          honored to count with the
 The TFESSD project’s findings and recommendations        support of TFESSD. We received
                                                          very good ideas during the
 proved very useful for dialogue and improving
                                                          review process of the proposal,
 activities, particularly those aimed at the rural poor
                                                          and then excellent support
 and indigenous communities.
                                                          during implementation.” --
                                                          Enrique Pantoja, World Bank
 Several key recommendations were reflected in the        TTL
 field work of activities to identify and register
 communal lands of peasant and indigenous communities in the cadastral database.

 Many of the instruments developed by the Bank-financed project, and improved with the
 results from the TFESSD-funded project, have been adopted at the institutional level, ensuring
 their broader impact. The project produced a final report was published and widely
 disseminated at international conferences and within Guatemala.

 The project also had a lasting impact on its implementation
 partners. The main counterpart in Guatemala, a local NGO called
 Pro-Peten, increased its capacity by participating in the project,
 thanks to its interaction with the international team of experts
 and methodologies applied during the field activities.

 Pro-Peten greatly appreciated the opportunity, and has
 continued to play a key role in helping to advance the rights of
 poor rural and indigenous communities in Guatemala.

 Participating communities benefited as well. Land access and
 rights is a very controversial issue in Guatemala and throughout
 the region, and a source of livelihood for many poor rural and
 indigenous communities.

 The TFESSD project equipped communities with knowledge about their rights, including
 through participatory mapping activities. Communities were trained and participated in
 clarifying their lands’ boundaries and current legal situation. In the medium term, this
 knowledge and capacity should help them defend their land rights, and protect one of their
 key assets.

20
                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT


 CASE STUDY: Sparking a Transformation in Liberia’s Land Policy

 TFESSD provided US$100,000 in funding to undertake an
 analytical study of Liberia’s land tenure system.

 The study, Liberia Insecurity of Land Tenure: Land Law and
 Land Registration in Liberia, examined land tenure security in
 Liberia as well as the land administration system after 20+
 years of war, and it proposed key recommendations that
 have changed the course of Liberia’s land policy.

 This study was instrumental in formulating what is now today
 Liberia’s land policy. Liberian President Ellen Sirleaf began
 the process by taking the study’s recommendation to form a
 Land Commission to begin changes to land security.

 President Sirleaf then appealed to the World Bank to start a project, and shortly thereafter,
 with another grant we obtained from a different source, a US$2.9 million Land Tenure Project
 was initiated with State and Peacebuilding Funds.

 Both the paper and the project marked the
 beginning of striking changes to Liberia’s land          “The paper produced has become
 policy, including a new draft land rights bill and key   the leading work on Land Tenure
 land administrative reform changes.                      in Liberia. The US$ 100,000
                                                          received [from TFESSD] was
 They also fostered a keen appreciation for land          enough to lead to a large policy
 issues, and other international donors joined the        transformation in Liberia that is
 World Bank in supporting Liberia’s five-year land        still thriving and ongoing.
 plan. Based on the number of donors attracted, the
 World Bank formed the first donors group, acting as      This series of events – from
 Chair for the first year.                                idea/concept to study, to project,
                                                          to impact – remains to date the
 The Land Commission, created and funded by the           achievement that I am most proud
 Liberian Government, is directly a result of the         of in my Bank career. Thank you
 TFESSD. The commission (http://www.landlib.org/)         TFESSD.”
 is now a thriving body that resolves land conflicts      – Nyaneba Nkrumah, World Bank
                                                          TTL
 and directs land policy in Liberia.




21
                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




 CASE STUDY: Feeding Global Knowledge on Scalability in Agriculture

 TFESSD funded a knowledge product on Lessons from Practice:
 Assessing Scalability and three case studies for the World Bank’s
 Agriculture and Rural Development (ARD) unit. These studies led
 to a follow-up external report on scaling up World Bank-
 supported ARD operations, funded from the World Bank budget.

 The external report generated considerable interest. It was
 highlighted in a presentation on scaling technologies by Rajiv
 Shah, then Administrator of the United States Agency for
 International Development. It was also highlighted and
 referenced in a number of development publications.




22
                                                                     TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




Poverty Window

The World Bank Group support for sustainable poverty reduction centers on action to broaden
opportunity, enhance empowerment, and strengthen security. Within this framework,
promoting broad-based growth was a critical priority, considering its proven importance in
reducing poverty.

Through the Poverty Window, TFESSD supported the World
Bank’s goals with evidence-based policy-making using          “Staff members report that
household survey data analysis and often real-time            TFESSD [Poverty Window] has
responses to specific client demands.                         remained a key source of
                                                              funding for robust analytical
Activities under the Poverty window were more strongly        work across countries and at a
geared toward global knowledge than other windows.            scale and depth otherwise not
                                                              affordable.”
In particular, they focused on strengthening in-country
capacity and analytics. Grants funded research to define and     --2012 Independent Evaluation
measure empowerment, as well as training and capacity-
building activities to support the decision-making and planning processes at the grassroots
level. Most of these activities were upstream World Bank studies that influenced policy
formulation and assessment. The trust fund also supported downstream monitoring and
evaluation, using participatory and quantitative mechanisms.

The Window operated in four main areas: shocks and vulnerability, employment, inequality of
opportunity, and impact evaluation.

FIGURE 6: Poverty window budget and activities, by region




23
                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Featured Projects
Through the Poverty Window, TFESSD funded 95 projects and disbursed US$18.8 million. Here
are some highlights:

 Project                     Impact
 Assessing Poverty and         Developed a methodology for predicting and evaluating the
 distributional impacts of      distributional impacts of the worldwide financial crisis,
 the financial crisis (TF       exploring differences across social groups.
 094729)                       Completed five country studies (Bangladesh, Philippines,
                                Mongolia and Poland), providing a strong base of evidence on
                                the different impacts of the crisis.
                               Informed WBG operations such as a policy loan in Poland and
                                the Emergency post-cyclone operation in Philippines.
                               Benefited analytical works including the Mexico Poverty
                                Report and economic updates for Bangladesh.
                               Report: The impact of the financial crisis on poverty and
                                income distribution: insights from simulations in selected
                                countries

 Natural Resources             Developed datasets and analytical foundations to help
 Management in                  policymakers and practitioners monitor the impact of shocks
 Mozambique (TF052779)          and determine the effectiveness of responses.

                               Developed a Socio-Economic Atlas that reported spatial
                                analysis of poverty and growth. The Atlas increased access to
                                socio-demographic and economic information, and informed
                                further analysis on the distributional impact of shocks.

                               Report: Mozambique then and now: an atlas of socio-
                                economic statistics - 1997-2007


 Implications of Climate       Projects centered on direct responses to climate change-
 Change for Economic            related shocks
 Policies in Asia-Pacific      Example: Implications of Climate Change for Economic Policies
 Economic Cooperation           in APEC, which explored the usefulness and applicability of
 (APEC) countries               market-based instruments and the institutional requirements
 (TF093403)                     for deploying such instruments in order to address climate
                                change. It enabled APEC countries to respond to climate-
                                based shocks quickly.
                               Report: The welfare effects of extreme weather events:
                                insights from three APEC case studies

24
                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

 Climate Volatility and the       Developed a framework for quantifying the impacts of climate
 Poor in Southern and              variability and change on the world’s poor. The framework
 Eastern Africa (TF092567)         was flexible and could be applied to other regions in Africa
                                   and the developing world.

                                  The case studies of Southern and Eastern Africa catalyzed
                                   more detailed analyses of that region.

                                  Report: Climate volatility and poverty vulnerability in Tanzania

 Socioeconomic Mobility           Analysis aimed at better understanding the determinants of
 and Inequality of Access          economic mobility and the growth of a stable middle class.
 to Employment in Europe          Included a profile of those vulnerable to downward and
 and Central Asia                  upward mobility, and aimed to link them to policies
 (TF010534)                        (education, taxation and social policy) in Moldova and
                                   Tajikistan.
                                  Report: Gender, mobility, and middle class in Europe and
                                   Central Asia: insights from qualitative research


 CASE STUDY: Trust Fund for Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA)

 TFESSD provided seed funding for the initial Poverty and Social Impact Analyses (PSIAs), which
 ultimately led to the establishment of a dedicated PSIA trust fund.

 The PSIA an analytical approach is used to assess the distributional and social impacts of policy
 reforms on various stakeholder groups. The tool can ensure that decision makers have a
 strong analytical and evidence-based foundation as they make a policy choice, especially if
 conducted before or during the reform process.

 In 2004, Development Policy Financing (DPF) began         “PSIA has made everyone more
 mandating poverty assessments to gauge if policy
                                                           aware of being mindful of the
 reform will negatively impact the poor. TFESSD
                                                           impacts on the poor. Good PSIAs
 funded the first pilot PSIAs in Africa with great
 success.                                                  have been disseminated that
                                                           have influenced demand.”
 These pilots led into other poverty impact analysis,
                                                      --Maria Beatriz Orlando, World
 eventually resulting in the establishment of a
 standalone PSIA Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) in     Bank Lead Social Specialist and
 2010 with support from DFID, GIZ, the Netherlands’   PSIA Program Manager.
 Ministry for Foreign Trade and Development
 Cooperation, Norway’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
 and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC).


25
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

 In the six years of its existence, the PSIA MDTF has funded more than 200 grants in over 80
 countries. PSIA outputs have taken different forms such as technical assistance, policy notes,
 inputs into larger pieces of analytical work, or stand-alone products. The analytical work is
 usually closely linked to the ongoing policy dialogue and complemented by a range of activities
 that aim to build partnerships, enhance national capacity, and raise awareness. PSIA closed in
 2016.



 CASE STUDY: Laying the Foundation for one of the World Bank’s Largest Impact Evaluation
 Programs

 TFESSD provided US$400,000 in funding to the Development Impact Evaluation (DIME) group
 in the Development Economics Group (DEC) to help kick-start a program of impact evaluation
 on private sector development as a driver of growth and inclusion, with a specific focus on
 marginalized populations and female entrepreneurs (TF010637).

 The funds were used to support a shift from piecemeal impact evaluations to a coordinated,
 programmatic approach to learn about the sector in a more systematic way. This included
 developing a community of practice and holding global workshops to bring together
 policymakers, practitioners and researchers to develop a learning agenda aimed at tackling
 some of the critical constraints to private sector-led growth. The funds were also used to
 support specific impact evaluations and leverage funds to expand the program.

 Through TFESSD support, the private sector Impact        “The original US$400,000
 Evaluation (IE) program is now one of the largest        support from TFESSD has been
 independent evaluation programs within the Bank. It      used to leverage millions of
 catalyzed what has now been a long-term                  dollars in project financing and
 engagement between DIME and the Trade and                trust fund support to continue
 Competitiveness Global Practice (previously the          the [private sector impact
 Financial and Private Sector Development Network).       evaluation] agenda.” –Aidan
                                                          Coville, World Bank TTL
 In addition, global IE workshops on private sector
 interventions have helped over 40 project teams
 develop and implement impact evaluations aimed at addressing common challenges identified
 in the learning agenda. The work has helped to understand and improve Bank investments in
 matching grants, business registration reforms, financial education, and business training, and
 it is expanding to address new focus areas within the Trade and Competitiveness global
 practice.

 The projects that the TFESSD supported are used to illustrate the potential impact evaluation
 can have in the sector and have been widely cited among operations and policy teams, as well
 as in academia.



26
                                                                       TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




Social Development


The Social Development Window was established to support innovation and experimentation
to move the WBG’s social development agenda forward.

The activities in this window supported analytical innovation and capacity development, and
focused on empowering poor and marginalized peoples to become active participants in the
development process. They paved the way for governments to craft policies and build
institutions that respond to the needs and demands
of the poor.                                              World Bank staff working in social
                                                          development believed TFESSD
The program also facilitated knowledge sharing in
                                                          made an important contribution
client countries and, in many instances, fostered         with its funding for upstream and
strong collaborative programs and partnerships in         impact analysis related to
areas such as social inclusion, community                 community-driven development,
empowerment, violence prevention, as well as              social accountability, and PSIAs,
community adaptation and resilience in response to        according to the 2012
shocks and climate change.                                Independent Evaluation.

It played an especially important role as, over the
years, social development themes came to the forefront of the Bank’s work, as highlighted in
several World Development Reports (WDRs) – Gender Equality and Development (2012), Jobs
(2013), Managing Risk for Development (2014), and Behavioral and Social Foundations of
Economic Development (2015).

FIGURE 7: Social Development window budget and activities, by region




27
                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Featured Projects
In total, TFESSD funded 164 projects through the Social Development window, disbursing
US$50.7 million. Here are some highlights:

 Project                       Impact
 The National Program for        The Government of Indonesia’s flagship poverty alleviation
 Community                        program.
 Empowerment (P122810)          It built on ten years of successful CDD experience in the
                                 Kecamatan Development Program (for which several studies
                                 and evaluations were co-financed by the TFESSD) and the Urban
                                 Poverty Program.
                                Covered both the rural and urban parts of Indonesia, and the
                                 rural area program was one of the world’s largest community-
                                 based poverty reduction programs.

 Improving Social Inclusion     Piloted and evaluated outreach interventions in selected
 in India's Health Insurance     districts that increased enrollment and utilization of hospital
 Scheme for the Poor             services among socially disadvantaged groups in Rashtriya
 (TF010269)                      Swasthiya Bima Yojana.
                                Initial findings indicated a small improvement in access to India's
                                 subsidized health insurance scheme among socially
                                 disadvantaged groups.


 The Large-Scale Land           Conducted research on large-scale land acquisition in 11
 Acquisition: Providing          countries in Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, Eastern
 Social Economic and             Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa in order to provide the key
 Environmental Guidance          pieces of information needed for an informed debate about
 project (TF094944)              large scale acquisition that could inform action by the Bank,
                                 policy-makers and other donors.
                                Resulted in a publication which was the one of the most
                                 downloaded publications at the World Bank in 2012 and 2013.
                                Report: Rising Global Interest in Farmland: Can It Yield
                                 Sustainable and Equitable Benefits?

 REDD+ Opportunity Costs        Produced a REDD+ Opportunity Costs training manual to
 Training Manual                 support client countries in their efforts to design policies and
                                 incentive mechanisms for reduced emissions from
                                 deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) by assessing and
                                 responding to the social and economic costs of REDD+ activities
                                 and programs.


28
                                                                     TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

                             The TFESSD grant complemented related technical preparatory
                              work funded by the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF),
                              which provides a collaborative platform and grants for countries
                              to develop national plans for REDD+ preparation.
                             Publication: REDD+ Opportunity Costs Training Manual

 Social Development          Prepared two significant social development flagship programs:
 Flagship Programs            Social Dynamics and Fragility, and Inclusion Matters: The
                              Foundation for Shared Prosperity.
                             Fragility: Enabled the WBG to engage more broadly on the issue
                              at the program and policy levels, both within the Bank and with
                              clients. Findings were operationalized in the field by supporting
                              re-engagement strategies in the Middle East, post-conflict and
                              youth integration operations in Africa, and urban development
                              in Latin America.
                             Social Inclusion: Provided a framework for understanding and
                              moving toward social inclusion and was intended for policy
                              makers, academics, activists, development partners, and
                              anyone curious about what inclusion means.
 Looking Beyond the          Flagship report focused on adapting rural livelihoods to climate
 Horizon: How Climate         change risks in the Balkans and Caucasus.
 Change Impacts and          It identified the exposure and vulnerability in the agricultural
 Adaptation Responses         sector to climate change, analyzed the potential impacts, and
 Will Reshape Agriculture     linked them to pragmatic adaptation responses in Albania,
 in Eastern Europe and        Macedonia, Moldova and Uzbekistan.
 Central Asia
                             The study won several awards for its innovative approach,
                              rigorous modelling techniques, knowledge of international and
                              local experts, and extensive stakeholder consultations at the
                              national and sub-national levels.
                             Report: Looking Beyond the Horizon: How Climate Change
                              Impacts and Adaptation Responses Will Reshape Agriculture in
                              Eastern Europe and Central Asia




29
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT



 CASE STUDY: The Success of Indonesia’s National Program for Community Empowerment

 The Indonesian National Program for Community Empowerment or Program Nasional
 Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM), which was launched in 2008, is the Government of
 Indonesia’s flagship poverty alleviation program.

 It builds on 10 years of successful CDD experience in the Kecamatan Development Program
 (KDP), for which multiple studies and evaluations were supported by the TFESSD and
 implemented by the Urban Poverty Program (UPP) between 1999 and 2011.

 PNPM’s development objectives are for villagers to benefit from improved socio-economic
 and local governance conditions. PNPM covers both the rural and urban parts of Indonesia,
 and the rural area program or PNPM-Rural is one of the world’s largest community-based
 poverty reduction programs, implemented nationwide in over 64,000 villages.

 The PNPM program has demonstrated significant impacts in terms of poverty reduction.
 Results from impact evaluations show that PNPM programs have enabled members of the
 community to eat better, to attend school for longer, to find jobs and set up businesses, to
 receive health care, and to participate in community and local political forums.

 “In addition to providing knowledge and experience, TFESSD activities [in Indonesia] were able
 to engage civil society organizations in a way that cumbersome national public expenditure
 procedures did not enable, hence demonstrating the value of engaging with civil society,”
 noted the 2012 Independent Evaluation.




30
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT



 CASE STUDY: Supporting Youth Empowerment through CDD in Africa

 This activity (TF010391) combined the analytical lessons from two sources – a global
 stocktaking of innovative youth inclusion, empowerment, and employment initiatives, as well
 as a country-level analysis of ongoing youth programs in Kenya, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone – to
 generate lessons that can feed into the design of CDD operations.
 The resulting publication was a global stocktaking report,
 Engaging Youth through CDD Operations, which was informed
 by the country-level diagnostic reports.

 Grant funding also supported several successful activities in
 the Bank-funded Sierra Leone Youth Employment Support
 Project, including training for a Community Organizations
 Committee and a targeting assessment.

 It supported two innovative pilots, one using smartphones to
 improve delivery of safety net programs, and the other
 allowing cash to be transferred through a mobile payment
 system in the project’s cash-for-work program.

 Due to political changes in Kenya, the planned work in that country was shifted to support a
 needs assessment study in the World Bank-funded South Sudan Skills Development Program,
 which allowed the project to align its skills training component with actual needs from private
 sector partners and beneficiaries.

 In Nigeria, the activity supported a study on Youth Engagement and Community Driven
 Development, in preparation for additional financing for the World Bank’s Nigeria Community
 and Social Development Project. The study assisted the project team to better understand
 how the CDD approach could be redesigned and restructured to allow for youth-based
 engagement and projects for empowering the youth. It also contributed to the Bank’s policy
 dialogue with the Nigerian government on youth development and job creation.




31
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




Social Protection and Labor

The last window to be added to TFESSD’s portfolio, Social Protection and Labor supported
innovation and new thinking on social policies and programs of World Bank Group projects. Its
objective was to strengthen the quality and impact of social protection activities in the WBG
country assistance programs as well as member countries’ own poverty reduction strategies
and policies.

TFESSD funded 89 projects through this window, disbursing some US$15.9 million. These
projects covered the key areas of social protection:

        Labor market interventions (regulation, programs,     “For Social Protection, there
         and wage-setting rules)
                                                               were no other trust funds.
        Social  insurance     programs        (pensions,      TFESSD was the only
         unemployment insurance, family benefits, and sick     vehicle to provide analytical
         pay)                                                  support and technical
        Social assistance (transfers in cash or kind,         assistance and knowledge
         subsidies, and workfare)                              work globally and in specific
                                                               countries.”
        Special programs to assist particularly vulnerable
         groups (the disabled, orphans, underprivileged        --Briana Wilson, former
         children, and the elderly)                            Social Protection Window
                                                               Manager
Many of the Social Protection activities were funded
through TFESSD’s last few calls for proposals, which focused on the theme. During the financial
crisis of 2007-2009, demand for lending in Social Protection increased dramatically, especially in
Africa and South Asia. Through the window, TFESSD supported a few key areas of Social
Protection that were scalable, helping the World Bank become a leader in Social Protection and
drawing global attention to the theme.




32
                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




FIGURE 8: Social Protection window budget and activities, by region




Featured Projects

 Project                      Impact
 Evaluating Efforts to        An impact evaluation of the effectiveness of street children
 Prevent the Phenomenon       prevention initiatives in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
 of Street Children in an     that was one of the first of its kind. While many evaluations in the
 African Post-Conflict        social protection sector analyze the impact of cash transfer
 Country (TF097402)           projects, very few attempt to understand the impact of other
                              types of social assistance projects, particularly the ones that
                              prevent child abuse. (TF097402)
 Developing Effective           An engagement platform on social safety nets (SSNs) for citizens
 Social Safety Nets to           in the MENA region that uses an array of tools to promote social
 Reduce Inequality and           inclusion and reduce inequality.
 Social Exclusion in the        Has fostered active knowledge exchange within the region on
 Middle East and North           how to think creatively about program assessments, including
 Africa (TF010807)               outreach to multiple stakeholders (government, civil society,
                                 academics, but also ordinary citizens) through a variety of tools
                                 (roundtables,     consultations, opinion         surveys,    game
                                 experiments).
 Haiti Nutritional Security     This activity made a significant difference in improving the
 (TF097257)                      country’s nutrition security options.
                                Has strengthened the capacity and effectiveness of nutrition-
                                 related safety net programs, addressing the persistent problems
                                 of severe and chronic malnutrition among Haiti’s most
                                 vulnerable populations.


33
                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

                                Produced an analysis of a food security, poverty and cash-for-
                                 work program as well as a nutrition and community worker
                                 assessment, generated knowledge that informed the
                                 Government’s national nutrition policy as well as its new plan
                                 for the reduction of extreme poverty.
                                Report: Haiti: Nutrition at a Glance



 CASE STUDY: Helping the World Bank Become a Leader in Social Protection

 TFESSD provided funding for a Global Stocktaking of Social Protection Programs, which
 developed a global inventory of social safety nets (SSNs), methodologies and toolkits that
 make it easier to collect data on social protection programs, especially in low income
 countries – filling a much-needed gap in information.

 Today, the World Bank is a leader in social protection, and
 this activity helped lay the foundation by creating             This activity provided seed
 substantial knowledge both within the Bank and externally.      money to begin work on a
                                                                 Social Protection database
 It improved the information base on existing social             and helped lay the
 protection programs in all low-income countries, fomented       foundation for the Bank’s
 a global debate on the role of social protection as a vehicle   leading role in this area.
 for pro-poor growth, and informed budget allocation
 decisions towards social protection programs.

                                              As a result of the global stocktaking, the inventory
                                              now includes 144 countries, with much more
                                              information about low income countries than was
                                              previously available.

                                              Advocacy for better social protection data
                                              brought about decisive progress in elevating
                                              statistical issues for social protection to the
                                              attention of senior policy makers and institutions,
                                              including the establishment of the Social
                                              Protection Inter Agency Coordination Board
                                              (which the Bank chairs).

 The grant also provided seed funding for a social protection database, The Atlas of Social
 Protection Indicators of Resilience and Equity (ASPIRE), which continues to grow and be a key
 source of social protection data.




34
                                                                               TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

     CASE STUDY: A Trailblazer in Mainstreaming Disability at the World Bank

     TFESSD played a key role in mainstreaming the disability theme in World Bank Group
     projects. For a number of years it was the only source of funding for analytic work on
     disability at the Bank, producing toolkits that helped Bank staff integrate disability into their
     activities. The Bank has also added a Disability Advisor.

     TFESSD-funded activities also helped keep a global dialogue on disability alive. For example,
     in Bangladesh, TFESSD funded efforts to improve national capacity for measuring the
     prevalence, type, level, and causes of disability. As a result, Bangladesh was the first
     developing country to implement the UN Washington Group's research and
     recommendations on a large scale – setting a precedent for UN member countries.

     And in Ethiopia, TFESSD funded a project on early childhood disability data collection that
     helped influence development of an inclusive education policy.

     Here are more examples of TFESSD activities that supported disability:

          Promotion of Inclusivity in Education, Employment and Health of Persons with Disability
           in South-East Asia (Report)

          Afghanistan, Pension Administration and Safety Net (P113421)

          India, Exploring Multi-sectoral Engagement in Building Linkages Between HIV/AIDS and
           Disability Programs: (Report)

          Colombia, Making the New Bus Rapid Transit System Accessible (P101356)

          Mexico, Accessibility Training for Bus Drivers (Toolkit)

          Disability and Labor       Markets     in   LAC,   Empirical   Evidence    and    Analytical
           Challenges (Report)

          Accessible transport in Africa, The Dakar Diamniadio Toll Highway (DDTH) Case Study
           (Project, Report )

          Towards Equity and Participation for Students with Disabilities in African Higher
           Education, The Case Studies of Ghana and Tanzania (Report)

          Sierra Leone, Social and Economic Situation of Persons with Disabilities (Report)




35
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

        Accessible Transport, Lessons from Urban Transport Projects in East Asia (China,
         Vietnam, and the Philippines): (Reports)




 CASE STUDY: Targeting the Poor for Social Protection in the Maldives

 In the Maldives, the World Bank Social Protection team supported the Government of the
 Maldives in their efforts to target the poor for social assistance programs. TFESSD provided
 funding to develop a targeting mechanism that would help build capacity and make the
 process more efficient.

 The mechanism included a database of applicants to better determine eligibility, information
 sharing across databases to authenticate information, a communications and outreach
 campaign to raise awareness of the programs, verification of information, and monitoring for
 continual improvement.

 “The TFESSD resources made it possible for us to engage more intensively with the
 government. This was particularly important as targeting is inherently political and we needed
 to ensure there was broad buy-in for the solution proposed,” noted Puja Vasudeva Dutta,
 World Bank Task Team Leader for the project.

 The tool was implemented by the National Social Protection Agency of the Maldives and
 mainstreamed into its operations. However, political upheaval made it difficult for the
 government to continue on its path towards implementing systemic targeting for social
 protection programs.




36
                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

LESSONS LEARNED

The experience of TFESSD offers several valuable lessons for donors and the World Bank, both
for future trust funds or the establishment of similar entities.


There is a clear need for flexible, innovative trust funds such as TFESSD.
Small funds for analytical and other catalytic work, such as TFESSD, can be more flexible and
respond more quickly to needs and demands than institutional resources. TFESSD was popular
among World Bank Task Team Leaders (TTLs), who appreciated its flexibility and innovative
nature.

“The competitive nature of TFESSD instigated TTLs to submit proposals that were innovative,
unique, and directly linked to creating new business opportunities. It helped advance clients’
thinking on Environment and Natural Resources (ENR) issues a lot,” said Klas Sander, a World
Bank TTL who received TFESSD funding for a project related to analysis of the charcoal sector in
Tanzania.

“My view is that by closing TFESSD we are missing out a lot on advancing the frontier of global
ENR understanding and driving the debate and dialogue on how the Bank and other
development partners can contribute to addressing those issues,” Mr. Sander noted.


Trust funds such as TFESSD help donors target priority areas.
Trust funds provide an opportunity to target contributions based on donor priority areas, while
aligning with and mainstreaming into existing programming in the World Bank. They can
leverage the clout provided by the World Bank in line with the priorities of the donors, and
ultimately find increased social and environmental benefits in countries.

TFESSD did this effectively, as evidenced by the case studies provided in this report. Norway
originally created the trust fund to strengthen the emphasis of sustainability in development
and link the environment more closely with social development and poverty.

The trust fund also showed that there is value in reinforcing existing trends and undercurrents.
One example is the World Bank’s environment strategy. The Environment Sector was
established at the time TFESSD came into existence, and the trust fund provided useful
resources for rolling out the environment strategy.




37
                                                                           TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

TFESSD filled an important funding gap.
Even though the World Bank has increased its focus on upstream analytical work, such work is
typically underfunded, both at the Bank and other development organizations. Analytic work
tends to be a collective good with long-term benefits, and country teams in budget squeezes
are likely to prioritize short-term investments with predictable returns on investments. A 2011
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) evaluation of trust funds found that they are especially
important for financing global public goods.

Many World Bank TTLs appreciated being able to receive funding from TFESSD for analysis that
wasn’t readily available elsewhere. An example is in the area of disability; for a time, TFESSD
was the only program funding analysis on disability in developing countries.


Monitoring long-term impact is a challenge for a broad program such as TFESSD.
TFESSD’s large, diverse portfolio also posed challenges for monitoring impact. It funded 531
projects worth over US$145 million covering a range of issues, with many activities not showing
an impact until years later.

While the trust fund’s broad objectives enhanced its flexibility and capacity to meet emerging
donor and Bank demands, it also makes the program difficult to assess. TFESSD did not have
defined benchmarks, indicators or measurable outputs on an aggregate level, which would
have helped tracking outcomes. Results monitoring was entirely based on self-reporting.

In addition, attribution of results was often complicated by the fact that TFESSD-supported
activities typically combined several funding sources put together.

“I was left with a frustration of how difficult it is to know the outcomes, to answer the
questions of attribution of impact,” said Mr. Heltberg (former Program Manager for TFESSD).



TFESSD’s broad design and governance may have prevented it from reaching its full
potential.
The 2012 Independent Evaluation of TFESSD found that despite important achievements,
shortcomings in design and governance arrangements could have prevented the trust fund
from reaching its full potential.

First, TFESSD was designed as a broad umbrella facility addressing multiple donor objectives
with one single outfit. A lack of differentiated analysis of constraints across sectors blurred the
objectives and limited the overall ability of the TFESSD to catalyze focused change in the World
Bank.
38
                                                                           TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Some challenges, however, were evidenced with the annual shifts in content of Calls for
Proposals, which created a certain level of unpredictability for task managers in the Bank. The
more narrow and unpredictable the thematic focus, the less relevant and flexible staff found
the fund. This concern was stronger among social development and social protection staff than
those working on environment and poverty issues.

Another challenge was around the governance for TFESSD, which was managed by a sectoral
policy and knowledge hub organizationally referred to as an “anchor.” While aiming to provide
for institutional-level ownership of policy and knowledge dissemination, trust fund governance
by the anchor meant resource allocation that was not always aligned with the strategic
priorities of regional vice-presidencies. Ultimately, anchor governance proved labor intensive
and lacking in adequate systems to ensure accumulation and dissemination of knowledge, and
limited TFESSD’s strategic relevance.


Conclusion
While it is difficult to quantify the financial value of building partnerships, TFESSD has played a
critical role for the World Bank’s efforts to bring together governments, donors and other
stakeholders to strengthen its approaches to socially and environmentally sustainable
development. The trust fund was established as a vehicle to support the projects and tasks
under the four specified windows. Over its 16 years of implementation, the TFESSD has
contributed to strengthening the analytical underpinnings and innovative approaches in a
number of sectors and countries through conferences, workshops (on diverse issues such as
coastal wetlands, coral reefs, disability, fisheries, forestry, indigenous peoples, livestock
insurance, river basin management and youth), South-South exchanges (livestock productivity
between Costa Rica and Cameroon), and multiple inputs leading up to and including the United
Nations Climate Change Conference (COP17) in Durban, South Africa, to name but a few.

The experience of TFESSD offers lessons learned that have generated dialogue on how to
structure trust funds to ensure that organizational incentives and measures are created that
can enhance collaboration across the institution, and that development impact is both
maximized and measurable. Numerous activities initially funded by TFESSD will be further
realized as work on the SDGs continues. The seed funding it provided – especially around
climate change adaptation, social protection, poverty impact evaluations and community-
driven development – will be felt for years to come.




39
                                                                                   TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

ANNEX 1: 2017 CLOSING FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR TFESSD
 Financial Summary for TFESSD (TF050887)
  - from Inception (December 2, 1999) to Closing (May 23, 2017)
 (in US Dollars, unaudited)
 Description                                                Cumulative
                                                            Amounts
 Receipts:
 Cash Contributions                                         148,689,836
 Investment Income                                          5,255,206
 Other Receipts and Net Transfers                           442,600
     Total Receipts                                         154,387,643


 Disbursements:
 Disbursements to Grantees                                  (2,818,468)
 Direct Costs Disbursed by WBG                              (141,076,819)
     Total Project Disbursements                            (143,895,287)


 Non-Project Disbursements:
 Administrative Fees and Expenses                           (8,309,874)


     Total Disbursements                                    (152,205,161)


 Transfer to Donor Balance Accounts:
 To Finland DBA                                             (353,281)
 To Norway DBA                                              (1,829,201)
     Total Transfers to DBAs                                (2,182,481)


 Fund Balance at May 23, 2017                               0



Summary of Projects by Window (Final at closure)
 Windows                                      Number of          Final
                                              Grants            Disbursements
                                                                (USD) *
 PROGRAM COORDINATION                                   1            3,551,366
 POVERTY WINDOW                                        95          18,830,131
 ENVIRONMENT WINDOW                                   180          56,823,709
 SOCIAL WINDOW                                        160          50,698,282
 SOCIAL PROCTECTION WINDOW                             88          15,899,424
 Grand Total                                          524         145,802,911
*The final disbursement figure per window includes $143,895,287 in project disbursements plus $1,907,624 in
administrative expenses.


40
                                                                                       TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

   ANNEX 2: LIST OF PROJECTS, CLOSING DATES AND DISBURSEMENTS

   ENVIRONMENT WINDOW
Fund        Fund Name                                                                              Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                     Date                USD
 TF023443   NTF-ESSD AFRICA COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT                                               7/31/2001         $ 199,650
 TF023457   NTF-ESSD FOREST POLICY IMPLEMENTATION REVIEW AND STRATEGY                             7/31/2001         $ 249,958
 TF023997   NTF-ESSD REGIONAL CONSULTATIONS OF THE WBG ENVIRONMENT STRATEGY IN AFRICA             7/31/2001         $ 129,669
 TF023999   NTF-ESSD REGIONAL CONSULTATIONS OF THE WBG ENVIRONMENT STRATEGY IN SOUTH ASIA AND     8/31/2001         $ 299,237
            LATIN AMERICA
 TF023783   NTF-ESSD SECONDMENT OF MR. KRYVI                                                      12/31/2001       $ (42,910)
 TF050202   NTF-ESSD:ENV.WINDOW WORLD COMMISSION ON DAMS FOLLOW-UP                                12/31/2001       $ 14,287
 TF050917   NTF-ESSD :CONFERENCE ON FINANCING THE ENVIRONMENTAL DIMENSION OF SUSTAINABLE           4/30/2002       $ 30,000
            DEVELOPMENT
 TF024747   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : VIETNAM COMMUNITY BASED FOREST ECOSYSTEM                6/30/2002        $ 59,411
            MANAGEMENT
 TF050077   NTF-CAPETOWN FIRST PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE IN PREP. FOR THE WORLD SUMMIT ON          6/30/2002        $ 59,731
            SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
 TF023456   NTF-ESSD AFRICA EA TRAINING                                                            6/30/2003        $ 179,997
 TF050613   NTF:ESSD-ENVIRONMENT STRATEGY DISSEMINATION SUPPORT                                    6/30/2003        $ 257,798
 TF051422   NTF-ESSD:DAM LICENSING, BENCHMARKING AND GOOD PRACTICE                                 6/30/2003        $ 50,000
 TF023863   NTF-ESSD COASTAL AND MARINE MANAGEMENT                                                  7/1/2003        $ 424,688
 TF051608   NTF:ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND VULNERABLE POPULATIONS IN SHANGHAI                      10/30/2003        $ 154,000
 TF023562   NTF-ESSD AFRICA WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT INITIATIVE                                 11/30/2003      $ 1,098,699
 TF051929   TA FOR PROPER PROGRAM IN INDONESIA                                                    12/15/2003        $ 102,964
 TF023501   NTF-ESSD CAS AND ENVIRONMENTAL INDICATORS                                             12/31/2003        $ 389,896
 TF024945   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : MELISSA                                                 12/31/2003        $ 245,678
 TF051309   NTF:ESSD-ENVIRONMENT IN PRSPS                                                         12/31/2003        $ 56,960
 TF051770   ENVIRONMENTAL INCOME                                                                   1/15/2004        $ 46,889
 TF051457   NTF-GLOBAL:CAPACITY BUILDING BY INDIGENOUS FOREST COMMUNITIES                          3/30/2004        $ 157,578
 TF051350   NTF-ESSD:POVERTY, HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT MAPS, LAC                                     3/31/2004        $ 88,148
 TF024943   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : URBAN COMMUNITY UPGRADING IN SSA AND ESTABLISHMENT       6/30/2004      $ 1,308,262
            OF AUUN
 TF024946   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : CLEAN AIR INITIATIVE IN SUB-SAHARA AFRICAN CITIES       6/30/2004        $ 574,602
 TF027771   NTF-ESSD : ENVIRONMENT WINDOW - INTEGRATED CROP MANAGEMENT FOR SMALL HOLDERS          6/30/2004        $ 303,689
 TF050121   NTF:ESSD-SUPPORT TO WDR 2002/03                                                       6/30/2004        $ 982,613
 TF051382   NTF-FORESTRY-D R CONGO                                                                6/30/2004        $ 294,841
 TF051837   YEMEN-ENERGY ACCESS FOR POVERTY REDUCTION                                             6/30/2004        $ 122,315
 TF051927   VIETNAM LAND TENURE CERTIFICATION                                                     6/30/2004        $ 249,162
 TF051320   NTF:ESSD-PAKISTAN;INEQUALITY AND INVESTMENT;LAND TENURE AND SOIL DEGRADATION IN THE   7/31/2004        $ 153,450
            INDUS BASIN
 TF051783   DEVOLUTION OF POVERTY                                                                 9/30/2004        $ 222,883
 TF051829   FARM RESTRUCTURING IN ECA, SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL                         9/30/2004        $ 90,127
 TF051830   STRENGTHENING THE ENVIRONMENTAL INITIATIVE OF NEPAD                                   9/30/2004        $ 246,910
 TF052578   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : MAINSTREAMING ENVIRONMENT IN PRSP'S                       9/30/2004        $ 60,000
 TF052579   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : PILOTING CLIENT CAPACITY BUILDING FOR ENVIRONMENTALLY     9/30/2004        $ 80,000
            AND SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE PROCUREMENT
 TF024817   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW - AFRICA ENVIRONMENT RISK MANAGEMENT                      12/31/2004       $ 987,307
 TF051420   NTF-ESSD:GOVERNANCE OF NATURAL RESOURCES                                              12/31/2004       $ 407,321
 TF051496   NTF-MOZAMBIQUE:POVERTY AND NATURAL RESOURCES USE IN THE VILANCULOS COASTAL WILDLIFE   12/31/2004       $ 13,544
            SANCTUARY
 TF051771   WATERSHED EXTERNALITIES AND LOCAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA                               12/31/2004       $ 97,933
 TF051801   NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN UGANDA                                                 12/31/2004       $ 396,090
 TF051421   NTF-ESSD:TANZANIA;MARINE AND COASTAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT                              3/31/2005       $ 508,592
 TF051812   HONDURAS:ECO/CULTURAL TOURISM DEVELOPMENT, ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS         3/31/2005       $ 295,017
 TF024693   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : DEC/RDV COMMUNITY-BASED MECHANISMS FOR LAND ACCESS       4/30/2005       $ 311,657
            AND TENURE SECURITY
 TF052629   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : INDONESIA - FOREST LAND/LAND USE RURAL POVERTY NEXUS      5/31/2005        $ 61,578
 TF052577   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : ENERGY ENVIRONMENT AND POPULATION PROGRAM                 6/15/2005        $ 70,707


   41
                                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund        Fund Name                                                                               Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                      Date                USD
 TF027742   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW - CHINA : STRATEGIC EA OF WESTERN REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT     6/30/2005         $ 184,996
            PLAN
 TF027747   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW - CHINA : NEW MODEL FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT                  6/30/2005        $ 148,490
 TF051534   NTF-AFRICA:THE POTENTIAL ROLE OF EA IN PROMOTING PARTICIPATION IN DECISION MAKING IN   6/30/2005        $ 425,000
            SADC
 TF051786   POVERTY IMPACTS OF PAYMENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES                                 6/30/2005        $ 172,522
 TF052198   NTF-ESSD DEVELOPING MONITORING INDICATORS AND TOOLS FOR TRACKING POVERTY-              6/30/2005        $ 27,034
            ENVIRONMENT ISSUES
 TF023376   NTF-ESSD CHINA SEPA AND INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION PREVENTION INITIATIVE                     7/31/2005       $ 1,233,647
 TF051319   NTF:ESSD-MNA;INSTITUTIONS AND GOVERNANCE IN THE MNA REGION                             7/31/2005         $ 155,524
 TF027741   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : MNA LEGAL FRAMEWORK MUNICIPAL AND HOSPITAL WASTE         9/30/2005         $ 684,759
            MANAGEMENT
 TF052593   NTFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : WORLD RESOURCES REPORT                                     9/30/2005      $ 1,250,000
 TF024692   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : SOUTH ASIA STRATEGIC PROGRAM                             12/31/2005      $ 1,621,150
 TF051800   ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE DISCLOSURE IN CHINA                                          12/31/2005        $ 256,585
 TF052554   NTFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : GENDER IMPACTS AND PRACTICE IN BANK LAND                  12/31/2005        $ 180,000
            ADMINISTRATION PROJECTS
 TF052822   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : ADAPTATION TO EL NINO IMPACTS IN ECUADOR AND PERU          1/31/2006         $ 259,087
 TF051785   COORDINATING ENVIRONMENT AND HEALTH IN MENA                                            3/31/2006         $ 321,435
 TF023532   NTF-ESSD WB/WWF ALLLIANCE FOR FORESTRY                                                 6/30/2006       $ 1,199,127
 TF024922   NTF-ESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : MNA ENERGY/ENVIRONMENT WINDOW                            6/30/2006         $ 647,772
 TF051607   NTF:POVERTY ENVIRONMENT NEXUS; A STRATEGIC APPROACH FOR COMBODIA, LAO PDR AND          6/30/2006         $ 589,635
            VIETNAM
 TF052653   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : CHINA VALUATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH RISK AND           6/30/2006        $ 368,483
            POVERTY-ENVIRONMENT LINKAGES
 TF054440   TFESSD ENV WINDOW: AFRICA REGION LAND AND PROPERTY RIGHTS                              6/30/2006        $ 138,404
 TF055774   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: M&E FOR MEASURING SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL                  6/30/2006        $ 100,000
            SUSTAINABILITY OF ARD PROJECTS
 TF052721   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: THE ENVIRONMENTAL MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOAL IN ECA        12/31/2006       $ 232,661
 TF053874   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT ASSESMENT AND MONITORING               12/31/2006       $ 189,955
            SERVICES
 TF051310   NTF:ESSD-PREPARATION OF TOOLKIT FOR COUNTRY ENVIRONMENT ANALYSIS (CEA)                 3/31/2007        $ 693,067
 TF051598   NTF-EGYPT:POVERTY AND NATURAL RESOURCES                                                6/30/2007        $ 289,237
 TF052552   NTFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : ADAPTATION OF AGRO-ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS TO CLIMATE          6/30/2007        $ 398,647
            CHANGE IN AFRICA
 TF052779   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : AFRICA STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENT AND POVERTY PROGRAM           6/30/2007       $ 1,233,121
 TF052912   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : DIESEL POLLUTION REDUCTION STRATEGIES FOR CITIES           6/30/2007         $ 152,248
 TF052914   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : BUILDING LOCAL CAPACITY AND INSTITUTIONS FOR               6/30/2007         $ 289,962
            DECENTRALIZED NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (NRM)
 TF053892   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW:SOUTH ASIA ENVIRONMENT STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION               6/30/2007        $ 595,223
 TF055510   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: POLICY RESEARCH REPORT ON FORESTS, LIVELIHOODS AND          6/30/2007        $ 131,846
            ENVIRONMENT
 TF056786   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: ZAMBIA NATURE TOURISM                                       6/30/2007        $ 127,000
 TF052540   NTFESSD ENV WINDOW : MAINSTREAMING WB/WWF ALLIANCE TARGETS INTO AFR COUNTRY            9/30/2007        $ 572,519
            PROGRAMS
 TF051328   NTF-ESSD:MAURITANIA;TECHNOLOGY FOSTERS TRADITION                                       12/31/2007       $ 182,568
 TF053884   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: ADAPTATION SCREEN AND DESIGN TOOL                           12/31/2007       $ 249,775
 TF053901   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: SUPPORT TO PARTICIPATORY PLANNING IN CHINESE CITIES         12/31/2007       $ 218,272
 TF054302   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW:COMMUNITY-BASED DROUGHT MGMT FOR THE SUSTAINABLE USE         12/31/2007       $ 135,200
            OFPASTORAL RESOURCE IN THE ARID&SEMI-ARID ZONESOF SSA
 TF054364   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: THE CATALYTIC ROLE OF WOMEN IN EFFECTING SUSTAINABLE        12/31/2007       $ 89,784
            DEVELOPMENT IN EGYPT
 TF054365   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: GOOD GOVERNANCE FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT                 12/31/2007       $ 183,532
 TF055456   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: ZAMBIA NATURE TOURISM                                       12/31/2007       $ 167,929
 TF055650   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: AFRICA - BUILDING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY              12/31/2007       $ 275,000
 TF055775   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: POLICIES AND INCENTIVES FOR MIOMBO MANAGEMENT               12/31/2007       $ 250,000
 TF055878   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: DEEPENING THE CHINA MAINSTREAMING OF ENVIRONMENTAL          12/31/2007       $ 407,565
            SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (MESD) PROGRAM
 TF055946   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: SOUTH ASIA ENVIRONMENT AND GOVERNANCE PROGRAM               12/31/2007       $ 244,411
 TF052820   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : LCR STRATEGIC PROGRAM ON ENVIRONMENTAL                      6/30/2008       $ 749,294
            MAINSTREAMING PHASE II
 TF053858   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW : IMPLEMENTING ENVIRONMENTAL & SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY &       6/30/2008        $ 154,181
            GOVERNANCE IN SMES

   42
                                                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund        Fund Name                                                                                              Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                                     Date                USD
 TF053903   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT FOR CULTURAL TOURISM AND                             6/30/2008         $ 414,926
            HERITAGE PROTECTION IN ECA (GEORGIA AND UZBEKISTAN)
 TF055594   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT OUTCOMES OF RURAL FINANCE                                6/30/2008       $ 189,692
 TF056130   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW:MANAGING KEY NATURAL RESOURCES IN AFRICA                                     6/30/2008       $ 248,307
 TF057211   TFESSD: RURAL HAZARD MITIGATION AND MANAGEMENT STRATEGY                                               10/31/2008       $ 78,400
 TF090840   PROFISH AND ARD FISHERIES SPECIALIST (GRONNEVET)                                                      11/30/2008       $ 197,855
 TF053885   TFESSD ENV WINDOW: INTEGRATING ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES IN POVERTY REDUCTION                              12/31/2008       $ 273,116
            STRATEGIES,COUNTRY POLICIES AND PROGRAMS IN THE EAP REGION
 TF055858   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: PROGRAM FOR SUSTAINABLE FISHERIES (PROFISH)                                12/31/2008       $ 339,853
 TF055906   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: MOZAMBIQUE INTEGRATED COUNTRY PROPOSAL                                     12/31/2008       $ 500,000
 TF057147   TFESSD: ETHIOPIA SUSTAINABLE LAND MANAGEMENT & TENURE SECURITY                                        12/31/2008       $ 186,987
 TF057343   NIGERIA: SOCIAL INCLUSION IN WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND IRRIGATION                                 12/31/2008       $ 56,630
 TF057355   COMPUTERIZED TOOLS FOR CONTINGENCY PLANNING AND FUND MANAGEMENT                                       12/31/2008       $ 122,856
 TF090242   GUIDELINES FOR MANAGEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION                                                12/31/2008       $ 39,781
 TF057243   TFESSD: MADAGASCAR - MAINSTREAMING HAZARD RISK MANAGEMENT                                              4/30/2009       $ 193,247
 TF053902   TFESSD ENVIRONMENT WINDOW: ENVIRONMENTAL GOVERNANCE IN UPSTREAM ENVIRONMENTAL                          6/30/2009       $ 298,188
            ANALYTICAL TOOLS (CEA AND SEA)
 TF057155   TFESSED: STRENGTHENING SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY IN VIETNAM'S HYDROPOWER SECTOR                           6/30/2009        $ 181,191
 TF057349   YEMEN - LAND TENURE FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC INCLUSION                                                 6/30/2009        $ 105,880
 TF057388   LIBERIA: USING A SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS APPROACH TO DEFINE LAND TENURE PRIORITIES IN A               6/30/2009        $ 116,269
            POST-CONFLICT ENVIRONMENT
 TF090512   WESTERN INDIAN OCEAN FISHERIES (WIOFISH)                                                               6/30/2009       $ 200,000
 TF090697   ENHANCE SME COMPETITIVENESS IN EAST AFRICA                                                             6/30/2009       $ 183,234
 TF090974   LEAD POLLUTION ABATEMENT IN INDIA AND VIETNAM                                                          6/30/2009       $ 167,000
 TF057150   TFESSD: LAND DISTRIBUTION AND ACCESS TO TENURE SECURITY IN AFRICA                                     12/31/2009       $ 99,643
 TF057353   VALUING AND PROTECTING WATER SERVICES                                                                 12/31/2009       $ 200,523
 TF057612   PRO-POOR TOURISM IN ZAMBIA AND ETHIOPIA                                                               12/31/2009       $ 49,911
 TF090528   INSTITUTIONAL PREPAREDNESS FOR MANAGING NATURAL HAZARDS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE                      12/31/2009       $ 438,900
            IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
 TF090878   INDIA: COMMUNITY-MANAGED APPROACHES TO SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS                                        12/31/2009       $ 149,770
 TF090908   STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS FOR BETTER ENVIRONMENTAL OUTCOMES IN SOUTH ASIA                            12/31/2009       $ 743,630
 TF090915   INTEGRATING ECOSYSTEM AND SPECIES DATA INTO DISEASE FORECASTING MODELS                                12/31/2009       $ 194,506
 TF057385   NATURAL DISASTERS AND RISK MANAGEMENT IN RURAL VIETNAM                                                 2/28/2010       $ 149,874
 TF057168   CENTRAL AMERICA INTEGRATED INDIGENOUS LAND ADMINISTRATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES                        6/30/2010       $ 192,954
 TF057357   RESPONDING TO CLIMATE CHANGES IN WEST AFRICA                                                           6/30/2010       $ 291,057
 TF090581   KYRGYZ REPUBLIC: SUPPORT TO DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY ON SECONDARY USE OF                   6/30/2010       $ 118,778
            RANGELAND
 TF090685   EAST AFRICA - NRM DECISION TOOLS                                                                      6/30/2010        $ 367,205
 TF090698   THE SOCIAL POLICY DIMENSIONS OF CLIMATE CHANGE                                                        6/30/2010        $ 383,272
 TF090916   WEST AFRICA MINERALS SECTOR STRATEGIC ASSESSMENT (WAMSSA)                                             6/30/2010        $ 392,044
 TF090971   CASPIAN FISHERIES MANAGEMENT                                                                          6/30/2010        $ 298,077
 TF091350   INDIA: COASTAL CITIES AND ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND SEA LEVEL RISE                             6/30/2010        $ 249,230
 TF092566   DISSEMINATION AND ADOPTION OF LESSONS FROM PILOT ADAPTATION PROJECTS TO THE BANK'S                    6/30/2010        $ 471,013
            REGIONAL PORTFOLIO
 TF090664   NIGERIA & MALI: IMPROVING GOVERNANCE FOR SCALING UP SUSTAINABLE LAND MANAGEMENT                       12/31/2010       $ 399,709
 TF057358   ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE MENA REGION                                                        3/31/2011       $ 193,203
 TF091250   ADDRESSING INDOOR AIR POLLUTION IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA                                                  3/31/2011       $ 399,990
 TF090780   CONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS IN FOREST MANAGEMENT                                                          6/30/2011       $ 149,243
 TF092632   BUILDING CLIMATE RESILIENT ECONOMIES IN SOUTH ASIA                                                     6/30/2011       $ 697,188
 TF092963   A ROADMAP FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE AMU DARYA RIVER BASIN, CENTRAL ASIA                  6/30/2011       $ 44,078
 TF093683   TFESSD - IMPROVING GROUNDWATER RESILIENCY: ADAPTATION OPTIONS FOR THE WATER SECTOR                     6/30/2011       $ 261,717
 TF095357   Policy and action-oriented research on post-harvest loss reduction technologies for basic grains in    6/30/2011       $ 119,214
            Sub-Saharan Africa
 TF095971   Climate Change Impacts on South Asian Food Trade                                                       6/30/2011       $ 104,295
 TF092657   CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION HANDBOOK FOR MAYORS                                                         11/30/2011       $ 347,153
 TF098225   Karnataka Climate Studies                                                                             12/30/2011       $ 145,602
 TF092931   IFC CES TFESSD CLIMATE CHANGE (CLIMATE RISK) ADAPTATION STUDIES                                       12/31/2011       $ 250,348
 TF096245   Study of incentive schemes for improving vehicle energy efficiency in Yemen                           12/31/2011       $ 44,953
 TF096948   Climate Variability, Safety Nets and Welfare in Nigeria                                               12/31/2011       $ 96,566
 TF090972   CHINA AIR POLLUTION CONTROL PROGRAM: IMPROVING ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH.                                   2/29/2012       $ 639,906
 TF090726   PROJECT LEVEL INSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS                                                                   6/30/2012       $ 191,918
 TF092631   DIAGNOSING AND MAINSTREAMING TREE-BASED ADAPTATION IN RURAL LANDSCAPES                                 6/30/2012       $ 59,949
 TF092842   ADAPTING VULNERABLE ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE TO CLIMATE CHANGE                                            6/30/2012       $ 199,390
   43
                                                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund        Fund Name                                                                                               Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                                      Date                USD
 TF094326   SUPPORT TO INNOVATIVE ACTIVITIES AT THE COMMUNITY LEVEL-TAKING FULL ADVANTAGE OF THE                   6/30/2012         $ 296,305
            DEVELOPMENT MARKETPLACE
 TF094946   Piloting Eco-Livestock Production                                                                       6/30/2012       $ 199,032
 TF096205   Management and Conservation of Coral Reefs in the Western Indian Ocean for Climate Change               6/30/2012       $ 180,000
 TF094863   Environment Strategy Consultations with External Stakeholders and Analytical Work                       9/30/2012       $ 467,594
 TF095510   Economics of Charcoal Consumption East Africa                                                          10/31/2012       $ 172,976
 TF010277   Reducing Inequality through Land Regularization                                                        12/31/2012       $ 197,763
 TF093684   PROFISH TFESSD CC & FISH                                                                               12/31/2012       $ 441,459
 TF099789   Supporting Africa's Climate Change Agenda at COP17 and beyond (FY10 and FY11 Program)                  12/31/2012       $ 467,195
 TF096142   Social Dimensions of Climate Change                                                                    12/31/2012       $ 297,962
 TF093328   CLIMATE CHANGE ECOSYSTEM ASSESMENT                                                                      3/31/2013       $ 368,109
 TF093578   THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE IN MIDDLE EAST AND                     3/31/2013       $ 221,325
            NORTH AFRICA (MENA): A REGIONAL ANALYSIS
 TF095806   Urban Agriculture: A Sustainable Solution to Addressing the Food Crisis, Adapting to Climate Change,   3/31/2013        $ 245,611
            and Alleviating Urban Poverty.
 TF091074   EGYPT: MEASURING IMPACTS OF PUBLIC DISCLOSURE SYSTEMS FOR POLLUTION ABATEMENT                          6/30/2013        $ 108,941
            PERFORMANCE
 TF092659   BUILDING THE ANALYTICAL CAPACITY TO MAINSTREAM ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE RISK IN BANK                      6/30/2013       $ 2,298,793
            OPERATIONS IN AFRICA # A PROGRAM APPROACH
 TF093108   DEVELOPING READINESS FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION (DRCA)                                                     6/30/2013        $ 999,347
 TF093109   HYDRO-AGRONOMIC-ECONOMIC MODEL FOR MEKONG RIVER BASIN AND LOCAL ADAPTATION IN                          6/30/2013        $ 980,903
            THAILAND AND LAO
 TF093351   WETLANDS CARBON MARKET DEVELOPMENT FOR FUNDING COASTAL COMMUNITIES ADAPTATION                          6/30/2013        $ 495,875
            TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
 TF094735   IMPACT AND PROCESS EVALUATION OF SMALLHOLDER BIOGAS IN CHINA                                           6/30/2013        $ 68,638
 TF097784   Pursuing Low Regret Climate Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction Options in the Republic of          6/30/2013        $ 166,204
            Djibouti
 TF099814   Using Forests to Enhance Resilience to Climate Change Project                                           6/30/2013       $ 440,000
 TF095925   Economic Analysis of Coastal Adaptation to Climate Change                                               6/30/2013       $ 494,726
 TF096978   Adaptation to Climate Change on the Coast of Sao Tome                                                   6/30/2013       $ 99,794
 TF098224   Climate downscaling and climate portal for the African continent                                        6/30/2013       $ 162,977
 TF099408   FY11 - Adressing the vulnerability of Africa's Infrastructure: a strategic, regional approach           6/30/2013       $ 318,286
 TF094845   A Strategic Approach to Climate Change in the EAP Region                                               12/31/2013       $ 595,715
 TF096975   Economically Cost-Effective, Environmentally Sound and Geographically Accessible Mechanisms for        12/31/2013       $ 439,081
            Reduced Deforestation and Degradation
 TF097837   Innovative Institutional and Technological Solutions to Reduce Vulnerability to Resource Degradation   12/31/2013       $ 470,660
            and Climate Shocks in LCR
 TF098226   Reducing Vulnerability Through Improved Information Access & S-S-N Cooperation                         12/31/2013       $ 201,870
 TF098624   FY11 - Understanding the Impact of Climate Change on Hydropower                                        12/31/2013       $ 156,699
 TF099583   Mapping Climate, Poverty, and Growth Nexus (TFESSD FY10)                                               12/31/2013       $ 188,073
 TF010993   Improving Gender Equity in Strenghtening Marine Managed Areas (MMAs) in Djibouti and Sudan              3/31/2014       $ 89,871
 TF099126   Nigeria Climate Change Risk Assessment                                                                  6/30/2014       $ 197,686
 TF098508   Climate Change Strategy for the Sundarbans Wetlands of West Bengal (India) and Bangladesh               6/30/2014       $ 251,068
 TF095217   Increasing the capacity to adapt water resource management, planning and operations to the              9/30/2014       $ 277,558
            forecasted impact of climate change in South-Eastern Europe.
 TF096977   Adaptation Potential and Socio-Economic Impact of Reducing Deforestation in the Congo Basin            9/30/2014        $ 270,033
            Total                                                                                                                $ 56,823,709




   44
                                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

   POVERTY WINDOW



Fund       Fund Name                                                                               Closing    Disbursements
                                                                                                     Date               USD
TF050423   NTF:ESSD-PAKISTAN-POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS                                  12/30/2002         $ 35,724
TF050421   NTF:ESSD-KYRGYZ-POVERY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS                                      3/31/2003         $ 77,387
TF050422   NTF:ESSD-MALWI-POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS                                      3/31/2003        $ 107,277
TF050450   NTF ESSD-NIGERIA: PUBLIC EXPENDITURES AND SERVICE DELIVERY                             6/30/2003        $ 138,655
TF050418   NTF:ESSD-ENHANCING POVERTY ANALYSIS AND MONITORING IN CENTRAL ASIA AND SOUTH           8/31/2003        $ 109,871
           CAUCASUS
TF050501   NTF ESSD - INDIGENOUS MUNICIPALITY STRATEGY; AN AYMARA PROPOSAL OF EMPOWERMENT        8/31/2003         $ 44,571
TF050441   NTF:ESSD-CAPACITY BUILDING FOR SETTING DEVELOPMENT TARGETS, ESTIMATING COSTS AND      9/30/2003        $ 124,748
           SETTING PRIORITIES IN PRSPS
TF051928   BROAD BASED RURAL GROWTH IN JAMAICA                                                   11/30/2003       $ 27,331
TF050437   NTF:ESSD-PARTICIPATORY MECHANISMS FOR ENHANCING ACCOUNTABILITY OF PUBLIC              12/30/2003        $ 76,577
           EXPENDITURES, RESOURCES AND SERVICES
TF050438   NTF:ESSD-PSIA(POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS), CHAD                               12/30/2003       $ 118,410
TF050502   NTF:ESSD-MADAGASKAR (POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS)                              12/30/2003       $ 101,390
TF050611   NTF:ESSD-POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS, MANGOLIA                                 12/30/2003       $ 103,217
TF050417   NTF:ESSD-MALAWI POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND SUSTAINABILITY                                12/31/2003       $ 327,000
TF050419   NTF:ESSD-IMPROVING POVERTY MONITORING AND ANALYSIS IN LAO PDR                         12/31/2003        $ 38,817
TF050440   NTF:ESSD-AFRICA;EMPOWERMENT AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION THROUGH DISEASE CONTROL           12/31/2003       $ 250,000
TF051313   NTF-ESSD:GEORGIA;SOCIAL DIMENSIONS OF MULTIPLE RATE INCREASES IN GEORGIA              12/31/2003        $ 93,810
TF050436   NTF:ESSD - EAST TIMOR;ENHANCING THE POVERTY IMPACT OF PUBLIC SPENDING                  2/28/2004        $ 34,020
TF050420   NTF:ESSD-PUBLIC EXPENDITURES AND POVERTY IN ETHIOPIA                                   6/30/2004        $ 25,176
TF050435   NTF:ESSD-EMPOWERMENT OF CIVIL SOCIETY FOR MONITORING AND EVALUATION PRSP IN LAC        6/30/2004       $ 142,109
TF050543   NTF ESSD:NEPAL-MEASURING AND LEARNING ABOUT EMPOWERMENT AND SOCIAL INCLUSION           6/30/2004       $ 148,666
TF051314   NTF-ESSD:EASTERN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA;SOCIAL DIMENSIONS OF ENERGY UTILITY           6/30/2004       $ 122,329
           PRIVITIZATION
TF052654   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : MOVING OUT OF POVERTY                                          6/30/2004        $ 98,795
TF052780   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : KAZAKHSTAN - LOCAL CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT IN POVERTY ANALYSIS    8/31/2004       $ 113,549
TF050439   NTF:ESSD-GUYANA : POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS                                  12/31/2004       $ 121,864
TF051799   POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS OF RURAL REFORMS IN ZAMBIA                         12/31/2004       $ 131,394
TF051977   TANZANIA- POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS OF AGRICULTURAL TAXATION REFORM          12/31/2004       $ 178,062
TF052652   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : AZERBAIJAN POVERTY - ENVIRONMENT MAPPING                       4/30/2005       $ 126,260
TF051946   PSIA IN WEST AND CENTRAL AFRICA                                                        6/30/2005       $ 177,283
TF051976   ETHIOPIA: EMPOWERING CIVIL SOCIETY                                                     6/30/2005       $ 273,953
TF052651   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : ZAMBIA POVERTY AND VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT                    8/31/2005       $ 241,331
TF052553   NTFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : SURVEY BASED WORK LINKING POVERTY AND ENVIRONMENT IN         12/31/2005        $ 58,177
           MONTENEGRO AND SERBIA
TF052699   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS OF TEA FACTORY             12/31/2005       $ 137,965
           PRIVATIZATION IN RWANDA
TF052872   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : THAILAND VILLAGE FUND EVALUATION                              12/31/2005        $ 74,564
TF054265   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: NORTHEAST OF THAILAND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT                  12/31/2005        $ 61,992
TF052966   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : URBAN POVERTY IN MONGOLIA                                      1/31/2006       $ 135,145
TF051323   NTF-ESSD:POVERTY AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT                                          2/28/2006       $ 373,412
TF051784   MEASURING EMPOWERMENT                                                                  3/31/2006       $ 239,734
TF051975   REVISITING THE ROLE OF AGRICULTURE IN REDUCING POVERTY IN AFRICA                       3/31/2006       $ 229,246
TF052871   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : POVERTY REDUCTION FOR POST-CONFLICT IVORY COAST                4/30/2006       $ 128,802
TF053883   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: MALAWI FOOD VULNERABILITY AND GOVERNANCE                        6/30/2006       $ 116,282
TF052873   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : EDUCATION AND HEALTH SERVICE DELIVERY IN LAO PDR               8/30/2006       $ 139,785
TF052965   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : GROUNDNUT SECTOR LIBERALIZATION IN SENEGAL                     8/31/2006       $ 100,021
TF053899   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: REDUCING POVERTY AND VULNERABILITY OF PASTORALISTS OF EAST      9/30/2006       $ 100,000
           AFRICA
TF053904   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: SOCIAL AND POVERTY IMPACTS OF LAND CONSOLIDATION POLICIES IN   10/31/2006       $ 104,713
           VIETNAM
TF054275   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: CONFLICT, SOCIAL INCLUSION, AND POVERTY IN NEPAL               2/28/2007        $ 104,723
TF053905   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: MADAGASCAR: SERVICE DELIVERY, GOVERNANCE & LOCAL               6/30/2007        $ 139,220
           ACCOUNTABILITY MONITORING PROGRAM
TF053918   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: GOOD GOVERNANCE FOR POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGIES                6/30/2007       $ 154,644
TF055851   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW-AFRICA: ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT                                    12/30/2007       $ 179,688
TF052913   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW : EAST AFRICA POVERTY AND DATA ANALYSIS INITIATIVE               1/31/2008       $ 212,231
   45
                                                                                                   TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund       Fund Name                                                                                            Closing    Disbursements
                                                                                                                  Date               USD
TF053878   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: POVERTY MONITORING SYSTEMS                                                   2/29/2008        $ 237,506
TF053879   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: IMPACT EVALUATION OF TANZANIA SOCIAL ACTION FUND 1                           3/31/2008        $ 472,482
TF055629   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: CHAD INTEGRATED COUNTRY POVERTY, GENDER AND SOCIAL ANALYSIS                  6/30/2008         $ 80,100
TF057151   TFESSD: MAURITANIA STRATEGIC COUNTRY GENDER ASSESSMENT                                              6/30/2008         $ 54,852
TF057649   MAKING DATA WORK AGAINST DISASTERS                                                                  6/30/2008         $ 47,295
TF053880   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW:INTEGRATING SOCIAL DIMENSIONS INTO POVERTY ANALYSIS IN AFRICA                 9/15/2008        $ 768,380
TF053886   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: MOVING OUT OF POVERTY                                                       12/31/2008        $ 395,735
TF053900   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: NEPAL: EMPOWERMENT & SOCIAL INCLUSION                                       12/31/2008         $ 96,479
TF055589   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: LIBRARY OF RESOURCES FOR QUALITY IMPACT EVALUATIONS                         12/31/2008        $ 138,106
TF055795   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: UGANDA POVERTY AND INEQUALITY ANALYSIS OF GROWTH                            12/31/2008        $ 178,341
           STRATEGIES
TF055856   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: MONITORING EMPOWERMENT IN FOUR COUNTRIES                                    12/31/2008        $ 250,430
TF057110   TFESSD - PROMOTING SHARED GROWTH FROM THE BOTTOM-UP IN AFRICA                                       3/31/2009         $ 50,806
TF056122   TFESSD POVERTY WINDOW: IMPACT OF EMPOWERMENT                                                        8/31/2009        $ 274,950
TF090888   EARNING YOUR WAY OUT OF POVERTY                                                                     1/31/2010        $ 149,985
TF090857   YOUTH EMPLOYABILITY                                                                                 3/31/2010        $ 109,156
TF057289   ADDRESSING EXTREME POVERTY IN LOW INCOME COUNTRIES: RISK AND SHOCKS                                 9/15/2010        $ 284,145
TF057365   ZAMBIA COUNTRY STUDY                                                                               12/30/2010        $ 408,535
TF092523   WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT ON CLIMATE CHANGE AND DEVELOPMENT                                         12/31/2010      $ 1,081,168
TF094803   EMPLOYMENT OF THE RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE PROGRAM IN BIHAR                                       6/17/2011        $ 119,623
TF090809   ETHIOPIA INTERNAL MIGRATION                                                                         6/30/2011        $ 170,687
TF092326   CLIMATE CHANGE, AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY, AND RURAL POVERTY IN INDIA                               6/30/2011        $ 318,924
TF094729   ASSESSING POVERTY AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF THE FINANCIAL CRISIS                                6/30/2011        $ 190,093
TF097866   Financial protection and equity in health                                                           9/30/2011        $ 158,943
TF094878   Randomized Impact Evaluation of the National Solidarity Program (NSP)                              12/31/2011        $ 199,795
TF090727   PROMOTING DECENT WORK IN AFRICA                                                                     6/30/2012        $ 598,941
TF092567   CLIMATE CHANGE AND VOLATILITY - TANZANIA                                                            6/30/2012        $ 533,092
TF094766   MOZAMBIQUE: POVERTY, VULNERABILITY, FOOD INSECURITY, AND MALNUTRITION                               6/30/2012        $ 191,226
TF096949   Monitoring Impact of the Food Fuel and Financial Crisis in ECA through LITS II                      6/30/2012        $ 212,287
TF097704   Reducing Vulnerability through Microfinance in Egypt                                                6/30/2012        $ 195,000
TF098513   Timely and accurate poverty and labor market monitoring                                             6/30/2012        $ 277,113
TF093356   ECONOMIC AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN ECA                                        8/31/2012        $ 296,713
TF093403   IMPLICATIONS OF CLIMATE CHANGE FOR ECONOMIC POLICIES IN APEC                                       10/30/2012        $ 401,564
TF098350   Inequality of opportunities, exclusion and vulnerability among Peruvian and Indian children        12/29/2012         $ 86,811
TF098830   Vulnerability to shocks, child marriage, and human development in Africa                            1/31/2013         $ 58,287
TF098165   Reducing Poverty, Inequality and Vulnerability in Southern Africa                                   6/28/2013        $ 191,598
TF094797   AADAPT - AGRICULTURAL ADAPTATIONS                                                                   6/30/2013        $ 399,898
TF097357   Poverty, Inequality and Conflict in West Africa                                                     6/30/2013        $ 283,470
TF097640   Redistribution and the State: Assessing the Distributional Impact of Fiscal Policy                  6/30/2013        $ 151,783
TF097908   Reducing vulnerability to poverty                                                                   6/30/2013        $ 399,379
TF010366   Promoting Inclusive Growth in the Low Income SSA countries                                         10/31/2013        $ 299,187
TF096793   Food Prices, Climate Change and Food Insecurity                                                    12/30/2013        $ 159,167
TF010395   Increasing Employment for Young Women in Jordan                                                    12/31/2013        $ 200,000
TF010534   Socioeconomic mobility and inequality of access to employment in Europe and Central Asia           12/31/2013        $ 241,178
TF010838   Fostering Inclusive Development: Advancing Knowledge of Inequality and Mobility in East Asia and    3/31/2014        $ 297,853
           the Pacific
TF010533   Economic Mobility and Pathways to Equality                                                         12/31/2014       $ 223,924
TF010637   TFESSD: Creating opportunities for broad participation in private sector income and employment     12/31/2014       $ 395,224
           Total                                                                                                            $ 18,830,131




   46
                                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

   SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT WINDOW


Fund        Fund Name                                                                               Closing    Disbursements
                                                                                                      Date               USD
 TF024402   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : INDONESIA LOCAL LEVEL INSTITUTION                            12/31/2001        $ 223,377
 TF024808   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW - EAST ASIA PUBLIC DISCLOSURE                                   4/30/2002        $ 73,626
 TF024237   WEST AFRICA HUB SECONDMENT                                                             9/30/2002        $ 313,772
 TF050546   WEST AFRICA HUB SECONDMENT                                                            12/20/2002        $ 147,448
 TF023497   NTF-ESSD STRATEGIC PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PIED                                 3/31/2003        $ 303,256
 TF023593   NTF-ESSD SUSTAINING CULTURAL HERITAGE AND DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA                        6/30/2003        $ 195,289
 TF024968   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : MAINSTREAMING COMMUNITY DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT IN MNA             6/30/2003        $ 228,523
 TF024910   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW - AFRICA REGIONAL CDD EFFORT : AFRICA TRADITIONAL ENERGY        6/30/2003        $ 409,641
 TF050143   NTF-ESSD:SOCIAL WINDOW-CDD CHAD                                                        6/30/2003        $ 48,966
 TF050144   NTF-ESSD:SOCIAL WINDOW-CDD MADAGASKAR                                                  6/30/2003        $ 64,193
 TF050146   NTF-ESSD:SOCIAL WINDOW-CDD NIGER                                                       6/30/2003        $ 152,155
 TF050147   NTF-ESSD:SOCIAL WINDOW-CDD NIGERIA                                                     6/30/2003        $ 45,851
 TF050148   NTF-ESSD:SOCIAL WINDOW-CDD ZAMBIA                                                      6/30/2003        $ 2,400
 TF024404   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : LAC INDIGENOUS PEOPLES                                        9/30/2003        $ 719,850
 TF024746   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : ECA CDD SUPPORT                                              10/31/2003        $ 852,478
 TF024411   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : SOUTH ASIA LOCAL LEVEL ORGANIZATION                           3/31/2004        $ 609,995
 TF024911   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW - AFRICA REGIONAL CDD EFFORT : PRODUCER ORGANIZATION AND        3/31/2004        $ 192,588
            POVERTY REDUCTION
 TF051838   ALBANIA & HONDURAS - IMPROVING THE ENVIRONMENT FOR CIVIC ENGAGEMENT IN POVERTY        6/30/2004        $ 150,716
            REDUCTION
 TF052138   CAMBODIA-POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS OF LAND REFORMS                            6/30/2004        $ 98,296
 TF024909   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW - AFRICA REGIONAL CDD EFFORT : COMPLEMENTARY SUPPORT TO CDD     6/30/2004      $ 1,297,137
 TF051811   CDD SCALING UP ACTION RESEARCH PROGRAM                                                 9/30/2004        $ 99,971
 TF051178   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL AND POVERTY IMPACT OF TRANSPORT PORTFOLIO                             10/31/2004        $ 239,305
 TF051665   NTF-ESSD:YOUTH EMPOWERMENT                                                            10/31/2004        $ 146,583
 TF053272   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : CONFERENCE ON LOCAL DEVELOPMENT                                10/31/2004        $ 100,651
 TF051948   AFRICA:LOCAL LEVEL INSTITUTIONS AND MACRO IMPACT                                      12/30/2004        $ 23,431
 TF051594   NTF-ENHANCING ACCOUNTABILITY OF INSTITUTIONS THROUGH ENABLING CITIZEN PARTICIPATION   12/31/2004        $ 156,602
            IN THE M&E OF PUBLIC SPENDING
 TF052539   NTFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : DEVELOPMENT AND DELIVERY OF ACCOUNTABILITY AND                12/31/2004       $ 149,792
            PARTICIPATION TRAINING MODULES FOR CDD
 TF052753   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW - AFRICA: POTENTIAL FOR CIVIL SOCIETY ENGAGEMENT IN LOW INCOME   12/31/2004       $ 142,239
            COUNTRIES UNDER STRESS
 TF053609   TFESSD-GLIA ON HIV/AIDS AND REFUGEES                                                  12/31/2004       $ 190,792
 TF052870   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS FOR MEASURING SOCIAL COHESION IN CONFLICT-     1/31/2005       $ 15,950
            AFFECTED COMMUNITIES IN SRI LANKA
 TF024691   NTF-ESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : SDV SOCIAL CAPITAL AND EMPOWERMENT                           6/30/2005        $ 672,227
 TF051839   GAMBIA PRS, SUPPORT FOR SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY AND PARTICIPATORY MONITORING AND        6/30/2005        $ 185,574
            EVALUATION
 TF052551   NTFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : SOCIAL DIMENTIONS OF REGIONAL DIFFERENCES IN TAJIKISTAN       6/30/2005        $ 147,061
 TF052874   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : VULNERABILITY AMONG THE DISPLACED IN THE CAUCASUS              8/31/2005        $ 214,887
 TF052598   NTFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : SOCIO-ECONOMIC DISPARITIES - CONFLICT POTENTIAL IN CENTRAL    9/30/2005        $ 139,504
            ASIA
 TF052610   NTFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : ENHANCING CAPACITY THROUGH RESEARCH AND ACTION FOR            9/30/2005         $ 58,867
            POVERTY REDUCTION INITIATIVES IN RWANDA AND SUDAN
 TF051836   ARMENIA - PARTICIPATORY MONITORING AND SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY                          11/30/2005       $ 139,724
 TF051322   NTF:ESSD-CAPACITY BUILDING NETWORK FOR COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT                          12/31/2005       $ 566,304
 TF051835   PROMOTING SOCIAL AND PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY IN AFRICA                                  12/31/2005       $ 436,952
 TF052781   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : TANZANIA: TASAF INTANGIBLE BENEFITS STUDY                      12/31/2005       $ 59,211
 TF054117   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: MOROCCO COUNTRY SOCIAL ANALYSIS                                 12/31/2005       $ 76,859
 TF053969   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: NIGERIA: NIGER DELTA CONFLICT ANALYSIS AND MANAGEMENT            1/31/2006       $ 150,000
 TF052023   MAINSTREAMING SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT IN WEST BANK AND GAZA                                 2/28/2006       $ 261,867
 TF052671   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW - BENIN : STRENGTHENING PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PARTICIPATORY        3/30/2006       $ 242,624
            MONITORING OF PRSP IMPLEMENTATION
 TF054103   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: AFRICA MUNICIPAL DIGITAL RADIO PROGRAM                          4/30/2006        $ 83,694
 TF051772   CDD IN CONFLICT CONTEXTS                                                              6/30/2006        $ 417,285
 TF051845   REVIEW OF CDD IMPACTS IN EAST ASIA REGION                                             6/30/2006        $ 489,958
 TF052550   NTFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : CHINA FARMERS ASSOCIATION                                     6/30/2006        $ 271,654

   47
                                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund        Fund Name                                                                               Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                      Date                USD
 TF052580   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : STRENGTHEN LOCAL GOVERNANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN ECA           6/30/2006         $ 399,423
 TF052596   NTFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : INDIGENOUS PEOPLE & POVERTY IN LATIN AMERICA                   6/30/2006         $ 99,729
 TF052597   NTFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : RACE AND SOCIAL INCLUSION IN POPULATION INFO GATHERING - LCR   6/30/2006         $ 287,991
            REGION
 TF054202   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: CIVIL SOCIETY CAPACITY BUILDING IN ZAMBIA AND MALAWI              6/30/2006       $ 124,009
 TF053919   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: AFRICA REGION: CONFLICT AND DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY BUILDING        10/31/2006       $ 143,273
            PROGRAM
 TF054260   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: HUMAN RIGHTS AND BASIC SERVICES                                  10/31/2006       $ 73,456
 TF052767   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW - AFRICA COTERMINOUS POSITIONS                                     12/5/2006       $ 557,912
 TF051253   NTF-ESSD INVESTING IN SOCIAL CAPITAL THROUGH CDD PROJECTS                              12/31/2006       $ 834,413
 TF051861   CHAD: LOCALIZATION OF THE PRSP IN RURAL AREAS AND STAKEHOLDER CAPACITY BUILDING        12/31/2006       $ 287,722
 TF053792   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : CHAD-PROMOTING CITIZEN EMPOWERMENT                              12/31/2006       $ 28,581
 TF053871   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : KNOWLEDGE SHARING ON INTEGRATIVE COUNTRY SOCIAL ANALYSIS        12/31/2006       $ 99,050
 TF053881   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: ECUADOR: GOVERNANCE THROUGH SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY                12/31/2006       $ 163,211
 TF053890   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS TO IMPROVE PUBLIC SERVICES IN INDIA        12/31/2006       $ 205,356
 TF053926   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: ENHANCING SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY IN KENYA                         12/31/2006       $ 106,468
 TF053982   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: CHANGE GOVERNANCE IN AFRICA                                      12/31/2006       $ 149,458
 TF053859   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : YEMEN COUNTRY SOCIAL ANALYSIS                                    1/30/2007       $ 114,472
 TF051773   PHILIPPINES - GENDER AND CONFLICT IN MINDANAO                                           1/31/2007       $ 421,798
 TF053970   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: VILLAGE LEVEL JUSTICE AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION                      2/28/2007       $ 340,505
 TF053787   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : STRENGTHENING BOTTOM-UP LOCAL GOVERNANCE IN GEORGIA &            6/30/2007       $ 252,417
            MOLDOVA
 TF053857   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : COUNTRY ASSESSMENTS - GHANA AND SIERRA LEONE                    6/30/2007        $ 249,941
 TF053863   TFESSD SOC WINDOW : STAFF SECONDMENT TO MNSRE                                          6/30/2007        $ 558,055
 TF053870   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW:CAPACITY BUILDING & PILOTING OF SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY             6/30/2007        $ 384,804
            INITIATIVES FOR COMMUNITY DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTHASIA
 TF055773   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: STRENGTHENING GOVERNMENT CAPACITY FOR LOCAL GOVERNANCE IN        6/30/2007         $ 95,385
            ECA
 TF053968   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: KENYA COUNTRY SOCIAL ANALYSIS                                     9/30/2007       $ 127,789
 TF053891   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: GUATEMALA: CAPACITY FOR INCLUSIVE GOVERNANCE                     11/30/2007       $ 419,529
 TF052915   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : LOCAL GOVERNANCE AND EMPOWERMENT IN INDIA                       12/31/2007       $ 433,278
 TF053796   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT AND SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY IN               1/30/2008       $ 394,093
            UGANDA'S HEALTH SECT
 TF054126   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: CAMPAIGN TO IMPROVE PARTICIPATION OF WOMEN IN CDD                1/31/2008        $ 424,980
            PROGRAMS IN INDONESIA
 TF054238   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: SUSTAINABLE CONFLICT RECOVERY: STRENGTHENING CDD APPROACHES      3/31/2008         $ 270,602
 TF051589   NTF-SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY                                                        6/30/2008       $ 1,737,731
 TF052785   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : EAP SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT URBAN FRINGE                        6/30/2008         $ 508,369
 TF053243   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : SUPPORTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF T                              6/30/2008         $ 352,232
 TF057191   COUNTRY TO COUNTRY TECHNICAL ALLIANCE ON SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY                         7/30/2008         $ 44,760
 TF057212   TFESSD: YOUTH EXCLUSION, GENDER AND VIOLENCE IN BURUNDI AND RWANDA                     7/31/2008         $ 49,353
 TF055766   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: COMMUNITY ACTION AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT FOR            9/30/2008         $ 257,368
            IMPROVING SERVICE DELIVERY
 TF052655   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW : AFRICA SD STRATEGIC ANALYSIS AND IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY       12/31/2008       $ 900,845
            REFORMS
 TF053889   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: PARTICIPATORY BUDGETING KNOWLEDGE & ACTION SUPPORT CENTERS       12/31/2008       $ 478,525
 TF055505   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: MALAWI - BUILDING RESILIENT COMMUNITIES THROUGH                  12/31/2008       $ 516,154
            EMPOWEREMENT, SOCIAL PROTECTION AND RISK MANAGEMENT
 TF055592   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: PARTICIPATORY MONITORING TO GET RESULTS AND MEASURE IMPACT       12/31/2008       $ 270,115
            OF LOCAL DEVELOPMENT: A MULTI-REGION INITIATIVE
 TF055593   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: ANDEAN SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY INITIATIVE                          12/31/2008       $ 264,773
 TF055615   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: YOUTH INCLUSION AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE MENA REGION               12/31/2008       $ 175,208
 TF055631   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: SOCIAL ANALYSIS AND PARTICIPATION IN DEVELOPMENT POLICY          12/31/2008       $ 379,558
            LENDING
 TF057064   LAO PDR: ANALYSIS OF DEVELOPMENT POLICIES FOR ETHNIC MINORITIES IN UPLAND AREAS        12/31/2008       $ 165,766
 TF057135   TFESSD: SENEGAL: BRINGING VULNERABILITY INTO POLICY FOCUS                              12/31/2008       $ 454,859
 TF057225   TFESSD: RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND COMMUNITY DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT                          12/31/2008       $ 45,255
 TF057423   STRENGTHENING THE IMPACT OF THE AFRICA REGION'S GENDER AND LAW PROGRAM                 12/31/2008       $ 187,756
 TF055743   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: STRENGTHENING SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR DELIVERY OF PUBLIC        1/31/2009       $ 190,761
            SERVICES AND INCLUSIVE GOVERNANCE IN THE CARIBBEAN
 TF055616   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: NIGERIA - HARMONIZATION OF PUBLIC POLICIES AND PROCESSES         2/15/2009        $ 189,651
 TF055754   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: YOUTH AND DEVELOPMENT IN CONFLICT-AFFECTED COUNTRIES             2/28/2009        $ 192,823
 TF057213   TFESSD: ETHIOPIA, SIERRA LEONE - TRANSPORT SECTOR: SOCIAL INCLUSION                    6/30/2009        $ 89,385

   48
                                                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund        Fund Name                                                                                             Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                                    Date                USD
 TF057237   TFESSD: YOUTH INCLUSION IN CONFLICT AND POST-CONFLICT CONTEXTS: IMPLICATIONS FOR CDD                 6/30/2009         $ 157,523
 TF057280   COUNTRY SOCIAL ANALYSIS, EXTREME POVERTY AND GOVERNANCE                                              7/31/2009         $ 190,135
 TF057310   AZERBAIJAN RURAL MOBILITY AND LIVELIHOOD OPPORTUNITIES                                               8/31/2009         $ 99,138
 TF057189   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: SUPPORTING ACCESSIBLE JUSTICE SYSTEMS IN POST CONFLICT                         9/30/2009         $ 324,207
            COUNTRIES
 TF055504   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: SOCIAL POLICY                                                                  12/31/2009       $ 425,994
 TF055507   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: INTEGRATED COUNTRY SOCIAL ANALYSIS                                             12/31/2009       $ 421,657
 TF055513   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: LOCAL GOVERNANCE PLATFORMS: STRENGTHENING LOCAL                                12/31/2009       $ 399,739
            GOVERNMENT-COMMUNITY INTERFACE IN CDD
 TF057340   ALLIANCE FOR DEMAND SIDE GOVERNANCE FOR SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY IN SOUTH ASIA                          12/31/2009        $ 382,851
 TF057347   MOBILIZING RURAL INSTITUTIONS                                                                        12/31/2009        $ 597,180
 TF090743   BUILDING DEMAND-SIDE GOVERNANCE BY THE POOR                                                          12/31/2009        $ 129,218
 TF055543   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: MONITORING CDD IMPACT FOR EAST ASIA CDD FLAGSHIP                                3/31/2010        $ 695,594
 TF090758   SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN WATER SUPPLY                                                           5/31/2010        $ 363,490
 TF057377   GLOBAL STUDY OF CRIME, VIOLENCE AND THE URBAN POOR                                                    9/30/2010        $ 235,622
 TF090255   IMPACT EVALUATION OF LOCAL DEVELOPMENT AND GOVERNANCE                                                12/31/2010        $ 847,245
 TF090592   PROMOTING EFFECTIVE LOCAL GOVERNANCE IN MNA: STRENGTHENING ACCOUNTABILITY                            12/31/2010        $ 371,280
 TF092387   AREA BASED DEVELOPMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION                                                 12/31/2010        $ 493,960
 TF090744   REGIONAL INTEGRATION OF SOCIAL INCLUSION IN INFRASTRUCTURE                                            1/31/2011        $ 125,844
 TF090810   LIVELIHOODS ACTION LEARNING FUND                                                                      1/31/2011        $ 234,507
 TF055744   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: MADAGASCAR-COMMUNITY POVERTY MONITORING AND ANALYSIS                            6/30/2011        $ 549,851
 TF091110   STRENGTHENING CITIZENSHIP THROUGH UPGRADING INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS                                      6/30/2011      $ 1,362,000
 TF092353   DEVELOPING SOCIAL ASPECTS OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE AGENDA                                             6/30/2011      $ 1,546,836
 TF092922   TFESSD OBTAINING LESSONS LEARNED FROM COMMUNITY FISHERIES CO-MANAGEMENT &                             6/30/2011        $ 335,155
            COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OF COASTAL CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
 TF093062   ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COASTAL CITIES OF NORTH AFRICA (MOROCCO)                           6/30/2011        $ 195,948
 TF094888   Surveying public attitudes on climate change to inform effective policy making                       6/30/2011        $ 248,579
 TF095332   Adaptation of Rural Livelihoods to Climate Change: Learning from the Poor Tribal Communities in      8/31/2011        $ 11,377
            Southern Rajasthan
 TF092388   INCREASING COMMUNITY RESILIENCE TO THE SOCIAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN LAC                        9/15/2011        $ 468,326
 TF097390   Engaging Societies in Responding to Fragile Situations                                               12/15/2011        $ 299,354
 TF090248   LOCAL GOVERNANCE IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA                                                               12/31/2011        $ 649,570
 TF092521   PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW TO ADDRESS SOCIAL IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE                                 12/31/2011        $ 133,698
 TF051226   NTF:SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND CDD ANCHOR                                                                 2/28/2012      $ 1,099,978
 TF097558   Enhancing practices on sustainable livelihood restoration for displaced persons                       5/31/2012        $ 2,320
 TF095301   Investing in Women Producers to Respond to Food Price Crisis                                          6/29/2012        $ 208,526
 TF092498   GENDER AND LOCAL GOVERNANCE IN CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION                                              6/30/2012        $ 363,291
 TF092688   MANAGING THE SOCIAL DIMENSIONS OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN MENA                                              6/30/2012        $ 381,322
 TF093061   COMMUNITIES AT THE SHARP END OF CLIMATE CHANGE                                                        6/30/2012        $ 289,683
 TF095008   Addressing Climate Change with Low Cost Green Housing                                                 6/30/2012        $ 293,422
 TF095853   Supporting Strategic Analysis for Social Development                                                  6/30/2012        $ 399,953
 TF095093   Safety Nets in Fragile States: GFRP Case Studies                                                       7/1/2012        $ 198,640
 TF010362   Mobility, inequality and the social institution of domestic servitude: Building the knowledge base   12/31/2012        $ 199,150
            for a social safety net intervention
 TF093767   VIOLENCE PREVENTION PILOTS PROGRAM                                                                   12/31/2012       $ 800,000
 TF095076   Realtime monitoring of the impacts of the global economic crisis                                     12/31/2012       $ 415,934
 TF098227   Reconnecting isolated vulnerable rural populations in the Central African Republic                   12/31/2012       $ 143,522
 TF094944   Large-scale land acquisition: Providing economic, social, and environmental guidance                  4/30/2013       $ 384,996
 TF095272   Assessing the social and economics costs of REDD at country level                                     6/29/2013       $ 339,997
 TF092960   ASSESSING COMMUNITY AND HOUSEHOLD RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN RAINFED AREAS                       6/30/2013       $ 156,847
            OF YEMEN
 TF093120   IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE                            6/30/2013       $ 1,286,410
 TF095002   Youth and Climate Change in MENA                                                                     6/30/2013         $ 251,144
 TF098461   Does Participatory Development Help Communities Cope with Increased Vulnerability?                   6/30/2013         $ 77,083
 TF098528   Increasing Morocco s resilience to climate shocks through community-based disaster risk              6/30/2013         $ 174,734
            management
 TF097516   What are the Next Steps in Supporting Youth Inclusion and Preventing Youth Violence in               7/31/2013        $ 343,859
            Vulnerable Post-Conflict Envrionments?
 TF097626   From #land grab# to development opportunity?                                                          9/30/2013       $ 299,890
 TF097839   Self Reliance for IDPs in the Caucasus                                                                9/30/2013       $ 142,604
 TF093008   ADAPTING RURAL LIVELIHOODS TO CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS IN THE BALKANS AND CAUCASUS                       10/31/2013       $ 574,167
 TF010269   Improving Social Inclusion in India's Health Insurance Scheme for the Poor                           11/30/2013       $ 105,826
 TF010401   TFESSD Agricultural Productivity                                                                     12/31/2013       $ 390,731
   49
                                                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund        Fund Name                                                                                                Closing    Disbursements
                                                                                                                       Date               USD
 TF012072   Addressing Inequality in Morocco and Tunisia: Improving access to Services through Citizen Voice       12/31/2013        $ 198,782
 TF098519   Real Time Monitoring of Social Impacts of Crisis Response and Recovery in ECA                          12/31/2013        $ 179,690
 TF010281   Mobilizing Societal Dynamics to Promote Social Inclusion and Cohesion in Fragile Settings               6/30/2014        $ 295,648
 TF010391   Youth Inclusion and Empowerment in CDD in the Africa Region                                             6/30/2014        $ 326,076
 TF099550   Enhancing Political Oversight in Resource Rich Countries in order to Reduce the Vulnerability of the    6/30/2014        $ 191,109
            Poor to Economic Shocks
 TF011013   Evaluating Social Accountability and Legal Empowerment for Health Services in Nigeria and Sierra        8/1/2014        $ 249,725
            Leone
 TF010372   Promoting the empowerment of women in local development in CAR                                          9/1/2014         $ 129,274
            Total                                                                                                                 $ 50,698,282




   50
                                                                                                      TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

   SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW


Fund        Fund Name                                                                                          Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                                 Date                USD
 TF053965   TFESSD SP WINDOW: ORPHANHOOD AND LIVING ARRANGEMENTS IN TANZANIA                                  6/30/2005          $ 67,580
 TF053966   TFESSD SP WINDOW: SENEGAL - SUPPORT FOR THE DISABLED WITHIN PRSP                                  6/30/2005          $ 19,450
 TF053967   TFESSD SP WINDOW: ORPHANS AND VULNERABLE CHILDREN TOOLKIT TESTING                                 6/30/2005          $ 74,821
 TF054110   TFESSD SP WINDOW: DISCRIMINATION OF ORPHANS IN BENIN                                              6/30/2005          $ 24,646
 TF053971   TFESSD SP WINDOW: RWANDA SOCIAL PROTECTION STRATEGY                                               6/30/2006          $ 33,935
 TF053964   TFESSD SP WINDOW: DISABILITY IN ARMENIA AND UZBEKISTAN.                                           6/30/2007          $ 80,000
 TF054118   TFESSD SP WINDOW: DISABILITY AMONG CHILDREN AND POVERTY IN COTE D'IVOIRE                          6/30/2007          $ 83,327
 TF056362   TFESSD-SOCIAL PROTECTION WIINDOW: GUINEA CONFLICT RISK AND VULNERABILITY                          9/30/2007          $ 25,000
            ASSESSMENT (RVA)
 TF055675   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: ETHIOPIA PRODUCTIVE SAFETY NETS PROGRAM                          12/31/2007       $ 152,491
 TF055682   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: DISABILITY AND LIVING STANDARDS                                  12/31/2007       $ 149,182
 TF053963   TFESSD SP WINDOW: SUPPORT TO MAINSTREAMING OF DISABILITY AT THE WORLD BANK                         6/30/2008       $ 409,103
 TF054203   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: YOUTH IN AFRICA: POVERTY AND LABOR MARKET                         6/30/2008       $ 145,636
            OPPORTUNITIES
 TF055620   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: SOUTH AFRICA AND LESOTHO SCALING UP AND                          6/30/2008        $ 199,635
            HARMONIZATION
 TF057288   DISABILITY & NATURAL DISASTER                                                                      6/30/2008        $ 14,976
 TF057003   TFESSD: POLICY TOOLKIT FOR YOUTH AT RISK                                                          12/31/2008       $ 129,535
 TF057146   TFESSD: MAINSTREAMING GENDER INTO DISASTER RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION                            12/31/2008        $ 59,210
 TF057400   SAFETY NETS FOR NATURAL DISASTERS                                                                 12/31/2008        $ 55,480
 TF057453   DECENTRALIZE DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND LOCAL GOVERNANCE - BANGLADESH                                12/31/2008        $ 66,025
 TF090917   YOUTH EXCLUSION AND POLITICAL VIOLENCE                                                            12/31/2008       $ 130,000
 TF055842   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: NIGERIA: PARTICIPATORY MONITORING OF NEEDS                        2/15/2009       $ 319,768
 TF055676   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: AFRICA REGIONAL LABOR MARKET STUDY                                3/31/2009        $ 96,350
 TF091148   INDIA: EMPOWERING DISABLED PEOPLE IN INDIA                                                         3/31/2009        $ 40,498
 TF055540   TFESSD SOCIAL WINDOW: CCT AND WEATHER RISK MANAGEMENT IN RURAL NICARAGUA                           6/30/2009       $ 366,954
 TF055759   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: INFORMAL SUPPORT FOR THE ELDERLY: A THREE                         6/30/2009       $ 132,125
            COUNTRY STUDY
 TF057436   STUDY OF THE TSUNAMI AFTERMATH AND RECOVERY (STAR)                                                 6/30/2009       $ 150,000
 TF090860   IDENTIFYING THE POOR IN INDIA                                                                      6/30/2009        $ 64,698
 TF090861   REACHING THE VULNERABLE AND AT-RISK YOUTH IN TIMOR LESTE                                           6/30/2009        $ 74,903
 TF090779   M&E FRAMEWORK FOR NIGERIA SAFETY NET PROGRAM                                                       9/30/2009       $ 146,092
 TF055944   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW:RISK,SOCIAL NETWORKS,INTERVENTIONS &                              10/31/2009       $ 149,400
            POVERTY:INVESTIGATING POVERTY & WEALTH DYNAMICS USING LONG-TERM
 TF057435   VIOLENCE AND CRIME IN THE CARIBBEAN                                                               3/31/2010        $ 197,458
 TF055590   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW: INFORMALITY, GLOBALIZATION AND WORKING POOR                      6/30/2010        $ 341,451
 TF055617   TFESSD SOCIAL PROTECTION WINDOW - GLOBAL: RISK, GROWTH, AND POVERTY REDUCTION IN                  6/30/2010        $ 205,198
            LOW INCOME COUNTRIES
 TF057002   TFESSD: TACKLING VULNERABILITY TO ADDRESS HEALTH ISSUES OF ERITREA                                6/30/2010        $ 124,736
 TF090877   STRENGTHENING CAPACITY FOR MEASURING DISABILITY ACROSS SOUTH ASIA                                 6/30/2010        $ 111,235
 TF091040   RWANDA - DEVELOPING BUILDING AND EVALUATING SOCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE POOR AND                    6/30/2010        $ 160,058
            VULNERABLE
 TF092501   CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE CHANGING ROLE OF CHILDREN IN HOUSEHOLD RISK                                 6/30/2010       $ 450,000
 TF090820   FLAGSHIP ON LABOR, SKILLS, AND PRODUCTIVITY                                                       12/31/2010        $ 47,227
 TF091773   THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISABILITY IN POST-CONFLICT COUNTRIES                           12/31/2010       $ 149,990
 TF057304   RESPONDING TO NATURAL DISASTERS THROUGH A COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT                             6/30/2011       $ 168,615
            APPROACH
 TF057305   RESPONDING TO NATURAL DISASTER THROUGH SOCIAL PROTECTION INSTRUMENTS INCLUDING                    6/30/2011          $ 77,701
            VULNERABLE GROUPS
 TF090720   ETHNIC MINORITIES, POVERTY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT                                                   6/30/2011       $ 194,519
 TF094621   IMPROVING RWANDA'S SOCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OPTIONS FOR CLIMATE-RELATED RISKS                        6/30/2011       $ 137,432
 TF094683   AGRICULTURE INSURANCE FOR VULNERABILITY REDUCTION AND CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION                    6/30/2011       $ 232,000
 TF096133   Reducing vulnerability of Mongolian herders to climatic risk                                       6/30/2011       $ 191,496
 TF090759   PROMOTING EQUITY FOR ETHNIC MINORITIES IN VIETNAM                                                 10/31/2011       $ 116,314
 TF096087   Impacts of the International Financial Crisis on Workers Remittances, Migration, and Poverty in   12/30/2011        $ 64,897
            Moldova.
 TF094689   MAKING THE BIO-CARBON FINANCE MARKET WORK FOR THE POOR IN THE MID-HIMALAYAN                       12/31/2011       $ 220,238
            RURAL COMMUNITIES

   51
                                                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Fund        Fund Name                                                                                             Closing     Disbursements
                                                                                                                    Date                USD
 TF057391   BREAKING THE BARRIERS TO YOUTH INCLUSION IN MOROCCO                                                  6/30/2012         $ 255,317
 TF092500   BANGLADESH: IMPROVING LOCAL CAPACITY TO ADAPT SAFETY NET PROGRAMS TO CLIMATE                         6/30/2012         $ 324,297
            CHANGE.
 TF092503   SUPPORT TO MAINSTREAMING OF DISABILITY AT THE WORLD BANK                                              6/30/2012       $ 649,078
 TF092558   CLIMATE CHANGE-INDUCED MIGRATION AND ITS IMPACT ON YOUTH IN WEST AFRICA                               6/30/2012       $ 339,582
 TF092625   INDEX-BASED INSURANCE PRODUCTS FOR MANAGING CLIMATE RISKS IN EAST AFRICA                              6/30/2012       $ 498,281
 TF097298   Vulnerability, Crisis Impact, and Effectiveness of the Safety Net Programs in Pakistan                6/30/2012        $ 61,763
 TF097736   Children and Youth in Crisis                                                                          6/30/2012        $ 74,957
 TF097678   Safety Nets for Energy Pricing Reforms                                                                9/30/2012       $ 170,300
 TF094826   Piloting an Indemnity Livestock Insurance in Ethiopia                                                11/15/2012       $ 199,886
 TF095119   Community-Based Conditional Cash Transfers with Mobile Phone Banking                                 12/31/2012       $ 322,738
 TF097614   Understanding and Translating Policy into Practice: Integrating Disability into MENA Operations      12/31/2012       $ 195,485
 TF097745   Evaluation of cash vs. food in school feeding programs                                               12/31/2012       $ 220,321
 TF094932   Effective and inclusive Targeting mechanisms in Africa                                                2/28/2013       $ 391,162
 TF010807   Developing Effective Social Safety Nets to Reduce Inequality and Social Exclusion in the Middle       6/30/2013       $ 192,387
            East and North Africa
 TF094825   Evaluating Demand-side Incentives and Community Mobilization to Expand the Uptake of                 6/30/2013        $ 188,731
            Essential
 TF095667   Social Protection Responses to the FFF Crises in East Asia                                           6/30/2013        $ 290,138
 TF096163   Developing an Effective SN to cope with Price Shocks in Djibouti and Yemen                           6/30/2013        $ 223,018
 TF097257   Haiti Nutritional Security                                                                           6/30/2013        $ 199,145
 TF097666   Reducing vulnerability via labor market intervention in Africa: Towards Building long-term           6/30/2013        $ 218,149
            resilience to respond effectively to crisis and shocks
 TF095456   Safety nets in Central Asia (Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan) # post crisis and beyond          8/31/2013       $ 195,910
 TF097983   Productive Safety Nets - What they mean for small holder farmers?                                    10/30/2013       $ 195,268
 TF097510   Welfare Cost of Risks and Risk Management Options                                                    12/31/2013        $ 99,849
 TF097955   Financial Innovations to Reduce Vulnerability                                                        12/31/2013       $ 199,791
 TF010791   Global Stocktaking of Social Protection Programs                                                      1/16/2014       $ 297,107
 TF095046   Reducing Malnutrition Caused by Food Insecurity in Ethiopia                                           2/28/2014       $ 179,336
 TF097402   Evaluating efforts to prevent the phenomenon of street children in an African post conflict           2/28/2014       $ 195,011
            country
 TF097444   Smart Safety Nets in ECA                                                                             4/30/2014        $ 295,617
 TF010804   Promoting Labor Market Participation and Social Inclusion through Well-Designed Social Welfare       5/31/2014        $ 299,989
            Systems in ECAs Poorest Countries
 TF010515   Developing and Improving Social Safety Net systems                                                   6/28/2014        $ 170,431
 TF010562   Extending Social Insurance to Informal Sector Workers                                                6/28/2014        $ 274,101
 TF010646   Inclusive Transfer Programs: Leveling the playfield to address inequality of opportunities           6/28/2014         $ 99,955
 TF010745   Piloting Service Delivery Innovations to Support Disabled People in Post-War affected areas in Sri   6/30/2014        $ 149,829
            Lanka
 TF010805   Graduation Strategies for Inclusion and Social Cohesion in the Middle East and North Africa          6/30/2014        $ 139,901
            Region
 TF097789   Evaluating conditional cash transfers schemes in Africa as safety net mechanisms for vulnerable      6/30/2014        $ 298,737
            populations.
 TF010483   Political Economy of Redistribution, Transfers, and Taxes in ECA                                      7/15/2014       $ 169,368
 TF097673   Impact Evaluation of the Bangladesh Employment Generation Program for the Poorest                    10/30/2014       $ 187,852
 TF010470   Social Safety Nets for Social Inclusion and Distributional Equity in Fragile States- the Case of     12/31/2014       $ 160,793
            Guinea
 TF010589   Using Results-Based Financing in Health to Promote Equity & Stability in a Post-Conflict Setting     12/31/2014       $ 154,934
 TF010763   Developing and Piloting a Social Protection Systems Assessment Tool in LAC                           12/31/2014       $ 149,429
 TF010775   Improving Targeting Efficiency of Social Safety Net Programs                                         12/31/2014       $ 172,755
 TF097686   Employment Integration of Persons with Disabilities: Pathways into Disability benefits and Back to   12/31/2014       $ 147,344
            Labor Markets
            Total                                                                                                               $ 15,899,424




   52
                                                                            TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




ANNEX 3: MULTIMEDIA SOURCES (YOUTUBE, INTERNET, PHOTOS)

World Bank Internet site on the TFESSD: http://www.worldbank.org/TFESSD

The following are examples of TFESSD-supported YouTube, Internet websites or photographs.
This list is not comprehensive.

Climate downscaling and climate portal for the African continent (TF098224)
       Downscaled General Circulation Models (GCM) climate change information through an
       online inter-active portal.
       http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/index.cfm

Haiti Kore-Fanmi, Photographs
       http://andreaborgarello.photoshelter.com/gallery-collection/Kore-
       Fanmi/C0000xYjSb2dy73o

Economics of Charcoal Consumption, East Africa (FY10, Closed), US$230,000 (TF095510):
       TFESSD funded documentary film on the charcoal sector in Tanzania. The video gave
       voice to people who rely on charcoal as the principle source of energy. The video was
       aired on Tanzanian television and is available in YouTube
       (http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=WfvoRWdMkkM) in English and Swahili
       has been viewed over 2000 times.

Project Level Institutional Analysis (FY08, Closed), US$200,000 (TF090726):
       An interview with the task team leader on findings of the reports and the importance of urban
       management and planning to reduce the risk and impact on YouTube:
       http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=5BoQThbbaoY.

Developing Readiness for Climate Adaptation (DRCA), (FY09) US$1,000,000 (TF093108):
       TFESSD supported the expansion of the country adaptation profiles which are accessible
       through the Climate Change Knowledge Portal:
       (http://sdwebx.worldbank.org/climateportal/index.cfm

Youth Leaders in Africa and Eastern Europe used the e-learning materials on the Fundamentals
of Climate Change
       Awareness raising communities on issues on accessing water during dry periods and on
       improving production:
53
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

       http:/einstitute.worldbank.org/ei/course/parliaments-and-climate-change

Potential and Socio-Economic Impact of Reducing Deforestation in the Congo Basin (FY11),
US$150,000 (TF096977):
       TFESSD also supported the production of a documentary film on the impacts of climate
       change on tropical forests to cover the "adaptation" aspects. The film, "Tropical Forests
       under Threat: Voices from the Baka" captures the story of the Baka, a pygmy community
       in far south-eastern Cameroon. The documentary sends a vibrant message that forest
       ecosystems and the communities that depend on it are under threat, but at that the
       same it provided communities a valuable knowledge about the forest. The film is
       available on YouTube in English: http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=Ga-D5rhzpPE (EN)
       and in French: (http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=CIAHctLbY0M (FR).

Innovative Institutional and Technological Solutions to Reduce Vulnerability to Resource
Degradation and Climate Shocks in LCR (FY11), US$500,000 (TF097837):
       A video with the interviews with the previous leadership of the Ministry of Environment
       in Colombia documenting the key to the success in the strengthening of environmental
       regulations.

Promoting Inclusive Growth in the Low Income SSA Countries (FY11), US$300,000 (TF010366):
       Africa Region Survey-based Harmonized Indicator Program (SHIP) database --
       harmonized household surveys available to all Bank Staff:
       http://microdatalib.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog?sk=ship

Timely and Accurate Poverty and Labor Market Monitoring (FY10), US$300,000 (TF098513):
       An interactive iBook is distributed at the Apple iBookstore :
       https://itunes.apple.com/us/book/effect-womens-economic-
       power/id58645839?ls=1
Mobility, Inequality and the Social Institution of Domestic Servitude: Building the Knowledge
Base for a Social Safety Net Intervention (FY12, Closed), US$200,000 (TF010362):
       Benin workshop including participants from key Ministries, civil society, academia,
       media and donors, and later in lectures at the University of Abomey-Calavi are available
       at http://www.fafo.no/childsrm/accueil.html.

Large Scale Land Acquisition: Providing Economic, Social and Environmental Guidance (FY10),
US$385,000 (TF094944):


54
                                                                          TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

       Report including typology of country situations based on agro-ecological potential is
       available at: http://elibrary.worldbank.org/content/book/9780821385913.

Real-time Monitoring of the Impacts of the Global Economic Crisis (FY10, Closed), US$430,000
(TF095076):

       Real-time monitoring systems results have been disseminated through publication of a
       book, an academic article, two country reports and several blogs. Research was
       conducted in 14 countries of which 9 were TFESSD funded. The book, Living through
       Crisis: How Food, Fuel and Financial Shocks Affect the Poor was published in March
       2012 with launch events conducted in London, Nairobi, Helsinki and Washington D.C. It
       can be accessed at:
       http://publications.worldbank.org/index.php?main_page=product_info&pro
       ducts_id=24310.

Safety Nets in Fragile States (FY10, Closed), US$200,000 (TF095093):
       The primary objective of this activity was to support the development of appropriate
       and effective social safety net systems in fragile or post-conflict contexts. Results from
       the assessments are available on the Bank’s external website at:
        http://intwork.worldbank.org/units/hdn. Key findings on targeting and wage-setting
       have fed into a forthcoming flagship publication on Public Works (Directions in
       Development).

Adapting Rural Livelihoods to Climate Change Risks in the Balkans and Caucasus (FY09),
US$575,950 (TF093008):
       Results of the regional synthesis report have been published in early April 2013 in the
       World Bank's Directions in Development Series. The book titled "Looking Beyond the
       Horizon: How Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Responses Will Reshape
       Agriculture in Eastern Europe and Central Asia", can be accessed at:
       http://elibrary.worldbank.org/content/book/9780821397688.

Communities at the Sharp End of Change (FY09, Closed), US$290,000 (TF093061):
       Grant outputs include: a report on Lessons from the Dzud, along with a photovoice
       book in Mongolian and English; a report on ‘Carbon Livelihoods: Social Opportunities
       and Risks of Carbon Finance’; and a report and video of the Addis Ababa workshop. All
       these are available at:
       http://www.worldbank.org/soicalresilience


55
                                                                        TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

Supporting Strategic Analysis for Social Development (FY10, Closed) - US$400,000 (TF095853):
       All reports and updates can be found on the Bank’s external website at :
       http://worldbank.org/socialdevelopment

Breaking the Barriers to Youth Inclusion in Morocco (FY06, Closed), US$260,000 (TF057391):

       The report “Kingdom of Morocco: Promoting Youth Opportunities and Participation” at:
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/06/16601214/morocco-
       promoting-youth-opportunities-participation

Support to Mainstreaming of Disability at the World Bank (FY09, Closed), US$879,055
(TF092503):
       The goal of the TFESSD Disability and Development Window is to promote the inclusion
       of disability components in Bank operations by providing a quick and flexible source of
       financing. Detailed information on activities can be found on the HDNSP Disability and
       Development Website: http://go.worldbank.org/AX0XDFQ9U0. (Internal only)

Index-Based Insurance Products for Managing Climate Risks in East Africa (FY09, Closed),
US$500,000 (TF092625):
       The experiences of ILRI are shared on the organization’s website (www.ilri.org/ibli) and
       http://livestockinsurance.wordpress.com/category/ibli-videos/.

Piloting Indemnity Livestock Insurance in Ethiopia (FY10, Closed) - US$225,000 (TF094826):

       The survey report was published and the main findings were disseminated at local
       meetings and international events by AEMFI, Nyala Insurance Company and the World
       Bank team:
       (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/Resources/2
       44362-1278965574032/Livestock.pdf).
Evaluating Conditional Cash Transfers Schemes in Africa as Safety Net Mechanisms for
Vulnerable Populations (FY11), US$300,000 (TF097789):
       Flagship publication on Public Works launched in December 2012 that captures and
       organizes information from over forty countries on the design and implementation of
       public works:
       http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=K7rG1r9TCP0
       http://www.YouTube.com/watch?v=KQkkw2fhqlY
       Finally, the information was disseminated to the G20 Developing working group section
       of nutrition and food security and safety nets:
56
                                                                         TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

       http://en.g20russia.ru/events_financial_track/20130226/781042277.html

Developing Effective Social Safety Nets to Reduce Inequality and Social Exclusion in the Middle
East and North Africa (FY12), US$200,000 (TF010807):
       More information can be found under the Gallup.com article on MENA SPEAKS:
       http://www.gallup.com/poll/158906/mena-residents-put-onus-government-
       hel-poor.aspx




57
                                                                             TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT




ANNEX 4: Key TFESSD Supported Reports and Media in 2014/2015
 Report/Media   Description
                Assessing Low Carbon Development in Nigeria. This book in the World Bank Studies
                series was one output of a TFESSD-funded activity to evaluate the threats and
                opportunities for economic growth in Nigeria posed by climate change and variability
                in the agriculture and water resources sectors. It was one of the studies that
                informed the Nigeria Erosion and Watershed Management Project (NEWMAP).
                (TF099126)



                Atlas of Social Protection Indicators of Resilience and Equity (ASPIRE). TFESSD provided
                seed funding for a social protection database, ASPIRE, which continues to grow and
                be a key source of social protection data. In particular the TFESSD activity improved
                the information base on existing social protection programs, and helped lay the
                foundation for the World Bank’s leading role in this area. (TF010791)

                Back to Work: Growing with Jobs in Europe and Central Asia. TFESD funded analytic
                work on inequalities in labor market participation outcomes and associated social
                exclusion across different age, gender, and ethnic groups that that fed into the World
                Bank’s ECA regional jobs report. (TF010804)

                The results of the project were featured in:
                     http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-07-02/lottery-tickets-for-staying-hiv-
                         free-cut-infections-25-.html
                     Burkina                 Faso:          http://go.worldbank.org/IVI4UESTZ0,
                         http://go.worldbank.org/W0XE28BUS0
                     Tanzania: http://emlab.berkeley.edu/~emiguel/pdfs/miguel_tz-cct.pdf

                Deforestation Trends in the Congo Basin. TFESSD funded the development of
                methodologies that contributed to this larger World Bank study that provided an in-
                depth analysis of the major drivers of deforestation and forest degradation for the
                next decades in the countries of the Congo Basin, and robust methodological tools for
                national scenarios based on different development trajectories. (TF096977)




                Economic Mobility and the Rise of the Latin American Middle Class. Analytic work
                funded by TFESSD was used to produce the 2012 Mobility and Middle Class Flagship
                Report, which was the second-most downloaded book at the World Bank in 2013 and
                the fifth most-sought-after publication of 2014 for poverty. The work was
                disseminated worldwide and has had widespread influence. (TF010533)




58
                                                                  TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

     Engaging Youth through CDD Operations. This World Bank global stocktaking report
     was informed by country-level diagnostic reports from Kenya, Sierra Leone and
     Nigeria funded by TFESSD. It provided valuable analysis on engaging youth through
     community-driven development. (TF010391)




     Inclusion and Resilience: The Way Forward for Social Safety Nets in the Middle East and
     North Africa. TFESSD funded an activity designed to enhance the knowledge of
     governments and civil society about social safety nets and options for reform
     (TF010805). An output of the activity, this report enriched the debate on politically
     feasible options for social safety net reform and renewal in the region. It was
     published as part of MENA Development Report series.




     INFOMIDIS mobile app. TFESSD activity supported the Ministry of Development and
     Social Inclusion of Peru (MIDIS) in developing mobile apps to increase the
     transparency and use of information related to social programs and socio-economic
     outcomes in Peru. The mobile apps are currently available in the Apple and Google
     Play stores, and are being used by MIDIS staff and other officials from Peru to easily
     access information related to social programs and socio-economic outcomes in the
     country. (TF010533)
     https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=pe.gob.midis

     Nigeria Erosion and Watershed Management Project (NEWMAP). TFESSD-funded
     studies helped inform the design of a $30 million component on climate change in
     the, which is supporting the Federal Government in developing a strategic platform
     to deal with the climate agenda. Also see the Government of Nigeria’s NEWMAP site:
     http://newmap.gov.ng/ (TF099126)



     Opening the Black Box: The Contextual Drivers of Social Accountability. A social
     accountability intervention was piloted in the Bank-supported Decentralized Service
     Delivery II Project. The results are being used in the rebuilding and recovery of the
     post-Ebola health system, and were featured in a case study for the World Bank’s
     Social Accountability Flagship Report. (TF011013)




     Sierra Leone Youth Employment Support Project. This activity including training for a
     Community Organizations Committee and a targeting assessment. It also supported
     two innovative pilots, one using smartphones to improve delivery of safety net
     programs, and the other allowing cash to be transferred through a mobile payment
     system in the project’s cash-for-work program. (TF010391)




59
                                                                 TFESSD COMPLETION REPORT

     Street Children Project. TFESSD funded two impact evaluation surveys for the World
     Bank’s Street Children Project in DRC, drawing initial conclusions on trends about
     children’s welfare, attitudes and information about children’s rights. The analysis was
     one of the first of its kind. While many evaluations in the social protection sector
     analyze the impact of cash transfer projects, few attempt to understand the impact of
     other types of social assistance projects, particularly the ones that prevent child
     abuse. (TF097402)

     TFESSD website. This website provides information about the trust fund, its
     activities, publications, annual reporting, and independent evaluations.
     http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/tfessd




     Tropical Forests under Threat: Voices from the Baka. This documentary film on the
     Baka community in Cameroon raised awareness on the impacts of climate change on
     tropical forests. It sent a strong message that forest ecosystems and the communities
     that depend on them are under threat, and the same communities have incredibly
     valuable knowledge about the forest. Available in French and in English:
     http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ga-D5rhzpPE (EN) and
     http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CIAHctLbY0M (FR). (TF096977)

     Water and Climate Adaptation Plan (WATCAP). TFESSED funded analysis that
     contributed to the World Bank’s WATCAP, which is intended to help to bridge the gap
     between the climate change predictions for the Sava River Basin and the decision
     makers in current and planned water management investment projects that will be
     affected by changing climate trends. (TF095217)



     Well Begun, Not Yet Done: Vietnam’s Remarkable Progress on Poverty Reduction and
     the Emerging Challenges. TFESSD-funded analysis featured in this 2012 Vietnam
     Poverty Assessment, which was widely disseminated in Vietnam and is a publication
     in the World Bank’s Equity and Development Series. It also informed the Bank’s
     Vietnam Country Strategy. (TF010838)




60
