    Prioritizing Climate Resilient Transport
Investments in a Data-Scarce Environment
                      A Practitioners’ Guide

                ACP-EU Natural Disaster Risk ReducƟon Program
                An iniƟaƟve of the African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc Group, funded by the European Union and managed by GFDRR
    Prioritizing Climate Resilient Transport
Investments in a Data-Scarce Environment
                      A Practitioners’ Guide




                 ACP-EU Natural Disaster Risk ReducƟon Program
                 An iniƟaƟve of the African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc Group, funded by the European Union and managed by GFDRR
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International
Development Association or



The World Bank

1818 H Street NW

Washington DC 20433

Telephone: 202-473-1000

Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily
reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments
they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.



Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed
to World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Photos: Government of Belize
Design: Blue Robin Designs, LLC
Acknowledgements
This Practitioners’ Guide was authored by Melanie Kappes, Beatriz Pozueta, Keren
Charles, Marion Cayetano, and Carolina Rogelis under the leadership of Frederico
Ferreira Pedroso and Diana Rubiano Vargas, all within the Social, Urban, Rural and
Resilience Global Practice. Yoonhee Kim and Justin Locke led the implementation of the
Multi-Criteria Evaluation (MCE) process, on which the Practitioners’ Guide is based. This
work was financed by the Africa Caribbean Pacific (ACP)–European Union (EU) Natural
Disaster Risk Reduction Program, managed by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction
and Recovery.

We thank our colleagues, both internal and external, who provided helpful comments and
reviews on this guide. These individuals include Rashmin Gunasekera, Yohannes Kesete,
Stephen Brushett, Philip Barutha, and representatives within the Government of Belize.
In addition, we thank Kerri Whittington and Blue Robin Designs, LLC, for the design and
layout of the guide.

Many people contributed to the successful implementation of the prioritization process,
especially the implementation of the MCE, and their work provided the experiences that
underlie this guide.

Special thanks to the Government of Belize, which provided the environment to develop
the innovative process on which this guide is based. We are especially grateful to
Yvonne Hyde, Chief Executive Officer, and Duane Belisle, Director, Planning, within
the Ministry of Economic Development who provided strong leadership throughout the
implementation of the MCE process. We would not have been able to complete the work
without their active participation. The MCE involved representatives from Government
ministries, municipalities, private sector, civil society, nongovernmental organizations,
academic institutions, and international financial institutions. We are grateful for their
time and inputs into the process. The team also thanks Ripin Kalra, Sideney Schreiner,
Jan Meerman, and representatives from the U.S. Department of Transportation for their
technical and strategic contributions.

This Practitioners’ Guide is one of several products of the technical assistance program
aimed at supporting Belize is prioritizing climate-resilient infrastructure investment
projects. Other products include the roads condition survey of Belize’s primary and
secondary roads, the National Climate Resilient Investment Plan, and the prioritization of
climate-resilient investments in the road network. We are grateful to all who contributed
to the creation of these documents.
CONTENTS




           Contents

             Acknowledgements									5
             Abbreviations										  7
             Introduction	           12
              Objective and Target Audience of the Practitioners’ Guide	             16
              Reader’s Instructions	                                                 17
             Prioritization of Road Vulnerability Investments	                       20
              Module 1: Definition of Objectives and Scope 	                         20
              Module 2: Institutional Composition	                                   23
              Module 3: Data Collation and Collection	                               26
               Data Collation	                                                       27
               Data Collection	                                                      30
              Module 4: Criticality Evaluation	                                      32
               Identification of Criteria 	                                          33
               Weighting of the Criteria 	                                           36
               Identification of Indicators, Data Requirements, and Scoring	         37
               The Modeling Environment for the Criticality Analysis	                41
               Calculation of Criticality	                                           41
              Module 5: Assessment of Risk/Exposure from Climate-related Hazards 	   43
              Module 6: Informed Decision Making	                                    51
             Discussion and Lessons Learned	                                         56
             References	                                                             59




6
Abbreviations

ACP 		     Africa Caribbean Pacific

ASTER 		   Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer

CBA 		     Cost Benefit Analyses

CEO 		     Chief Executive Officer

CRIP 		    Climate Resilient Infrastructure Project

DEM 		     Digital Elevation Model

EU 		      European Union

GDP 		     Gross Domestic Product

GFDRR 		   Global Facility for Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction

IPCC 		    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

MCE 		     Multi-Criteria Evaluation

MoF 		     Ministry of Finance

MoFED 		   Ministry of Finance and Economic Development

NGO 		     Non-Governmental Organization

NSDI 		    National Spatial Data Infrastructure

SMART 		   Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound

UNISDR 	   United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




       Executive
       Summary

                    The planning and analysis of infrastructure investments is complex as it is both
                    strategic and long-term in nature, involves large capital expenditures, and affects
                    multiple stakeholders. The prioritization of investments in transport infrastructure
                    investments, requires the explicit consideration of multiple and often conflicting and
                    incommensurate perspectives and criteria. Compounding the challenges of prioritizing
                    transport infrastructure investments is the present and future impact of climate. As a
                    result, innovative and participatory tools are required to identify and prioritize key
                    transport infrastructure investments that efficiently utilize available resources and
                    engage multiple stakeholders with the goal of developing climate resilience.

                    Belize is exposed to a high level of risk from meteorological 1 hazards, which have
                    significant negative impacts to economic and social development gains as well as to
                    its infrastructure. As a result, the Government of Belize identified climate resilience as
                    one of the key policy priorities in its national development agenda and approached the
                    World Bank for support to develop a program that addresses the country’s vulnerability
                    to natural disasters and the impacts of climate change. Given the complexity associated
                    with increasing the road network resilience and in the context of extensive financial needs
                    and limited availability of funds, the Government wished to identify areas of the road
                    network that combine highest risk with highest socioeconomic criticality to efficiently
                    direct resources toward the highest climate resilience enhancing impact. In response to
                    this request, the World Bank worked with the Government to carry out an assessment and
                    prioritization process that resulted in identification of investments aimed at increasing
                    the country’s resilience to the impacts of natural hazards by improving key road segments
                    in the road network.

                    The prioritization process and lessons learned from it are presented and discussed in this
                    Practitioners’ Guide, which aims to provide guidance for the prioritization of climate-
                    resilient investments in road infrastructure by presenting a general methodology, a
                    conceptual framework, and a case study of the process that was conducted in Belize. It
                    specifically addresses environments where data is scarce, but there exists institutional
                    memory that can be harnessed. It makes use of existing data, draws on expert knowledge,



8
                                                                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



and actively engages with key stakeholders, to identify and prioritize key national
investments using a participatory and data-informed process.

The conceptual framework consists of six modules presented sequentially in practice;
however, their implementation may be both in parallel and iterative:
       (a)	 Definition of objectives and scope of the prioritization process

       (b)	 Understanding of the governance context and establishing the institutional
            arrangements for the process

       (c)	 Collation of data, focusing on identifying and bringing together existing
            data, and collection of data, focusing on the creation of new data to fill the
            data gaps

       (d)	 Evaluation of criticality

       (e)	 Assessment of risk/exposure from climate-related hazards

       (f)	 Informed decision making

In each module, key concepts are presented followed by a description of the application
in the Belize context. The process in Belize involved determining (a) socioeconomic
importance of road sections and (b) flood susceptibility of the primary and secondary
road network. Road stretches critical for access to public services such as hospitals and
schools, movement of economic products and services, and use in evacuation routes
as well as those that provide access to the socially vulnerable were assessed through
the participatory Multi-Criteria Evaluation (MCE) process. Representatives from over 35
ministries, municipalities, private sector organizations, civil society, nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), and academic institutions determined the most important criteria
for assessing the critical road stretches. Once these were established, the participants
developed indicators to evaluate the criteria and scored each indicator, which enabled
quantitative analysis of the road network. Flood susceptibility was analyzed using a
combined approach of field inspections and collection of information on past events.
Incorporating the outputs from these processes, a cutting-edge geospatial model was
then developed based on network analysis.

Through this process, four key areas were identified that were the most critical and were
highly susceptible to flooding:




                                                                                                            9
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



                           (a)	 Greater Belize City area. Considered critical because of its importance
                                for access of relief services to the communities and as an essential part of
                                the evacuation network. Most road stretches are especially susceptible to
                                flooding, ranking in the highest flood susceptibility range.

                           (b)	 West of Belmopan. Considered critical because it provides connectivity
                                between production sites and raw material extraction areas and the (air)
                                ports and border crossings, access of relief services, and access to socially
                                vulnerable populations. Most road stretches were considered to be in the
                                medium to high flood susceptibility range.

                           (c)	 Northern area around Corozal. Considered critical because several routes
                                are used extensively as essential parts of the evacuation network and in
                                providing access to socially vulnerable populations. In addition, the area is
                                important for the connectivity between production sites and raw material
                                extraction areas and the (air)ports and border crossings. Some road stretches
                                were ranked in the high flood susceptibility range.

                           (d)	 Southern area around Independence. Considered critical because the
                                dependency on these roads is very high. The majority of roads in this area,
                                especially the highway, fall into the high flood susceptibility range.

                    The result was adopted by the Government as a strategic plan and used to coordinate
                    investments that were implemented with various donors, including the World Bank.
                    This process was successful in Belize because the ministry responsible for national
                    development planning provided strong leadership throughout the process. This is
                    essential if the results of prioritization processes are to be integrated into national
                    processes.




10
INTRODUCTION




               Introduction
               Transportation networks are a critical infrastructure for each country as they enable
               access and connectivity for economic activity; for access to services (for example,
               commerce, tourism, education, and health); and for emergency situations (for example,
               evacuation), among others. As such, the prioritization of transport infrastructure
               investments requires the explicit consideration of multiple and often conflicting and
               incommensurate perspectives and criteria as they have important social, economic,
               and environmental effects that affect stakeholders differently. Furthermore, the spatial
               distribution and network characteristics of transport infrastructure add another layer of
               complexity that needs to be taken into consideration.



12
                                                                                               INTRODUCTION



Natural hazards can have a deleterious effect on transport infrastructure, particularly on
road networks. For example, heavy rainfall may cause erosion and scouring of roads and
bridges, flooding may result in road closures and limited use of roadways, and strong
winds may bring debris that obstructs traffic flows. All of these have social impacts as
they reduce the usability of the roadways, cut off access to communities and services
in cases with limited redundancy, and increase travel times. Economic impacts may
include increased time and costs to move people and goods to commercial areas and
increased costs of road and vehicular maintenance. Due to the vulnerability of transport
infrastructure to natural hazards and its importance in connecting communities,
production sites and import/export nodes, transport infrastructure planning requires
the integration of disaster risk management.

Compounding the challenges of infrastructure investment planning is the impact of
climate change. As stated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
taken as a whole, the range of published evidence indicates that the “net damage costs
of climate change are likely to be significant and to increase over time” (IPCC 2007).The
global manifestation of climate change could include sea level rise, continued increase
in temperatures, more frequent and intense hurricanes, increase in the frequency and
magnitude of floods, and more severe droughts, among others. These effects are likely to
continue to intensify through the current century. While the magnitude of such changes is
still, in many cases, highly uncertain, they result in challenges in prioritizing, planning,
and designing of infrastructure investments because those assets are usually built for
many decades of service.

The Government of Belize had identified climate resilience as one of the key policy
priorities in the national development agenda and approached the World Bank for support
to develop a program that addresses the country’s vulnerability to natural disasters
and the impacts of climate change, focusing on the road network. In response to this
request, the World Bank 2 worked with the Government to carry out an assessment and
prioritization process that resulted in identification of investments aimed at increasing
the country’s resilience to the impacts of natural hazards by improving key road segments
in the road network. Together, they developed a methodology to prioritize investments
in segments of the road network based on the service they provide for socioeconomic
activities, as well as their susceptibility to the impacts of natural hazards, which are
expected to intensify in the future.

The state-of-the-art approach to prioritizing investments that build climate resilience
among the people and within the economy drew on inputs from the U.S. Department
of Transportation (Federal Highway Administration 2011). The approach involved
integrating stakeholder evaluation of important road sections with technical hazard
and risk assessments. It also included getting political buy-in to use the results of the
quantitative analysis to inform a World Bank investment project. Given Belize’s data



                                                                                                        13
INTRODUCTION



               scarcity, the methodology provided a novel approach that integrated expert and local
               knowledge to develop quantitative tools for analysis. In addition to informing a World
               Bank investment project, the resulting priority list is being used to inform and guide road
               infrastructure investments throughout the country, including those by other multilateral
               development banks.

               The process implemented in Belize and the guidance provided in this report reflect
               lessons learned by the World Bank teams that facilitated the development of climate-
               resilient strategies and investment programs in the Caribbean through the Pilot Program
               for Climate Resilience. The pilot program synthesized lessons learned from regional
               experiences with best practices around the globe as the World Bank team made concerted
               efforts to include state-of-the-art knowledge and expertise on the topic.

               Three key factors underscored the engagement and led to the success of the prioritization
               effort documented herein: (a) the process had to be led by the Government; (b) the
               process had to be information based even when data was limited; and (c) the process
               had to be participatory. Key government ministries were involved in the entire process at
               both the technical and executive levels. There were timely submissions to the Cabinet as
               well as presentations to chief executive officers (CEOs) of the government ministries to
               keep the ministers and their CEOs apprised and engaged in the process. Technical officers
               from central and local governments, NGOs, and the private sector were encouraged and
               empowered to participate in the prioritization process. Though data was limited, the
               participants brought with them a body of knowledge and institutional memory that
               informed the discussions and scoring processes to build structured consensus on the
               priorities.

               This work was conducted using financial support from the Africa Caribbean Pacific
               (ACP)–European Union (EU) Natural Disaster Risk Reduction Program, received through
               the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). It was meant to
               demonstrate that disaster risk resilience and broader climate resilience could be
               successfully integrated into national development goals.




14
                                                                                                      INTRODUCTION



BOX 1. BELIZE CONTEXT
Belize is exposed to a high level of risk from meteorological and geophysical hazards, which
have significant negative impacts on its economic stability and social development gains.
Between 1995 and 2014, losses from hydrometeorological disasters were estimated at US$57
million, with an annual average loss of approximately 3 percent of gross domestic product
(GDP) (Kreft et al. 2015). It is estimated that if current climatic trends continue, extreme
events will become more frequent, resulting in greater fiscal impacts (Tompkins et al. 2004).
Disasters could therefore have a direct and large impact on economic conditions through
reduced productivity, unsustainable budgetary deficits, and increased national debt, due to
reconstruction costs. Furthermore, resources appropriated to respond to natural disasters
reduce the funding available for development projects. In recent years, the impact of natural
disasters and the stagnating economy have contributed to the substantial increase in poverty.
The charts in Figure 1 highlight the increasing frequency and severity of natural disasters in
Belize.



    Figure 1. Frequency and Severity of Major Natural Disasters in Belize over the Past Two
                                                Decades




         Source: D. Guha-Sapir et al. 2016. 3             Source: D. Guha-Sapir et al. 2016 and own
                                                                        calculations.4

Underdeveloped and dilapidated infrastructure, particularly in the transport sector, is a key
constraint to disaster vulnerability reduction and economic growth. The road network in Belize
is particularly vulnerable due to the lack of redundancy and exposure to natural hazards.
Dependency on the road network is further exacerbated as 70 percent of the population lives
near primary and secondary road networks; thus, flooding of one section of a roadway can cut
access and severely disrupt economic and social movement. The maps in Figure 2 show the
relationship between the population and commerce centers and the road network.




                                                                                                               15
INTRODUCTION



               Figure 2. Population and Road Networks (Left) and Economic Flows in Road Network (Right)




                Source: Own elaboration using spatial data received   Source: Own elaboration using spatial data received
                from Government of Belize and analysis results.       from Government of Belize and analysis results.


               As a result, the Government of Belize has prioritized the transport sector in its medium-term
               investment planning, because of the socioeconomic importance and the need to reduce vulnerability.
               Given the complexity associated with increasing the road network resilience and in the context of
               extensive financial needs and limited availability of funds, the Government sought to identify areas
               of the road network that combine highest risk with highest socioeconomic criticality to efficiently
               direct resources toward the highest climate resilience enhancing impact.




               Objective and Target Audience of the Practitioners’ Guide
               This report aims at providing guidance for the prioritization of climate-resilient
               investments in road infrastructure by presenting a general methodology and conceptual
               framework followed by showcasing the process that was carried out in Belize. It specifically
               addresses environments where data is scarce but where institutional memory that can be
               harnessed exists. It makes use of existing data, draws on expert knowledge, and actively
               engages with key stakeholders, to identify and prioritize key national investments using
               a participatory and data-informed process.




16
                                                                                                   INTRODUCTION



The Practitioners’ Guide was primarily developed for

       (a)	 transport specialists and planners who seek to prioritize and select
            investments;

       (b)	 government officials who would like to use participatory processes to select
            investments;

       (c)	 decision makers who operate in data-scarce environments;

       (d)	 climate change specialists and disaster risk management specialists who
            provide advice and influence decision-making processes in governments,
            multilateral development banks, and other international development
            agencies; and
       (e)	 private developers who want to engage in dialogue with governments about
            development and investment priorities.

Reader’s Instructions
The methodology presented in this Practitioners’ Guide consists of six modules and
in each module, the conceptual approach is presented followed by the example from
Belize. While the methodology is presented sequentially and in the best order for
implementation, in practice, some of the activities for the various steps will overlap, take
place in parallel, and go through several iterations. This is because the process involves
developing a methodology based on the understanding of current data availability and
conditions and then adapting the methodology once gaps in available data and other
limitations are made known.

The modules are as follows:

       •	   Module 1: Definition of Objectives and Scope. Good decisions need clear
            objectives and a well-defined scope. Therefore, immediate and ultimate
            objectives need to be distinguished. In addition, for the scope definition,
            aspects such as the spatial and temporal scale, the type of assets, and so on
            need to be considered.

       •	   Module 2: Institutional Composition. The composition of contributors and
            participants in the prioritization process is critical, particularly for getting the
            political buy-in, tapping into the technical expertise, and incorporating the
            concerns of road users. It is important to carefully identify key stakeholders
            and define the mechanisms and opportunities for participation.




                                                                                                            17
INTRODUCTION



       •	      Module 3: Data Collation and Collection. The kind of data available and the resources to
               collect further data influence the choice of analysis approach and type of model to analyze the
               criticality and climate risks of the road networks. Consequently, once the objectives are clearly
               articulated, a quick list of the kinds of data that could support the assessment of options to
               achieve the objective should be prepared and a scan of the immediately available data sets,
               their scale, and their attributes, should be undertaken. Both, data collation and collection are
               iterative processes and are conducted in parallel to all of the other steps. While the scope and
               objectives of the prioritization process provide an initial indication of the data sets needed,
               ultimately, the criticality and hazard/risk model selection and setup determine the final list of
               required data sets and attributes.


       •	      Module 4: Criticality Evaluation. Investments need to target areas that are strategic to reach
               the Government’s development goals, including social, economic, and other considerations. An
               MCE is a flexible tool that enables the evaluation of the socioeconomic impacts arising from
               interruptions in the transportation network focusing on the importance of the road network and
               its various segments to the people and the economy (criticality).

       •	      Module 5: Assessment of Risk/Exposure from Climate-related Hazards. The probability of
               physical impacts is evaluated, depending on the data availability, through an assessment of
               exposure or risk that the transport infrastructure is facing from the initially defined climate-
               related hazards.


       •	      Module 6: Informed Decision Making. Based on the analysis of results from the criticality and
               the climate hazard assessment, the actual prioritization is carried out. This module provides
               insights on how the results were prepared for and used by decision makers.
                                                             Scope




                                                              Data
                                                                                     ers
                                          rs




                                                      Criticality Evaluation
                                           lde




                                                                                 old
                                                ho




                                                                                keh
                                            ake




                                                        Hazard Analysis
                                                                               Sta
                                                 St




                                                     Informed Decision
18
PRIORITIZATION




                 Prioritization of Road
                 Vulnerability Investments
                 Module 1: Definition of Objectives and Scope
                 Good decisions need clear objectives, which should be specific, measurable, achievable,
                 realistic, and time-bound (SMART) (Doran 2008). It is useful to distinguish between
                 ultimate and immediate objectives, where ultimate objectives are framed in terms of
                 strategic or high-level outcomes, such as the level of economic growth, social cohesion,
                 or sustainable development, and immediate objectives are directly linked with the
                 outputs of the project. Consideration of a proposed option needs to concentrate on those

20
                                                                                                     PRIORITIZATION



criteria that contribute to the immediate
                                                                       Scope
objectives resulting in successful outputs
and hence lead to accomplishing the
ultimate objectives, that is, the outcomes.
                                                                        Data
Investment decisions and the associated
budget allocation often require a




                                                                                               ers
                                                    s
prioritization process, as resources are often                  Criticality Evaluation




                                                    der




                                                                                           old
limited. To maximize returns, resources




                                                          ol




                                                                                          keh
should be allocated to those investments




                                                      keh
that contribute to the achievement of the                         Hazard Analysis




                                                                                         Sta
                                                          Sta
most important immediate and ultimate
objectives.
An important step in the prioritization
process is the determination of the
objectives (immediate and ultimate) and
the scope, including the following aspects:
                                                               Informed Decision
       •	    Spatial    scope/area     under
             consideration: This could be the entire country, a department, a district, a
             province, a state, a city, or some other geographically defined area.


       •	    Type of infrastructure and type of assets: This could be road network, rail
             network, waterways, and so on.

       •	    The portion of the network that is being assessed: This could be the entire
             network or a subset, such as the primary road network.

       •	    Climate-related natural hazards that are likely to affect the infrastructure:
             This could be floods (flash, riverine, pluvial, and coastal floods); landslides;
             sea level rise; and so on.

       •	    Time horizon: Infrastructure investments are planned for a certain lifespan.
             In the context of climate change, there is considerable change in conditions
             to be expected during the usually long lifespans of the assets that should be
             taken into account, if possible.


       •	    The prioritization methods: Several prioritization tools exist and the team
             leading the process will need to assess the options and select those that
             will best help achieve the immediate and ultimate objectives. Cost-benefit
             analysis (CBA) and MCE are viable options. In the case of an MCE, it can
             involve a wide range of stakeholders or could be limited to those with expert
             knowledge about the relevant subject matter.


                                                                                                               21
PRIORITIZATION



                         •	   Data and information availability to support the prioritization process:
                              While ambitious objectives based on detailed analyses would be desirable,
                              data and information availability are an important factor to consider when
                              setting the scope. If initially there is not enough knowledge on the situation
                              to factor this in, a second iteration to define the immediate objective and
                              scope of the exercise may be needed.

                 BOX 2. SCOPE OF BELIZE PROJECT
                 Ultimate objective: Reduce climate vulnerability and increase climate resilience of the transport
                 infrastructure in Belize.

                 Immediate objective: Prioritize road investments in the primary and secondary road network to
                 be able to strategically reduce climate risk.

                 Scope: Primary and secondary road network, consideration of riverine and flash flooding, no
                 integration of climate scenarios.

                 Climate-related natural hazards likely to affect the infrastructure: The primary natural hazards
                 to affect the roadways in Belize are riverine flooding, pluvial flooding, coastal flooding, and
                 sea level rise. However, due to data limitations, coastal flooding and sea level rise could not be
                 included in the analysis.

                 Temporal scope: While the optimal time horizon would be the approximate lifespan of the
                 transport infrastructure assets that would be identified and addressed for retrofitting, there
                 was not enough data available to estimate socioeconomic and climate-related changes. Thus,
                 primarily, the current situation was evaluated for the prioritization process while changes over
                 time would rather be considered when designing specific interventions.




22
                                                                                                           PRIORITIZATION



Module 2: Institutional Composition                                          Scope
The composition of contributors and participants
in the prioritization process is critical, particularly
for getting the political buy-in, tapping into the
technical expertise, and incorporating the concerns                           Data

of road users. It is important to carefully identify




                                                                                                     ers
                                                          ers
key stakeholders and define the mechanisms and                        Criticality Evaluation




                                                                                                 old
                                                               ld
                                                           eho
opportunities for participation.




                                                                                                ke h
                                                                k
                                                                        Hazard Analysis




                                                                                               Sta
                                                                Sta
First, transportation is a cross-cutting topic that
concerns a multitude of government ministries
and departments directly or indirectly, as well as
the private sector and civil society. Roads enable
access to services such as education and health
care; facilitate social development; are critical in
emergency situations for evacuation, response,
                                                                    Informed Decision
and recovery; and are central to economic activities
connecting production sites, markets, processing sites, and so on. Road construction
is closely related to physical development opportunities and affects the natural
environments. To ensure that the final prioritization adequately considers the country’s
strategic goals across all sectors involved, the representation of all those ministries and
departments and key private sector and civil society partners is fundamental. Ministries
and departments involved, range from Works/Transport through Education, Health and
Local Government, Human Development/Social Transformation, National Emergency
Management, and Economic Development and Tourism to Natural Resource Management
and Physical Planning. In addition to governmental agencies, organizations from the
private sector, academia, NGOs, and civil society have an important stake in the topic.
As such, they need to be identified and included into the process. Finally, the Ministry
of Finance (MoF) plays a critical role because the outcome of the prioritization of
infrastructure investments shall inform and influence budget allocation.

Second, as this process is aimed at informing investment decision making, it naturally
involves multiple levels of participants from institutions—ranging from the technical
through the top administration to the political level. While mostly technical staff
participate and engage fully (for example, in full-day workshops), policy and political
actors at permanent secretary/CEO and minister levels need to be aware of the process,
informed on the progress, and given the opportunity to discuss the findings and provide
their endorsement at critical milestones to ensure that the results will be widely
accepted, adopted, and used.




                                                                                                                     23
PRIORITIZATION



                 The first step is to determine which ministry or department will lead and coordinate the
                 process. The MoF is well positioned to take on this function due to its convening power,
                 ultimate decision-making role in budget allocation, and suitability for a moderator role
                 for discussions among technical ministries. In the case of transport infrastructure, the
                 ministries responsible for Works and Transport will be a key technical player because
                 it is responsible for the management, maintenance, and upgrade of the asset. The
                 ministry responsible for Natural Resources and Physical Planning is also a key partner
                 because infrastructure improvement has implications for the natural environment
                 and for planning. Other government ministries, the private sector, civil society, and
                 academic representatives are also key determinants of the importance (criticality) of
                 specific sections/segments of the road network and therefore need to participate in the
                 prioritization process. Furthermore, the stakeholder group should involve all relevant
                 agencies and actors that contribute to the evaluation and management of natural hazards
                 and climate change effects. Additional stakeholders with specialized knowledge, such as
                 researchers that have worked on relevant topics, should also be invited.

                 Once the stakeholders have been identified, the formalization of the participation of the
                 technical representatives, particularly those from government ministries, should follow
                 standard country procedures to appoint them to participate in the assessment process.
                 This will ensure that they have the authority to engage in the discussions and bring
                 useful data to support the assessment processes. Similarly, the engagement of permanent
                 secretaries/CEOs and government ministers/Cabinet should make use of their standard
                 operating procedures for deliberation on matters of national concern. This ensures that
                 the prioritization discussions become part of the discussion agenda of the Government.
                 Furthermore, it decreases the probability that critical steps or actors are left out.


                 BOX 3: BELIZE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
                 In Belize, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) led the prioritization process
                 for the road network’s climate resilience improvements investments with strong commitment and
                 engagement from the CEO responsible for Economic Development. MoFED officially coordinated
                 all related activities from the start of the process in May 2013 to the presentation of the final
                 priority segments in December 2013. MoFED invited the Government, private sector, academia,
                 and civil society representatives to the workshops and project meetings, organized presentations
                 to the CEOs at strategic points, and ensured adequate communication of the process to the
                 Cabinet of ministers using Cabinet papers and presentations.

                 For the criticality assessment, about 40 technical staff participated in the process, representing
                 the government ministries, town and city councils, the private sector, academia, and civil society.
                 Sessions were held to finalize the criteria for assessment of criticality, identification of indicators,
                 scoring of the importance of the indicators, and discussion of the data to inform the indicators.
                 The World Bank’s team used the information to develop the criticality model and present the
                 criticality scores for the various road segments.




24
                                                                                                      PRIORITIZATION



For the flood susceptibility assessment, the key contributors were primarily the district engineers
from the Ministry of Works and Transport who have ample experience with flooding in their
districts.

Throughout the prioritization process, four presentation and discussion sessions were held with
the CEOs. This ensured that the CEOs were kept informed and that they could in turn update
their respective ministers on the progress. That way, when Cabinet papers were submitted, there
was familiarity with the topic. Three Cabinet papers on the process were submitted, providing
updates together with the request for endorsement and concurrence to proceed:

        •	   The first paper informed the Cabinet on the intention to carry out the prioritization
             process and gave an indication of the methodology.

        •	   The second paper provided an update on the process and the criteria and indicators
             for scoring.

        •	   The third paper presented the priorities for adoption.
In each case, there was a discussion among the Cabinet members followed by the decision to
proceed. The decisions were communicated to the World Bank team through MoFED.

In summary, the process was successful because the CEOs were kept informed through
presentations and discussions at Cabinet debriefing sessions as well as by their technical officers
who participated in the technical sessions. The process enabled them to provide feedback at
critical points in the process and develop a level of comfort with the approach that was being
used.




  Politicians and Policy Makers         Executive Leadership                 Technical Team



       Cabinet                           CEO - MoFED                             Line ministries
        •	Made final decision             •	Has convening power
        •	Was updated during the          •	Managed the process                     Academia
          process                         •	Informed the Cabinet
                                                                                   Civil society
                                         CEO - Line Ministries
                                          •	Validated results from the                NGOs
                                            technical team
                                          •	Participated in process




                                                                                                                25
PRIORITIZATION



                 Module 3: Data Collation and Collection

                 Data collation and collection are complementary processes with the aim to be as efficient
                 as possible in the use of existing data while strategically collecting data where needed
                 and possible with the available resources to enhance the level of detail, quality, and so
                 on of the modeling result (Figure 3).


                  Figure 3. Data Collation and Collection Process Leading to the Development of a Robust Model


                                                                Idea
                     Collate Data                                                             Model

                                                             Does the
                                     Adjust idea          available data           Yes
                                                           support your
                                                              idea?




                                                          No




                                             Collect Data




26
                                                                                                          PRIORITIZATION



Data Collation                                                              Scope

The kind of data available influences the choice
of analysis approach and model creation for the
prioritization of road segments based on their                               Data
criticality and flood susceptibility. Consequently,




                                                                                                    ers
once the objectives are clearly articulated, a




                                                         rs
                                                                     Criticality Evaluation




                                                          lde




                                                                                                old
quick list of the kinds of data that could support




                                                                ho




                                                                                               keh
the development of options to achieve the




                                                            ake
                                                                       Hazard Analysis




                                                                                              Sta
objective should be prepared and a scan for the




                                                                St
immediately available data sets, their scale, and
their attributes should be undertaken.

The first step is to generate a catalogue of the
spatial and tabular data sets that are available,
who the custodians are, the scale of the data, the
associated attributes, the frequency of update,                      Informed Decision
and the process for accessing the data. As the
catalogue is being prepared, the accessible data should be collected and reviewed for
accuracy, precision, and relevant attributes to support the analysis.

The data scan and review are vital steps as they provide the opportunity to undertake
fitness for purpose evaluation. In addition, they result in the identification of immediately
useable data; data that need augmentation or preprocessing before they can be used;
data that are not immediately available/accessible; data that are available but do not
exist in digital and immediately useable formats; and data that would need primary field
collection effort. This knowledge helps with the quantification of the level of effort that
will be required to preprocess, augment, and create relevant data sets for use in the
assessment of options to achieve the immediate objectives.

For this process, a relationship of trust between the facilitating team and the actors
involved in data management is critical since in many countries, there is not necessarily
a culture of sharing data. The identification of existing spatial data management and
sharing initiatives and key persons with a leading role in these processes, as well as the
establishment of close collaboration, may significantly facilitate the access to data.

Most times, even data that have passed the fitness for purpose evaluation will need some
preprocessing before use in an application or model. To the extent possible, that process
should be undertaken for each data set as soon as it is selected for inclusion in the
assessment model. This includes ensuring that the records have valid unique identifiers
and that the relevant attributes are included in the right format.

One of the potential activities during preprocessing phase is to integrate records from
multiple data sources with a similar/compatible scale and bring them together into one
data set. Table 1 is a listing of some of the types of data that may be required when
prioritizing to build resilience to natural hazards.                                                                27
PRIORITIZATION




                 Table 1. Examples of Data Sets That May Be Required/Useful for Prioritization of Climate-resilient
                                              Investment Prioritization of Transport Infrastructure

                  Type of Data                Data Sets

                                              Administrative and natural boundaries (for example, watersheds); cities, towns, and
                  Geospatial base data        villages; roads; digital elevation model (DEM); bathymetric model for coastal areas; land
                                              use/land cover; waterways; wildlife distribution; archeological sites; and so on

                  W e a t h e r - / c l i m a t e - Meteorological time series (rainfall, temperature, and so on), location of the rain gauges,
                  related                           climate predictions, and so on

                                              Discharge time series, location of river gauges, information on flood events, flood
                  Flood-related
                                              inventories, and so on

                                              Landslide records; landslide inventory; existing landslide susceptibility, hazard, or risk
                  Landslide-related           analyses; soil maps; infiltration; geological/geomorphological maps; liquefaction potential;
                                              and so on

                  Disaster preparedness       Evacuation routes; hurricane shelter locations; critical assets; 911 services; and so on

                                              Population distribution, centers for social services (schools, hospitals, clinics, and so on),
                  Social
                                              bus routes, and so on

                                              Production centers, ports/airports, market centers, tourism facilities, banks, utilities,
                  Economic
                                              factories, natural resource distribution, and so on

                                              Location, type (roads, public buildings, and so on), properties (size, materials, condition,
                  Asset/infrastructure
                                              and so on), and so on



                 In some cases, the data that are needed exist but not in an immediately useable digital
                 format. They may be in PDF documents; scanned reports; paper copy of tables, reports,
                 and maps; and so on. In these cases, the options for bringing the data into a useable digital
                 format should be explored. Data may also be available through imagery that need to be
                 interpreted. There has to be a balance between accuracy and precision on the one hand
                 and cost of data generation on the other. Where the cost of data collation is reasonable,
                 it is preferable to obtain the best quality of data possible from both a precision and
                 accuracy perspective. Data should be ranked based on importance, relevance, and cost
                 of collation with the highest ranked data being sourced and prepared first.

                 Data collation and collection is an iterative process. Existing data at the right scale and
                 precision may be collated first and then appropriate attributes added over time as the
                 importance and source become clearer. Through collation, data are continually improved
                 before the actual analysis. In cases where the most suitable data are not available,
                 appropriate proxies may be identified and take through the aforementioned iterative
                 process. Therefore, proxies are understood as indirect measures that approximate a
                 phenomenon in the absence of a direct measure.

                 Despite the best efforts at data collation, there could be data sets that do not currently
                 exist and may need to be created using primary data collection methods. However,

28
                                                                                                            PRIORITIZATION



as primary data collection may require significant time and resources, it should be
targeted toward the required data with a clear definition of the level of detail and type
of characteristics required. This step should only be carried in parallel to methodology
selection and model creation as an iterative process.

BOX 4. BELIZE DATA COLLATION
Several data sets were collated for use in the prioritization model for the rehabilitation of Belize
road segments. Examples of data sets that were used ‘as is’ include the Flood Extent of Tropical
Depression 16 of 2008 and the Belize Land Use/Land Cover of 2011 by Meerman.

Data sets that were augmented included the Rivers of Belize and the Belize Land Systems Data
initially prepared by King et al. as part of the Belize Natural Resources Assessment 1987 to 1992.
In the case of the rivers data set, the rivers of Belize had been previously digitized from the
1:50,000 DOS (U.K. Directorate of Overseas Surveys) sheets for Belize. River names and river
order were added as attributes to the records of the data set. In the case of the land systems data
set from King et al., there was more information in the reports than in the shapefiles available.
The reports were used to augment the shapefiles.

There was information such as the location of banks, production sites, and historical flooding
among others for which digital data were not available but which were documented in reports.
The information was used to create shapefiles to represent the information as data records with
key attributes.

All of these are examples of data collation activities that occurred during the preparation for
the prioritization of Road segments for rehabilitation. The list of features and phenomena for
which data sets were collated for the Belize Transport Network Prioritization Model include the
following:

        (a)	   A DEM (Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer [ASTER], 30 m
               resolution)

        (b)	   A stream network of the major rivers and streams

        (c)	   A countrywide small-scale flood susceptibility from the land resources assessment (King et
               al. 1993)

        (d)	   A flood extent mapped after Tropical Depression 16, which was derived using the automated
               classification of Landsat imagery

        (e)	   A list of flood records from newscasts

        (f)	   Flood hot spots identified by engineers of the Ministry of Works and Transport

        (g)	   Location of production and processing centers for key products

        (h)	   Location of (air)ports and border crossings

        (i)	   Location of hurricane shelters, schools, hospitals, and health centers

        (j)	   Evacuation routes

        (k)	   Population centers

        (l)	   Centers of economic activities
                                                                                                                      29
PRIORITIZATION



                 Data Collection
                 The data collection step complements data collation and is an iterative process that
                 takes place in parallel with methodology development and model creation. While the
                 scope and objectives of the prioritization process provide an initial indication of the
                 data sets needed, ultimately, the criticality and hazard/risk model selection and setup
                 determine the final list of datasets and attributes required for the analysis. It is useful to
                 prepare a master data list with the specifications for each data set, in terms of features,
                 attributes, and data type/properties for each attribute. This master data list and the
                 specification of each data set can then be applied to guide the final preparation of data
                 for the analysis. The data collated as described in the Data Collation subsection are
                 compared to this list to determine if they need further preprocessing, complementing, or
                 even new data collection.

                 In cases where the preferred data are not available or are too costly to produce in terms
                 of time, human, and financial resources, the use of alternative data sets or proxies should
                 be explored. A proxy data set would indirectly score an indicator and, in some cases, this
                 may be sufficient to support the decision-making process. If suitable alternative data
                 sets or proxies are identified, they should be prepared using the collation approaches
                 discussed in the Data Collation subsection. If suitable proxies are not available,
                 consideration should be given to primary data collection to create the data.

                 One of the data sets that is critical for prioritization of transport infrastructure
                 investments is the transport network. If these data are not available, extensive field
                 data collection may be required for which adequate planning should be undertaken.
                 First, a comprehensive list of the features and attributes that will be collected should be
                 prepared and the collection method should be documented. Then, the collection forms,
                 which should enable the collection of all the features and attributes in the primary
                 collection scheme, at the appropriate scale, accuracy, and precision, should be prepared
                 and tested.

                 The final database that will store the data being collected should be designed using
                 database development best practices. At present, relational or object relational databases
                 provide the most versatile options for data storage and retrieval (including the storage
                 of spatial data); this should be considered when developing the final database. Field
                 collection should be organized in a way that facilitates the transfer of data to the final
                 database.

                 Several options exist for primary data collection, but preference should be given to
                 options that enable one-time entry of data. Serious consideration should be given to the
                 use of software and mobile devices for the collection of field data. Tools, such as the
                 Open Data Kit, that allow for the use of customizable data collections forms should be
                 considered.



30
                                                                                                  PRIORITIZATION



It is important to standardize data collection methods and practices across data
collection teams. Quality control and quality assurance measures will need to be put in
place to ensure that data collection teams follow standardized and tested protocols for
data collection, transfer, review, and integration into the final database.

Once the primary data collection process has been developed, a field data collection and
management guide should be prepared for all data collection and data integration teams
to review and use. Resources should be allocated for testing of the data collection, data
review, and data integration methods before they are finalized and adopted, as well as
for the training of data collectors and data integrators.

Consideration should be given to the possible data uses besides the one that motivated
the initial data collection. In addition, data update and maintenance processes that
would enable the data, once collected, to be kept current while enabling historical views
should be developed. It is recommended that data be maintained and updated as part of
the normal workflows of those who are responsible for the data.

  BOX 5. DATA COLLECTION FOR BELIZE PROJECT
  A data set that was not available before the prioritization of primary and secondary road
  segments for rehabilitation was the condition of the roadways and their appurtenances.
  Through field survey, the conditions of the road network at 2 km intervals, the road
  intersections, bridges, culverts, guardrails, signs, and other related appurtenances were
  collected using visual inspection techniques.

  A list of features and attributes were agreed upon; a database to hold the data was designed;
  a data creation form was created and tested; and field data were collected, verified, and
  integrated into the database. Furthermore, a field data collection guide was prepared to
  train data collectors and data reviewers.

  The resulting road network condition data for the primary and secondary road can, beyond
  supporting the prioritization of segments, be used for further purposes such as road asset
  management and maintenance. If these are considered from the beginning, data collection,
  guiding materials, and database setup can directly include such considerations—if resources
  permit—to make the effort as useful for the country as possible.




                                                                                                            31
PRIORITIZATION



                 Module 4: Criticality Evaluation


                 Criticality: As understood in this document, criticality is the importance of specific
                 segment, or nodes in the transportation network (road segments, bridges, or culverts) in
                 terms of their provision of access to various economically or socially significant locations.


                                    Scope                         Infrastructure investments are designed for many
                                                                  years of service, involve large capital expenditures,
                                                                  and require the explicit consideration of multiple,
                                                                  sometimes conflicting and incommensurate,
                                     Data                         perspectives stemming from their important
                                                                  social, economic, and environmental effects that
                                                            ers
                 ers




                             Criticality Evaluation               affect various stakeholders differently. A widely
                                                        old
                      ld




                                                                  used approach to investment prioritization is
                  eho




                                                       keh



                                                                  traditional CBAs; however, CBAs often fail to
                       k




                               Hazard Analysis
                                                      Sta
                       Sta




                                                                  consider many of the benefits of infrastructure
                                                                  investments because they rely wholly or very
                                                                  largely on monetary valuations. Thus, there is a
                                                                  need to extend the framework of CBA to adequately
                                                                  take into consideration not only economic and
                                                                  financial but also social, institutional, technical,
                           Informed Decision                      and environmental factors that affect the selection

                 and prioritization of infrastructure improvement interventions. MCE, sometimes also
                 called Multi Criteria Analysis, is a decision-making tool for analysis of complex trade-
                 offs between or among alternatives choices that can integrate quantitative and/or
                 qualitative aspects in the process of prioritizing and ranking options. While there are a
                 number of different MCE approaches, they all have in common that the “options and their
                 contribution to the different criteria [are made explicit], and all require the exercise of
                 judgment” (Communities and Local Government 2009). The judgment can either be made
                 by a group of stakeholders through a consensus-building process, especially on cross-
                 cutting and controversial topics (participatory MCE) or by one/few expert(s), based on
                 knowledge, understanding, and expert judgment. Once the objective and scope have
                 been defined (see module 1), the principal steps of an MCE process, as used for the
                 assessment of the criticality of the road network, include the following:

                             (a)	 Identification of criteria

                             (b)	 Identification of indicators, data requirements, and scoring

                             (c)	 Weighting of the criteria

                             (d)	 Calculation of criticality
32
                                                                                                PRIORITIZATION



While the first three steps are highly participatory, the final step requires detailed
analyses and calculations that should be performed by a small and qualified technical
team, though intermediate and final results are validated throughout the process by
specific sector representatives of the whole stakeholder group. In the following discourse,
each step will be presented and explained, followed by the example from Belize:



Identification of Criteria



     Criteria: Principles or standards on which a judgment or decision may be based.


As criteria form the core of an MCE, establishing a soundly based, operational set of
criteria against which to judge/prioritize the options is a critical step. A measurement
or a judgment needs to specify or indicate how well each option meets the objectives
expressed by the criteria.

At a minimum, criteria should have the following characteristics: (a) internal consistency
and logical soundness; (b) transparency; (c) ease of use; (d) measurable indicators,
whose data requirements are not inconsistent with the importance of the issue being
considered; (e) realistic time, level of effort, and cost requirements for the analysis
process; (f) ability to provide an audit trail; and (g) software to carry out the assessment,
where needed.

It is important to understand that while criteria may be abstract, the extent to which
an asset or option meets a criterion or set of criteria should be measurable. To measure
the extent to which the asset or option meets a criterion, one or more indicators are
to be identified and assessed either quantitatively or qualitatively. Indicators will be
discussed further.

Working sessions are a useful approach to obtain representative criteria reflecting the
different perspectives of participating sectors and stakeholders. During those sessions,
the stakeholders can be tasked with identifying and articulating criteria that reflect the
importance of the asset/infrastructure that is being reviewed, while considering their
respective sector strategies and perspectives. Depending on the number of participants,
the entire group may be divided into smaller groups to carry out the assigned tasks.
In addition to the identification of criteria, they should document their rationale for
identifying each criterion and give an indication of how it could be measured/assessed.

To stimulate and inspire the criteria identification process, a number of criteria
categories or topics can be determined before the stakeholder working sessions by the
team coordinating the MCE process. The idea is to identify broad categories for which
the asset is important; such thematic groups could include economic, health, social, and
so on.
                                                                                                          33
PRIORITIZATION



                 BOX 6. CRITERIA USED IN BELIZE PROJECT
                 For the criticality assessment of the road network in Belize, the facilitating team provided eight
                 categories under which workshop participants in groups of four to six persons were tasked with
                 identifying criteria (see Figure 4).

                 Figure 4. Categories of Criteria Identified as a Starting Point for Discussions among Stakeholders


                                                 Description of the current condition, the related need of repair/
                     Physical Vulnerability
                                                 reconstruction, and how that affects the asset's utility


                                                 Factors that indicate the level/extent of use within the transport
                      Use and Operational
                                                 network, its capacity and importance in supporting the economy,
                        Characteristics
                                                 social services, evacuation, and so on


                                                 Asset’s role in supporting commerce and providing access to major
                     Economic Parameters
                                                 employment destinations: contribution to economic functions


                                                 Importance of transport assets to the community with regard to
                       Social Parameters         providing access to facilities that allow the community to function:
                                                 contribution to social functions


                                                 The extent to which segments of the network provided access to
                            Health
                                                 health facilities



                                                 The extent to which segments of the network are designated
                      Safety and Security
                                                 evacuation routes or components of the national defense system



                                                 Environmental or ecological aspects that may influence the
                   Environment and Ecology       prioritization or avoidance of interventions in a certain area



                                                 This category is able to include any criteria that may not fit into the
                         Local Values            above outlined categories



                 During a large group (plenary) work session, the criteria identified by the various small groups
                 were presented and integrated into a common framework. Similar criteria were combined and
                 concise names for each criterion were determined for ease of analysis. The criteria were reviewed
                 to ensure that they had the relevant characteristics (for example, consistency and logical
                 soundness, transparency, ease of use). The final category, ‘Local Values’ was a category aimed
                 at capturing criteria that did not belong to the other categories; however, since none of the
                 groups identified criteria for this category, it was eliminated from the analysis. This preliminary
                 framework was further refined and adjusted as part of the MCE process. For example, some
                 criteria were later removed due to lack of data, discovery of further redundancies, and so on. The
                 preliminary set of criteria used is presented in Figure 5.
34
Figure 5. Preliminary Set of Criteria
PRIORITIZATION



                 Weighting of the Cr iter ia
                 As initially mentioned, MCEs can integrate qualitative and quantitative criteria. The
                 first step in the integration process is the weighting of the criteria; This step essentially
                 assigns relative importance to each criterion.


                   Weighting: Numerical weights are assigned to define the relative importance for each
                                              criterion compared with the other criteria.


                 Typically, the weighting is done through a consensus-building process. There are numerous
                 approaches with different levels of complexity, ranging from simple discussions followed
                 by an agreement on weights to consensus-building exercises and weighting in groups or
                 individually followed by calculations of average weights. The selection of method may
                 depend on the size of the group, the difference in perspective, and the time available.
                 Box 7 discusses the approach used in Belize to weight the criteria used in the criticality
                 assessment of the road network.

                 BOX 7. WEIGHTS FOR THE BELIZE PROJECT
                 For the weighting process, the workshop participants were split up into groups of four to six
                 persons and carried out the following five-step process:

                         (a)	   Each group, after being informed of the strategic development objectives 5 and sector
                                strategies, classified all criteria into ‘high priority’, ‘medium priority’, and ‘low priority’
                                criteria classes. First, the group identified five to nine high-priority criteria; then, it selected
                                five to nine criteria for the medium priority class. The remaining criteria were checked to
                                ensure that they were suitably classified as part of the low-priority class. Any criteria without
                                priority were eliminated.
                         (b)	   The group discussed and decided upon a weight for each class with a total weight of 100
                                percent among all three classes.

                         (c)	   Once the priority classes were weighted, each person was given 24 stickers and was tasked
                                with distributing 8 stickers among the criteria of each of the three classes.

                         (d)	   The weight for each criterion was calculated as a product of the weight of the class and the
                                proportion of the stickers that it received within the class.

                         (e)	   Each group presented its weighting result to the entire workshop and explained the rationale
                                behind its approach. The overall weight for each criterion was calculated by averaging the
                                weights it received from the different groups.

                 During a session following the same workshop, the results were presented and discussed with
                 the entire group. The session focused on criteria that had received the most similar or the most
                 dissimilar weights between groups, the overall highest weights, the overall lowest weights,
                 criteria proposed for elimination, and finally the top seven criteria that totaled up to 50 percent
                 of the overall weight (see table 2). The groups discussed whether the results represented the
                 discussions within and between groups.
36
                                                                                                         PRIORITIZATION



 Table 2. Criteria Weights of the Primary Criteria Totaling up to 50 Percent of the Overall Weight


                                                               Weights Resulting   Weights from the
    Criterion                                                  from the Workshop   Workshop Adjusted
                                                               (%)                 by the CEOs (%)

    Essential part of the evacuation network                         17.03                17.90
    Condition                                                        17.78                16.52

    Dependency on the road                                           15.23                16.50

    Adequacy regarding the current demand/level of use               12.07                14.57

    Access of mobile utilities, food, and relief services to
                                                                     14.26                13.79
    the communities

    Connectivity between industrial, production sites, raw
    material extraction areas, ports, airports, and border           10.00                11.35
    crossings

    Access to socially vulnerable populations                        13.64                 9.37



Subsequently, the weights were presented to the CEOs, and each CEO individually had the opportunity to
adjust the weights. By averaging the weights among all CEOs, a second set of weights was created (see
table 2). This set of weights was used for developing the criticality model.


Identification of Indicators, Data Requirements, and Scoring
Criteria, defined as principles or standards on which a judgment or decision may be
based, are generally abstract and therefore not directly measurable. To operationalize/
measure each criterion, one or more indicators need to be determined bearing in mind
that the aggregate score of the indicators of a criterion should convey a ‘single meaningful
message’ regarding the extent to which the criterion is met. The score of each indicator
is derived using one or more data sets that indicate/measure aspects of the performance
of the criterion.


Indicator: Variable or component of a system used to provide specific information
on the state or condition of a particular criterion. It is a measurable variable used as a
representation of an associated (but nonmeasured or nonmeasurable) factor or quantity.




                                                                                                                   37
PRIORITIZATION



                 If more than one indicator is used to measure a criterion, the weight (contribution)
                 of each indicator to the final measure needs to be determined. This could vary from a
                 simple average, where each indicator’s contribution is equal, to a weighted average,
                 where each indicator’s contribution varies. Expert judgment was used to determine the
                 relative weights of indicators in the calculation of indicator scores for each criterion.

                 The indicator selection is influenced by the availability or collectability of data that
                 covers the entire area under consideration, at sufficient resolution and detail. Indicator
                 identification is an iterative process, which starts with initial data screening followed
                 by more in-depth data search, data collation, and exploration of new data collection.
                 The more data available to measure a criterion, the more options there are for selection
                 of appropriate indicators. If the data to measure a particular indicator are not available
                 and cannot be collected or created, they will need to be replaced by an alternative
                 indicator for which data can be found or created.

                 As indicators are being finalized, a common scoring system needs to be established to
                 enable the joining of indicators into one criterion and criteria into the overall criticality.
                 This is necessary as indicators could be assessed using very different units such as
                 distance, time, monetary value, or qualitative measure, all of which would need to be
                 converted into one standard scoring system.

                 Common scoring systems include three or five levels and could be either numerical
                 or nominal. Consequently, a five-level scoring standard would be ‘very high’, ‘high’,
                 ‘moderate’, ‘low’, ‘very low’, or ‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’, ‘4’, ‘5’, while a three-level scoring standard
                 will be ‘high’, ‘moderate’, ‘low’, or ‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’. In reality, any number of scoring schemes is
                 possible as long as it is consistently applied across all criteria, and there is a significant
                 difference between the score levels, which enables each score level to add value.
                 Subsequently, the threshold values for the score levels are defined for each indicator.

                 While a large group of stakeholders can identify criteria and their indicators, the
                 definition of the threshold values for the scores applied to each indicator and the
                 calculation of aggregate scores for each criterion should be carried out by a smaller
                 group, with verification of the outputs by subject-matter experts. For example, indicators
                 for health-related criteria should be identified and/or verified with representatives from
                 the Ministry of Health, health professionals, and community development practitioners.




38
                                                                                                         PRIORITIZATION



BOX 8. INDICATOR IDENTIFICATION FOR BELIZE PROJECT
The indicator identification and finalization exercise was carried out in a small technical team
that included a transport engineer with experience in network analyses and a GIS expert familiar
with the Belizean context. Preliminary indicators were identified, data required to inform those
indicators were determined, and their availability or the possibility of using proxies was evaluated.
Depending on the feasibility of the indicators, alternatives were studied and, through an iterative
process, a first set of indicators was created. Those indicators were discussed with the respective
sectors in the Government to obtain feedback and to make adjustments as required.

The scoring system applied in Belize consisted of six levels. For indicators with less differentiation
in the data, only four out of the six levels were applied.


                                      Table 3. Scoring System

              Score       Level of Criticality (Detailed)    Level of Criticality (Simple)

                0                    Unknown                           Unknown

                1                      Low                               Low

                2                    Marginal
                3                    Moderate                          Moderate

                4                  Considerable
                5                      High                              High

The final set of seven criteria were assessed using 15 indicators. For example, the criterion
Dependency on the road was measured using the Existence of alternative routes indicator. Once
the number and quality of alternative routes had been measured, their contribution to criticality
was evaluated using the scoring system by attributing a higher value (score) to roads for which
no alternative routes were available or the alternative routes were of a lower category and poorer
condition. Conversely, roads for which alternative routes could be identified received a lower
score. For details on the indicators and their scoring, refer to the report on the ‘MCE criteria and
indicator framework – Belize’ (Schreiner et al. 2013).




                                                                                                                   39
Figure 6. Framework of Indicators Used to Measure Criticality Criteria
                                                                                                      PRIORITIZATION




The Modeling Environment for the Criticality Analysis
Once all the data are organized and the scoring system and process are finalized, a
score for each indicator will need to be assigned to each segment. Adding the scores
as attributes to the segments of the road network and the MCE is typically carried out
within a software environment. Several software options are available for the kind of
evaluation needed in an MCE.

BOX 9. MODELING ENVIRONMENT FOR BELIZE PROJECT
In the case of Belize, ArcGIS was used to prepare data for the analysis, VISUM was used for the
criticality analysis, and ArcGIS was used for the flood susceptibility analysis. ArcGIS was also
used for the overlay of the results of the criticality analysis and flood susceptibility assessment
and finalization of the areas where road rehabilitation could have the biggest resilience-building
effects.

VISUM, developed by PTV Group of Germany, was selected for the criticality analysis. VISUM is a
transportation demand forecasting platform that allows for detailed management of GIS data and
offers a wide range of transportation analyses tools and configurable traffic assignment functions.
Its models take into consideration all road users and their interactions, and its capabilities are
recognized by professionals involved in transport planning. Transportation experts use VISUM to
model transport networks and travel demand, to analyze expected traffic flows, to plan public
transport services, and to develop advanced transport strategies and solutions.

Most of the data collated or collected for the Belize MCE analysis was in the ESRI Shapefile
format, so, in addition to providing an array of transport analysis functions, the criticality
analysis environment needed to be able to read data in this format. The data model used by
VISUM is compatible with ESRI’s Shapefile format; it permits each vector data type (point, line,
and polygon) to be classified, and several types of attributes (string, integer, real, date, time,
Boolean, and so on) can be assigned to them directly or as related tables. Additionally, the
attributes can be used as an object for filtering, mathematical procedures, and graphical display.
In explaining the merits of VISUM, the transport engineer leading the model analysis reflected:

     “VISUM offers a wide range of predefined functions; from a simple GIS intersect operation
     to complex heuristics to optimization models used in traditional travel demand forecasting
     models. Those functions can be structured into calculation procedures, which execute each
     selected function according to predefined parameters. The procedures work in a similar way
     to scripts, with the advantage that programming is not required.”



Calculation of Criticality
First, each indicator is calculated separately for the entire road network. Subsequently,
using the indicator weights, indicators are linked to criteria. Finally, the overall criticality
is computed as the sum of products of criteria and their respective weights.




                                                                                                                41
PRIORITIZATION



                 BOX 10. CALCULATION OF CRITICALITY IN THE BELIZE PROJECT
                 The final criticality of the primary and secondary road network of Belize is presented in figure 7.

                 After the model was developed and run, the results went through a series of validation exercises,
                 the first round of which was conducted by the team that led the prioritization process. Their main
                 task was to ensure that the model was complete and that there were no major errors in the results
                 at a technical level. Based on knowledge of the area under assessment, it was checked whether
                 the results were reasonable.

                 The next round of validation was held with key stakeholders. Their task was to determine if the
                 modelled results identify key areas that need to be addressed based on the criteria that had been
                 defined.



                                  Figure 7. Criticality of the Primary and Secondary Road Network




42
                                                                                              PRIORITIZATION



Module 5: Assessment of Risk/                                        Scope
Exposure from Climate-related
Hazards
Risk is defined as the probability of a hazard                          Data
event and its negative consequences. In a
technical context, it is often described as a




                                                                                       ers
                                                       s
                                                               Criticality Evaluation




                                                       der




                                                                                   old
function of hazard, exposure , and vulnerability.




                                                             ol




                                                                                  keh
                                                         keh
A natural hazard refers to the “likelihood and
                                                                  Hazard Analysis




                                                                                 Sta
                                                             Sta
intensity of a potentially destructive natural
phenomenon, such as ground shaking induced
by an earthquake or wind speed associated
with a tropical cyclone” (GFDRR 2014). This
guide focuses on natural hazards and, more
specifically, hydrometeorological hazards that
may affect the road infrastructure. Exposure
                                                              Informed Decision
refers to the location, attributes, and value of
assets that are important to communities, such as people, buildings, factories, farmland,
and infrastructure. In this guide, the focus is the road network, including roads, bridges,
drainage, and so on. Finally, vulnerability refers to the reaction of an element when
exposed to a hazard impact. For example, vulnerability of a road to flooding increases
with worsening road conditions and may lead to damage of the surface and possibly even
destruction of the road.

Risk assessment is “a methodology to determine the nature and extent of risk by analyzing
potential hazards and evaluating existing conditions of vulnerability that together could
potentially harm exposed people, property, services, livelihoods, and the environment
on which they depend” (UNISDR 2009). The Guidelines for Mainstreaming Disaster Risk
Assessment in Development define disaster risk assessment as “the process of collecting
and analyzing information about the nature, likelihood, and severity of disaster risks.”
The process includes deciding whether to prevent or reduce disaster risks, determining
which risks to address, and developing a plan to manage those risks. The assessment
process emphasizes proactive management of disaster risks through reduction of both
prospective and accumulated risks. It covers assessment of risks from future hazards as
well as those that have already occurred. It is important to note that risk assessment is
the first step in effective disaster risk management and should be undertaken as part of
a comprehensive risk management strategy.

There is not one standard approach to risk assessment. The method used in a specific
situation is dependent on a number of factors, including the purpose, area of interest,
scale or level of detail, and the time frame to be assessed. Furthermore, very practical
factors include time and resources to complete the task and availability of data.



                                                                                                        43
PRIORITIZATION



                 Usually, the relation is that the more detailed an analysis and the larger the area under
                 consideration, the higher the cost due to the need for a more sophisticated model with
                 higher data requirements.

                 In the context of prioritization of climate-resilient investments of road infrastructure,
                 three principal levels of detail with respect to risk/exposure assessment can be
                 distinguished: (a) susceptibility assessment; (b) hazard assessment; and (c) risk
                 assessment. It is important to note that the approaches are additive, that is, the hazard
                 assessment builds on the susceptibility assessment and the full risk assessment builds
                 upon the hazard assessment.

                        (a)	   Susceptibility assessment. This approach aims at identifying the geographic
                               likelihood of a certain hazard, that is, the probability that one area will be
                               affected in the future versus another area, also referred to as ‘susceptibility’.
                               It does not provide information on the temporal probability of the hazard,
                               meaning that although it could determine that one area will be affected with
                               a higher probability than another, no information is provided when or how
                               often an event may occur. Subsequently, the susceptibility information is
                               overlaid with the road network to identify the areas that are located in areas
                               susceptible to the hazard under consideration and therefore exposed to a
                               potential impact. This approach does not consider vulnerability; this means,
                               it is not required to understand how assets will behave when affected by a
                               certain event—information that is often not easy to obtain. This approach
                               is especially useful if detailed rainfall records, discharge information for
                               floods, landslide inventories, bathymetry data, and so on are missing and
                               the principal source of information are experts.

                        (b)	   Hazard assessment. In a hazard assessment, the spatial and temporal
                               probability of an event occurring in an area is analyzed. Subsequently, the
                               hazard information is overlaid with the road network to identify the areas
                               that are exposed to high, medium, and low hazard levels. In comparison to
                               the susceptibility assessment, the hazard assessment provides information
                               on the frequency and intensity with which a certain type of event could be
                               expected. However, in this case, the vulnerability of the assets, that is, the
                               reaction of the assets to the impact of an event, is not taken into account.
                               This approach is useful if ample data on the natural system is available
                               (rainfall, discharge, topography, bathymetry, infiltration, and so on) and
                               the natural hazard phenomena are well understood, but there is a lack of
                               understanding on the reaction of assets to the impact.




44
                                                                                                                           PRIORITIZATION



         (c)	   Risk assessment. In a full, quantitative risk assessment, the probability of
                a certain level of damages is described in financial terms. This requires
                an in-depth understanding of the processes contributing to the hazard; the
                elements that are exposed to the hazard; and the vulnerability of the assets,
                that is, their behavior when affected at different hazard levels. This approach
                requires availability of numerous high-quality data sets. A challenge with
                this type of approach is the availability of models because there is a limited
                amount of vulnerability models and curves available for roads, bridges, and
                culverts, especially as it relates to climate-related hazards such as floods
                and landslides.


                   Table 4. Comparison of Three Levels (Depth) of Risk Assessments

                   Susceptibility Assessment             Hazard Assessment                    Risk Assessment

Input     data Expert knowledge on the natural      Additionally, good quality digital   Additionally, asset data,
requirements   hazards and assets, information on   terrain model, bathymetry            including location, extent/
               past events, and other geospatial    hydrometeorological         time-    shape, and characteristics
               data as available. Location of the   series, soil distribution and        and damage data as basis
               assets under consideration           characteristics, land cover, and     for vulnerability models/
                                                    so on                                functions


Data      scale/ Small/low                          Medium/moderate                      Large/high
level of detail
Advantages      Simple, with low data and time Good trade-off between level of           Full quantification of risk
                requirements                   effort and obtained information.          provides a good understanding
                                               While the costs of impacts are            of the probability of impacts
                                               not quantified, the combination           and related costs. It can serve
                                               of hazard intensity and exposed           as a starting point for cost-
                                               assets provides a good first              benefit considerations.
                                               idea of possible effects.


Disadvantages   Due to the qualitative or No information is provided on High cost, time, and data
                semiquantitative nature of the the effect of a hazard event on requirements
                susceptibility   assessment,     no the asset.
                information on the absolute level of
                hazard in different areas or future
                cost implications is provided. The
                approach is purely based on the
                experience from past events and can
                therefore not integrate projections
                under future conditions.




                                                                                                                                     45
PRIORITIZATION



                 Please note that it is beyond the scope of this guide to provide details on susceptibility,
                 hazard, and risk assessments but to rather provide an overview of their characteristics
                 (Table 4). There are many models, and an expert in the respective field should do the
                 selection and implementation of the assessment.

                 BOX 11. FLOOD SUSCEPTIBILITY ANALYSIS IN BELIZE
                 Due to its generally flat topography and multitude of rivers and perennial streams, pluvial and
                 riverine flooding are among the principal hazards in Belize. Another major hazard is coastal
                 flooding given the long and low-lying coastline. For this road infrastructure prioritization process,
                 a flood susceptibility assessment focusing on riverine flooding was carried out, given (a) the
                 lack of sufficient hydrometeorological data at a fine-enough resolution and the lack of suitable
                 resolution topography and bathymetry data; (b) the countrywide scope of the analysis; and (c) the
                 limited time and financial resources available. Coastal flooding was not taken into consideration
                 because there was no existing analysis for the entire country at the required scale and an analysis
                 could not be conducted given the low quality and resolution of the DEM. Landslides are not a major
                 risk along the primary and secondary road networks due to Belize’s generally flat topography.

                 The flood susceptibility analysis carried out in Belize was based on combining expert knowledge
                 with field observations, data on past flood events, and existing literature into a qualitative
                 approach. The MCE tool was used; however, this time, expert judgment determined the criteria,
                 weights, and indicators. In the following section, the criteria and indicators are presented and
                 described (Figure 8 and Figure 9).

                 Identification of Criteria
                 To carry out a simplified susceptibility analysis, criteria were chosen considering the available
                 data and according to the causes of flooding of the road network, which include undersized
                 stream-crossing structures and insufficient hydraulic capacity of culverts and bridges. The
                 underlying cause is that often design and construction of culverts and bridges is carried out
                 without sufficient hydrologic and hydraulic information, which results in undersized structures in
                 most cases. In addition, a significant number of stream crossings is in bad condition (obstructed
                 or damaged), which leads to further reduced hydraulic capacity and increased vulnerability.
                 Susceptibility to river floods, which relates to the flooding caused directly by the water bodies,
                 seems to be less frequent than the flooding at crossings; however, for high-severity events, it
                 can significantly affect the road network. Based on these observations, the flood susceptibility
                 analysis was developed using the following two criteria: (a) Flooding at stream crossings and (b)
                 Indications of past river flooding.




46
Weighting of the Criteria

                                Figure 8. Flood Susceptibility Flow Chart - Concept of the Flood Susceptibility Analysis Approach




Note: The river flood susceptibility consists of two criteria (dark blue and dark orange boxes), which are composed of multiple indicators (in the light blue and
the light orange boxes). In the rectangles on the lower right side of each criterion/indicator, the weights are presented.

To obtain the overall flood susceptibility, the criteria need to be combined using weights based on their respective relevance. Because flooding at crossings
appears to be the most frequent issue and results in the need for constant repairs of the road infrastructure, it was assigned a higher weight (60 percent) than
the indication of past river flooding (40 percent).
PRIORITIZATION



                 Identification of Indicators, Data Requirements, and Scoring
                 Once the criteria were established, indicators were developed based on experience from past
                 events, field observations, and expert knowledge. In the case of flooding at stream crossings,
                 based on the assumption that most stream crossings, especially culverts, are undersized and
                 mostly in insufficient condition, the following two indicators were chosen: (a) number of streams
                 crossing the road and (b) condition of the crossings (see the light blue boxes in Figure 8). The
                 second criterion, indications of past river floods, integrates all available information on past
                 events, indications from experts, and existing studies as well as flood characteristics. Two types
                 of information sources were considered: the flood susceptibility information from the study of
                 King et al. (1993) and the flood records from newspapers, expert information, and mapping of the
                 flood extent after Tropical Depression 16. In addition, the type of flooding was taken into account
                 due to the varying effects that different types of flooding may cause on the road network. For
                 example, floods in sloped areas have a quick onset and recede quickly after the rainfall events,
                 whereas floods in plain areas rise more slowly but may stay longer and thereby impede traffic for
                 a longer time.

                 To estimate the indicators, the road network was divided into 5 km stretches, and information
                 collected based on visual inspection and existing data was attached. Each indicator was
                 ‘normalized’ from its original unit and assigned a score between 1 and 100, which was chosen
                 based on expert judgment with the aim to capture increasingly worse flood susceptibility
                 conditions. The following section describes the indicators in more detail.

                 Number of stream crossings. Any crossing of a river or small stream along a road has the potential
                 for flooding, especially considering that according to the Ministry of Works and Transport, no
                 design standards currently exist. Consequently, the assumption underlying this analysis was that
                 stream-crossing structures were undersized for the whole network. On that basis, the number
                 of streams crossing the road was an indicator of possible flooding, whereby for every stream
                 crossing a 5 km stretch of the primary and secondary roadway, a score of 10 was applied. This
                 value was obtained from a linear normalization procedure, where the road stretch with the
                 maximum number of crossings (10) was given a score of 100.

                 Condition of crossings. Crossing structures in poor condition enhance the flood hazard potential
                 because they reduce the hydraulic capacity. The condition of crossings within each 5 km stretch
                 was determined by the culverts, bridges, or streams in the worst condition given a score of 100,
                 partially damaged or partially clogged given a score of 50, and in good condition given a score
                 of 0.

                 Flood susceptibility (King et al. 1993). When King et al. (1993) did the assessment of renewable
                 resources in Belize, they ranked the potential for flooding across Belize. Each 5 km stretch of
                 road within areas that they identified as flood prone was given a score of 100, and 5 km stretches
                 within areas not judged as flood prone were given a score of 0.

                 Flood records. The 5 km stretches located in areas where flooding was identified in recorded
                 events were considered to be in a confirmed susceptibility area and given a score of 100. Other
                 areas were given a score of 0.

                 Type of flood. The type of flood expected can greatly influence the hazard conditions; for example,
                 the floods that occur in the mountainous areas are more likely to be flash floods while floods
                 in flat areas tend to remain much longer. Flash floods cause short-term interruption of traffic
                 while floods in the flat areas last longer and cause more significant traffic disruption. Therefore,




48
                                                                                                        PRIORITIZATION



flat areas, where there would more likely be slow onset floods, were given a score of 100 and
mountainous areas, where there would more likely be flash floods, were given a score of 50 and
areas not prone to flooding or where no floods were recorded were given a score of 0.

A weight was then assigned to each indicator so indicator scores could be combined into a final
score for each criterion per 5 km stretch of road.

Indicator weights for the criterion flooding at crossings. Given the assumption that road
drainage structures were inadequate, the number of stream crossings across the road stretches
would affect the likelihood of flooding more than the condition of crossings. As such, more weight
was given to the number of stream crossings (70 percent) and less weight to the condition of
crossings (30 percent).

Indicator weights for the criterion indication of past river flooding. The flood susceptibility
study by King et al. (1993) was used to identify stretches of road that could be flooded according to
geomorphological conditions. The recorded events were considered as a complement of the study
by King et al. (1993); therefore, equal weight (45 percent) was given to the flood susceptibility
(King et al. 1993) and the flood records indicator. While the type of flood plays a role in the
resulting impact, it is comparatively less relevant and therefore weighted lower (10 percent).

Calculation of Flood Susceptibility
First, the indicators were calculated for the entire road network; then, using the weights, the
criteria values were derived and the flood susceptibility values were computed.

After the model was developed and run, the results went through a series of validation exercises
the first round of which was conducted by the team that led the prioritization process. Its main
task was to ensure that the model was complete and that there were no major errors in the results
at a technical level. Based on knowledge of the area under assessment, it was checked whether
the results were reasonable.

The next round of validation was held with key stakeholders. Their task was to determine whether
the modelled results identify key areas that need to be addressed based on the criteria that had
been defined.

Subsequent to the validation, three susceptibility classes were established: (a) high susceptibility—
areas with a final score between 50 and 100; (b) medium susceptibility—areas with a final score
of 0–49; and (c) low susceptibility—areas with a final score of 0. The results were compared with
data of critical sites collected in the field to validate the results and then combined with these
data. The final ranking were estimated as follows:

       •	   High priority: A 5 km stretch identified as Priority 1 stretches AND critical from the
            field analysis

       •	   Medium priority: A 5 km stretch identified as Priority 1 stretches OR critical from the
            field analysis

       •	   Low Priority: A 5 km stretch identified as neither Priority 1 NOR critical from the field
            analysis

The final outcome of the analysis, the flood susceptibility evaluation of the entire primary and
secondary road network of Belize, is presented in Figure 9.




                                                                                                                  49
PRIORITIZATION




                 Figure 9. Flood Susceptibility of the Primary and Secondary Road Network




50
                                                                                                                 PRIORITIZATION



Module 6: Informed Decision Making
                                                                                   Scope
While creating models, calculating numbers, and
preparing maps is critical, it is equally important to
involve the decision makers from the beginning of
the process so that they buy into the process and are                               Data
prepared for the final results. Thus, it is advisable
to involve the Cabinet, or the highest decision-




                                                                                                           ers
                                                                rs
                                                                            Criticality Evaluation




                                                                 lde




                                                                                                       old
making authority, at strategic points throughout the




                                                                      ho




                                                                                                      keh
process. Upper management, such as the CEOs of




                                                                  ake
                                                                              Hazard Analysis




                                                                                                     Sta
line ministries, should also be engaged, so that there




                                                                       St
are frequent points at which incremental approval
is given for intermediate outputs and proposed
methodologies. Ultimately, the decision to allocate
funds to projects rests with the Cabinet and is
executed through the MoF, which is responsible for
budget preparation. Key stakeholders of the process
                                                                           Informed Decision
such as the MoF can provide guidance on how to best
present the final results and discuss their use.
The information provided should enable decision making about the most effective use
of scarce resources to make the people and economy more resilient to the impacts of
natural hazards. As such, additional information about already ongoing infrastructure
investments and cost implications should be included in communication to decision
makers.

BOX 12. USING THE RESULTS TO INFORM INVESTMENTS IN BELIZE
Three Cabinet papers were submitted when there was an intermediate product or proposed
methodology for the Cabinet to approve throughout the process. The Cabinet papers were short
and focused on presenting the most important information required for decision making. In
addition, there were frequent discussions with CEOs during their Cabinet debriefing session
as well as further discussions with the CEO directly responsible for managing the process and
relationship with the Cabinet.

When presenting the final results, additional information that was considered useful for prioritizing
investments was integrated into the presentation; for example, information on planned or already
ongoing infrastructure projects were included.

In the selection of intervention for the World Bank project, the scope and cost of investments
were considered as interventions that required major capital investments, for example, paving
of unpaved roads or the construction of new roads were not considered, given the limited funds
available. The map showing road type and condition (see Figure 10) reveals that all highways
stretching between (a) the Western Border (to Guatemala) and Belize City, (b) the Hummingbird
highway from Belmopan to Dangriga, (c) the Southern highway from Dangriga to Punta Gorda,
and (d) the Northern highways are paved while most other roads of the primary and secondary
network have a gravel surface.



                                                                                                                           51
PRIORITIZATION




                 Figure 10. Road Surface Type Including Information on Ongoing and Planned Projects




52
                                                                                                       PRIORITIZATION



The prioritization of flood risk reduction was carried out based on the identification of areas with
high flood susceptibility in combination with high socioeconomic criticality. Thereby, not a single
road stretch was identified rather than areas with significant criticality and flood susceptibility
to account for the network character of the transport infrastructure.

    Figure 12. Priority Areas for Flood Vulnerability Reduction Investments under the Climate
                                   Resilient Infrastructure Project




                                                                                                                 53
PRIORITIZATION



                 The four areas that have been identified and prioritized for road investments are the following:

                         (a)	   Greater Belize City area. This area was considered critical because it got a high criticality
                                rating in the ‘access of relief services to the communities’ and ‘essential part of the evacuation
                                network’ criteria and a medium criticality rating in all the other criteria. Flood susceptibility
                                of road stretches in this area ranked in the highest susceptibility class.


                         (b)	   West of Belmopan. This area was considered critical because it got a high criticality ratings
                                in the ‘connectivity between production sites and raw material extraction areas and (air)
                                ports and border crossings’, ‘access of relief services to the communities’, and ‘access to
                                socially vulnerable populations’ criteria and a medium criticality rating in most of the other
                                criteria. Flood susceptibility of road stretches in this area ranked from low to high, with most
                                stretches in the medium to high susceptibility class.


                         (c)	   Northern area around Corozal. This area was characterized by a mix of high to low criticality.
                                Several routes are ranked as highly critical in the ‘essential part of the evacuation network’
                                and their importance in providing ‘access to socially vulnerable populations’ criteria. In
                                addition, the area had high criticality for the ‘connectivity between production sites and raw
                                material extraction areas and (air)ports and border crossings’ criterion. Flood susceptibility
                                of road stretches in this area ranged from low to high.


                         (d)	   Southern area around Independence. This area was characterized by medium criticality.
                                While the ‘dependency on the road’ criteria was ranked very high, the ‘condition of the roads’
                                is comparatively good, so the criteria was ranked low. Flood susceptibility for the majority
                                of road stretches in this area, especially the highway, fell into the high flood susceptibility
                                class.

                 The Government of Belize used this information for the selection of sites for intervention under
                 the World Bank–supported’, Climate Resilient Infrastructure Project (CRIP). 




54
DISCUSSION




             Discussion and
             Lessons Learned
             The participatory prioritization of investments in the road infrastructure in Belize
             combined the results of two MCE processes: criticality and susceptibility assessments of
             the primary and secondary network. The final output was the identification of priority


56
                                                                                               DISCUSSION



areas in the network toward which resilience improvement investments should be
targeted. The process was successfully completed, and the final product is being used
to identify or inform investments in road infrastructure in Belize. This section presents
some factors that led to the success of the prioritization process and some lessons
learned to consider during future implementation of similar processes.

       (a)	   A good understanding of the decision-making processes in a jurisdiction
              where a prioritization process is to be implemented is useful. Time spent
              discussing who the key decision makers are, how they make their decisions,
              and the deliberation processes for resource allocation options should inform
              the way information is shared and discussed during the prioritization process.
              In the case of Belize, the interactions among technical officers, the CEOs,
              and the Cabinet was managed by the CEO in the MoFED. Her experience in
              facilitating discussions between the Government, at its various levels, and
              multilateral banks about project selection enabled the facilitating team to
              work with technical representatives and CEOs at key junctures in the process.

              At the technical level, the CEO for Economic Development worked with
              her colleagues to appoint representatives from their respective ministries
              to participate in the criticality assessment of the road network and
              collaborated with the Ministry of Works and Transport in the implementation
              of the susceptibility assessment. She worked with the facilitating team to
              package the findings, at strategic points in the process, for submission to
              the executive for consideration, discussion, and endorsement. The priority
              list was not submitted simply as a final product, but rather the process,
              intermediate product, and final list were sequentially submitted and
              incrementally adopted.

       (b)	   As much as possible, get the organization that facilitates the decision-
              making process to participate in the technical discussions and to
              take ownership of the process and results. This could improve the
              prospects for use of the results and the adoption of the methods and
              principles of evidence-based decisions in resource allocation processes.

              In the case of Belize, the MoFED successfully led the prioritization
              process through the Government’s decision-making mechanisms.

              The Ministry of Works and Transport, which is responsible for road
              infrastructure, participated in both the criticality and flood susceptibility
              components of the evaluation. As a result, it is now integrating disaster
              resilience into the design and construction of roadways, as well as including
              resilience considerations in its maintenance planning.

                                                                                                     57
DISCUSSION



             (c)	   Evidence-based prioritization could improve resource allocation and lead
                    to higher levels of human development. The information for evidence-
                    based prioritization comes from institutional and operational knowledge,
                    as well as data collected and assessed. Good data development and data-
                    sharing capabilities better enable evidence-based resource allocation. If at
                    all possible use the process to help to develop and or strengthen the data
                    collection and data management and sharing culture.


             (d)	   Data created   or compiled for use in evidence-based prioritization
                    for resource   allocation in a particular thematic area will often
                    be useful in    other thematic areas. Bearing this in mind could
                    help ensure    that collected data are appropriately disaggregated.

                    In the case of Belize, a series of data sets were collated and created for use
                    in the model to prioritize road segments for investments. An important data
                    set that was created was the road database, which can also be used as input
                    for the management of the primary and secondary public roads. Other data
                    created included the location of public buildings such as banks, production
                    centers, and historic floods, among others. Some existing data such as the
                    Belize Rivers and the land systems from the King et al. (1993) study were
                    upgraded to improve usability in the MCE models, and others such as the
                    30 m ASTER DEM, Belize Land Use/Land Cover, and Belize settlements were
                    collated for use. In total, about 30 data sets were utilized in some way in
                    the preparation of the prioritization model. The data collated and collected
                    have been shared through the national spatial data infrastructure (NSDI). It
                    is expected that the Government will adopt and update the data sets as well
                    as use them in its national development planning.

                                                    




58
                                                                                         REFERENCES




References
Rogelis Carolina María. 2013. Simplified Flood Susceptibility Analysis of the Belize´s
       Road Network. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Communities and Local Government. 2009. Multi-criteria analysis: a manual. Department
     for Communities and Local Government. London, U.K.

Doran, George T. 2008. “There’s a S.M.A.R.T. Way to Write Management’s Goals and
       Objectives.” Management Review 70.11 (Nov. 1981): 35. Business Source
       Corporate. EBSCO .

Federal Highway Administration. 2011. Impacts of Climate Change and Variability on
       Transport Systems and Infrastructure: The Gulf Coast Study, Phase 2 - Task
       1: Assessing Infrastructure for Criticality in Mobile, AL. Federal Highway
       Administration. U.S. Department of Transportation.

GFDRR. 2014. Understanding Risk in an Evolving World – Emerging Best Practices in
      Natural Disaster Risk Assessment. World Bank. Washington, DC.

Homeland Security. 2013. Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment Guide:
      Comprehensive Preparedness Guide (COG) 201. Second Edition, [Online] http://
      www.fema.gov/media-library-data/8ca0a9e54dc8b037a55b402b2a269e94/
      CPG201_htirag_2nd_edition.pdf.

IPCC. 2007. “Summary for Policymakers,” in Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation
       and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
       Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
       Press. Cambridge, UK p. 17. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/
       ar4-wg2-spm.pdf.

King R.B., Pratt J.H., Warner M. P. and Zisman S. A. 1993. Agricultural Development
       Prospects in Belize. National Resources Institute, Chatham, UK.

Kreft Sönke, et al. 2015. “Global Climate Risk Index 2016.” Germanwatch. http://
       germanwatch.org/en/download/13503.pdf.

Kreft Sönke, et al. 2015. “Global Climate Risk Index 2016.” Germanwatch. http://
       germanwatch.org/en/download/13503.pdf.

Kappes Melanie. 2013. Presentation of the Final Results; Prioritization of Roads for
      Investment under Belize Climate Resilient Infrastructure Project (BCRIP). World
      Bank, Washington DC, USA.




                                                                                               59
ENDNOTES



           Pozueta Beatriz, and Kappes Melanie. 2013. Prioritization of Road Infrastructure
                  Investments by Means of a Multi-Criteria Evaluation Methodology. World Bank,
                  Washington, DC.

           Schreiner Sideney, Kappes Melanie, Pozueta Beatriz, Cayetano Marion, and Meerman Jan.
                  2013. MCE Criteria and Indicator Framework - Belize. World Bank, Washington
                  DC, USA.

           Tompkins Emma L., and Neil Adger W. 2004. “Does Adaptive Management of Natural
                 Disasters Enhance Resilience to Climate Change?” Ecology and Society (2): 10.
                 http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art10.

           Transport & ICT. 2015. Moving Toward Climate-Resilient Transport: The World Bank’s
                  Experience from Building Adaptation into Programs. World Bank, Washington,
                  DC. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0.

           UNISDR [United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction]. 2009. UNISDR
                 Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. United Nations. Geneva, Switzerland.

           World Bank. Report No. 63504-BZ. 2011. Belize Country Partnership Strategy 2012–2015.
                  World Bank, Washington DC, USA.

           _____________

                           1.	 Meteorological: High wind/excess rainfall/hurricanes and drought.

                           2.	    Latin America and Caribbean Urban and Disaster Risk Management
                                 team in the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice

                           3.	    Guha-Sapir, D., R. Below, and Ph. Hoyois - EM-DAT: International
                                 Disaster Database - www.emdat.be - Université Catholique de Louvain -
                                 Brussels - Belgium.

                           4.	    Guha-Sapir, D., R. Below, and Ph. Hoyois - EM-DAT: International
                                 Disaster Database - www.emdat.be - Université Catholique de Louvain -
                                 Brussels - Belgium.

                           5.	 Adjusted for inflation to 2016 using the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
                               inflation calculator: http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm.

                           6.	    In the beginning of the workshop, a presentation was given by MoFED
                                 on the strategic development objectives of the Government.

                           7.	 http://www.preventionweb.net/files/4040_
                               africaguidelinesmainstreamingdrassessmentdevelopment1.pdf.



60
