Liquidity Management for Mobile Money Providers
           Insights from Global Experiments




                                                  Page 1
                                                                 Types of Liquidity
                                                                    Overview
Solving the liquidity management challenge is one of the next big issues facing mobile money
providers around the world. None of the players, even the most prominent like M-PESA in Kenya or
Globe in the Philippines, have figured out solutions that will work across the country. Even global
remittance companies like Western Union have not solved the issue. In fact, most of Western Union’s
payout centers are banks. In developing countries, even this strategy does not always work because
the bank branches themselves run out of money.1 The trade-off is to have customers return another
day. It is not surprising, that the challenges are exacerbated in rural areas. Some providers, like
CelPay Zambia, focus on urban areas where there is access to bank branches. Thus the company
avoids liquidity problems in harder to reach areas.

Fortunately, customers appear to be forgiving. In Kenya, 20% of M-PESA customers report that they
cannot withdraw money from an M-PESA agent. In 70% of those cases, the retail agent did not have
sufficient funds. Nonetheless, more than 98% of M-PESA customers are happy with the solution.2
This suggests that even though there are liquidity problems, the customers are willing to look past that
– at least for the time being – because of the overall value they perceive from the mobile money
solution. It is unknown how long this will be case.

Even if customers are willing to put up with the inconvenience of having to return to an agent to
access their capital, liquidity management is currently a huge expense for the retail agent and puts a
strain on the attractiveness of mobile money as a viable business for them. According to research
conducted by CGAP, the primary cost of the mobile money business for retail agents is liquidity
management, which consumes 20-30% of the total expenses for this business line.3 In the Philippines,
three out of five categories of retail agents are traveling to the bank more than 3 times per week.4




The industry is learning that building mobile money distribution channels is more difficult than
exploiting airtime agent networks. Similarly, many have not yet faced the realization that liquidity is
unlikely to take care of itself. It is likely to require oversight and management on the part of the
MFSP and the master agents.




1
  Interview with Paul Sumerall, Managing Partner at New Corridor Advisory Services. October 28, 2009.
2
  FSD Kenya. “The performance and impact of M-PESA”. 2009
3
  http://www.docstoc.com/docs/21369876/The-Hype-Cycle-and-Mobile-Banking
4
  http://www.docstoc.com/docs/21369876/The-Hype-Cycle-and-Mobile-Banking




                                                                                                           Page 1
Liquidity management actually takes two forms: management of electronic value in the mobile wallet
and cash management. When “liquidity” is mentioned by technology providers, some MFSPs, and
others they are usually referring to the management of electronic value. While scale is being
built, this is the more serious of the two forms of liquidity management. While customer volumes
are low, the cash impact on retail agents is also relatively low, but electronic value appears as a
management problem even in the most nascent mobile money businesses.

Liquidity Manag em ent: Electronic Value

Mobile money transactions between a retail agent and a customer requires that the retail agent
has cash value in their mobile wallet. As the agent provides financial services throughout the day,
the cash amount on their phone fluctuates up and down, depending on whether they are accepting
funds or paying out. When the amount in the retail agent’s mobile wallet is used up, the agent
cannot perform additional services and needs to refill their account. If the agent does not have a
bank account linked to their mobile wallet, this means they need to make a trip to the bank to
transfer cash into electronic value.

It is becoming more common for electronic liquidity to be handled not only by the retail agents,
but also by the master agents. Technology is also being developed to help the master agents and
the MFSP manage liquidity. The following example describes the liquidity management process
in the EMIDA 5 system when a customers makes a deposit with a retail agent.




Liquidity Management: Physical Cash

The other form of liquidity management relates to physical cash. Customers who are seeking to
make cash deposits into their mobile wallets or to withdraw cash from their accounts will go to


5
  EMIDA is a leading electronic top-up technology provider that is moving into the mobile money space. Refer
to EMIDA Example – Liquidity Management in Part 10 of the Toolkit for additional information.




                                                                                                               Page 2
retail agents. With cash-in transactions, customers deposit their money with retail agents. While
cash-out transactions result in customers seeking to withdraw funds via retail agents.




 Cash-i n




 Cash-out




Depending on the relative volumes of cash-in or cash-out transactions in any given day, the retail
agent can become either cash-rich, with too much cash on hand, or cash-poor. In the latter case,
the agent does not have enough cash to provide the customer with the full amount of their
withdrawal request. Often customers must return the following day to obtain their money.

Unlike electronic liquidity issues that can be managed remotely via bank transfer or master agent
transfers, cash liquidity can only be managed physically. While mobile money customer bases
remain small or primarily urban, cash liquidity issues have not been a significant problem for
many mobile money providers. But if the retail agent either has too much cash on hand,
increasing security risks, or not enough cash on hand to handle customers withdrawal requests,
then there needs to be a movement of physical cash. This either has to take place via the agent
going to the bank or having someone, such as the master agent, bring cash. As transaction
volumes increase, cash liquidity is likely to be a more challenging problem than electronic
liquidity.




                                                                                                     Page 3
                                                        Liquidity Management Options


As mentioned previously, none of the mobile money providers have solved the problem of
liquidity management adequately. This is true for both electronic as well as cash liquidity issues.
There are no easy solutions or silver bullets. There has been progress, however, which points to
some mitigation options. It is likely that multi-pronged strategies, including several of the
following approaches – if not more - will be required

Choose Retail Agents That Already Handle Cash

To date, ensuring that retail agents have enough cash on hand for customer requirements has not
been a major issue for G-CASH because Globe chose pawnshops, foreign exchange offices, and
Globe Telecom stores as their primary retail agents. These businesses already deal in large
volumes of cash, and they all have safes. This approach coupled with the relatively low
transaction volumes the market is currently experiencing has allowed G-CASH to bypass cash
liquidity issues for the time being.

Jointly Manage Agent and Customer Growth

Liquidity management is particularly challenging during the scale up of a mobile money service.
Therefore, it is important to match the growth of the agent network with the growth of the
customer base. Too many agents will result in agents that are not making sufficient revenue to
make the business interesting, and will lead to high drop-out rates. Too few agents will lead to
increased liquidity management challenges.

Use Master Agents

Master agents are a critical element of liquidity management. They are being used extensively to
ensure that retail agents are able to maintain sufficient electronic value on their mobile phone as
well as to have insight into cash management issues. Technology providers, such as EMIDA, and
MFSP, such as M-PESA, are building liquidity management tools into their mobile money
offerings to further enhance master agents’ ability to manage the liquidity needs for the retail
agents in their networks.

In Kenya, M-PESA uses an agent hierarchy to facilitate liquidity management. Master agents buy
and sell M-PESA electronic value from the retail agents, giving the retail agents the means to
balance their relative positions in M-PESA electronic value and cash on a day-to-day basis.
Master agents create accounts in banks that are located near their retail agents, and the retail
agents usually visit the nearest bank branch daily to either deposit or withdraw cash from their
account. In other cases, the master agents will physically collect or drop off cash to retail agents.
In this way, master agents help to balance out the net cash requirements of the various agents
within their hierarchy and thereby provide ways to move money from retail agents in areas with
net cash in to retail agents in areas with net cash out. M-PESA mandates that each master agent
be present in at least two provinces to increase the chance that the net cash requirement will
balance out at the master agent level. 6

Master agent head offices can also transfer float between stores as another mechanism to manage
cash floats. In this case the master agent makes a transaction from one store’s float account to
another store’s float account. The M-PESA system authorises the transaction if funds are

6
    Mas, Ignacio and Morawczynski, Olga. 2009. “Lessons from M-PESA.” Innovations. MIT Press




                                                                                                        Page 4
available and the rules on both accounts can be met. The master agent then finalises the
transaction after checking the transaction details and the second store’s float account receives
the funds after the transaction has been finalised. Despite M-PESA’s sophisticated agent
structure, liquidity remains to be one of their top concerns.

Unlike M-PESA, most mobile money businesses have not progressed to the point where the
master agents are involved in picking up or replenishing cash. This procedure is being
experimented with elsewhere, however. For example, in the Philippines microfinance banks that
are using G-CASH are starting to have branch managers pick up excess cash from the retail agents
in their network. It is very possible that this approach will ultimately be what is required to
ensure smooth cash management.

ATM, Bank, and Microfinance Linkages

One of the easiest and most straightforward ways to minimize liquidity issues is to select retail
agents that are located in close proximity to bank branches or ATMs. This enables the retail
agent to access cash points relatively easily. But even when branches are close by, agents do not
always use them as frequently as they need because they do not want to leave their shops for even
the 10 to 15 minutes it would take to visit the branch. The relatively underdeveloped banking
system is one of the factors that contribute to the challenge of liquidity management for M-
PESA in Tanzania. The number of bank branches per 100,000 inhabitants is only 0.57 and this
low level of density makes it difficult for agents to easily manage their cash floats. Agents must
travel long distances to find a bank branch where they can renew their floats which means that
they have less time in their shops and may not be able to top-up their floats as often as they
need. As a result, agents in Tanzania face increased float management problems and customers
have often complained about this. M-PESA Tanzania is still struggling with managing this
problem.

Ensuring that retail agents have bank accounts from which they can pull assets is another liquidity
management tool. One of the main reasons that MABS designed their Text-A-Withdrawal
service was to allow their retail agents to remotely transfer funds from their bank accounts
directly to their mobile wallets. This eliminated the need to continuously put more cash into
their G-CASH accounts.

Providing mobile money customers with cards or pin codes that enable them to withdraw cash
from an ATM is another important way to mitigate liquidity issues, particularly in urban areas
with high ATM densities. Even though they have more than 16,000 retail agents, M-PESA uses
this approach in Kenya where they have partnered with PayNet, an ATM and POS service
provider. Customers can access a one-time pin code from their mobile phone, which they can use
to withdraw funds from any of the ATMs in PayNet’s PesaPoint network.

Microfinance institutions are increasingly being viewed as a mechanism to increase the size and
reach of the agent network. In most countries, relationships between MFSPs and microfinance
institutions are still in their infancy, but there are a few examples that suggest these relationships
might become very valuable in the future. In order to make the value proposition work for the
MFI, it is important that the mobile service provider enable loan disbursements and loan
repayments. MFIs can also benefit if their agents are able to provide value added services, such as
bill payments, micro-insurance, and other products to their customers through the mobile phone.
In exchange, the MFI branches, and potentially their loan officers, can become agents for the
MFSP. Since the MFI is already in the business of handling and managing cash, they can help
minimize liquidity issues wherever they operate. And often, MFIs operate in more remote




                                                                                                         Page 5
locations. In Kenya, Equity Bank has its own mobile banking service called EAzzy 24/7. The
bank also provides cash-in and cash out services for M-PESA in both urban and rural areas.7

Service Diversification

When the types of services available across the mobile money solution are limited, liquidity
problems are likely to be even more prevalent because agents tend to end up cash rich or cash
poor. As service diversity increases, there are more opportunities for retail agents to balance
their cash holdings through disbursements and withdrawals. In November 2009, M-PESA, Kenya
was working with 27 companies that used the service for bulk distributions and 75 companies that
were collecting payments from their customers through M-PESA.8 This helps the company and
its agents balance out the liquidity challenges.

In Afghanistan, M-Paisa agents currently face severe liquidity management challenges since
mobile money is mainly used for loan payments. This means that cash withdrawals and deposits
are very unbalanced, with the number of customers repaying their microfinance loans far
exceeding the number of withdrawals. Thus agents need to keep a significant amount of M-Paisa
funds available, requiring them to either tie up a large amount of float in the system or to make
frequent trips to the bank. In the coming months, the mobile operator that runs M-Paisa is
hoping to address this imbalance by increasing the number of users receiving their salary through
M-Paisa as these customers will be withdrawing cash from the agents and will, hopefully, balance
the cash deposits for loan repayments.

The Brazilian government gave Caixa responsibility to disburse government benefits, including
pensions. Since paying pensions is a cash-out procedure, agents faced the problem of balancing
their funds and the bank had cash loading issues, especially in rural areas. Hence, Caixa started
offering bill payment services as well to customers. Bill payment solutions serve as a cash-in
option for the bank's agents and help in balancing the cash flow.

Staggered Payments

Government pension and subsidy payments, salary disbursements from employers, and other
business-to-person (B2P) payments are becoming more common in mobile money solutions.
These types of cash-push solutions are becoming more commonplace as they are proving to be a
good way to hook customers on the mobile solution. However, since many of these payouts tend
to occur at the same time, they put enormous pressure on agent liquidity.

One mechanism to manage these B2P payments more effectively is to have the funding agency
stagger their payments over a number of days or weeks. This change can have a very positive
impact on the liquidity issues.

Tameer Bank in Pakistan trains their agents on how to manage cash flows by limiting daily
transactions, both in value and volume, and on the timings of cash services options. This helps
them to evolve more predictable liquidity models for their agents.

Bank Credits and Overdraft Protection

Just as MFSPs will probably need to consider providing loans to some of their agents for start-up
capital, these businesses should also consider helping their agents obtain short-term (few day)

7
 http://www.centerforfinancialinclusion.org/Document.Doc?id=731
8
 Mas, Ignatio. “ Three Keys to M-PESA’s Success: Branding, Channel Management and Pricing”. Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. 2010.




                                                                                                       Page 6
bank credits and overdraft protections. Such mechanisms would go a long way to help agents
manage their liquidity challenges.
.
Tameer Bank is experimenting with these types of solutions. Some of their larger franchisees
work on overdrafts from other banks. So the scope of their solution expands beyond cash
management to the concept of inter-bank switches that can be leveraged to provide liquidity to
cash points for the agents across the country.

Encourage Electronic Payments

Although it is unlikely that cash will be completely replaced any time soon, moving toward
services that enable more customers to make purchases with mobile money will also help manage
liquidity issues. One area that could prove to be very important is transforming supply chains
into electronic versus cash-based conduits.

Coca-Cola Sabco is looking at the use of mobile money as a way to shift the supply chain of its
Manual Distribution Centers away from cash. In Papua New Guinea, IFC is looking at piloting
mobile money to reduce the cash in the coffee supply chain. These types of shifts will be
important in moving mobile money beyond a mere money transfer solution that requires an
abundance of cash-in/cash-out points.

Combine Airtime Top-up with Financial Services

More and more mobile money providers are recognizing that airtime top-up is a critical part of
their financial value proposition. This service tends to have cash-in requirements. With the
inclusion of airtime services in their mobile money product line, an agent has a repetitive business
that can offset cash withdrawal services – thus balancing their cash flow a bit more.




                                                                                                       Page 7
                                               APPENDIX 1
                 GSMA Report: Managing a Mobile Money Agent Network9


How do operators ensure agents are liquid?
Most agents will regularly need to restock their inventory of electronic value or cash in order to
continue serving their customers. Agents who primarily perform cash in will need to restock their
inventory of electronic value; agents who primarily perform cash out will need to restock their
inventory of cash. 10

Operators have developed a host of liquidity management processes, and most operators employ
more than one. In part, the options that will be available to operators are shaped by their existing
relationships with stakeholders like airtime dealers – as well as the quality and extent of the
banking infrastructure in their markets and the willingness of banks to play an enabling role for
mobile money. All of these mechanisms have a cost, whether explicit (bank transfer fees) or
implicit (time, capacity at company-owned stores, etc.), and whichever entity assumes these
costs will need to be compensated for them – whether it is the operator, the agent, or an
intermediary.

Option 1: Selling and buying electronic value directly to and from agents
The simplest arrangement is for mobile operators to sell and buy electronic value directly to and
from agents. Many operators have company-owned retail locations in the markets in which they
trade, and they can use these outlets as mobile money and cash distribution points to agents
(although they would also typically serve as agents to users as well). However, this approach
requires agents to physically present themselves at one of the operator’s outlets, which,
particularly for far-flung agents, can take up a large amount of their time.

If the existing banking infrastructure in the market is sufficiently developed, an operator can
leverage it to make selling and buying electronic value to and from remote agents easier. For
example, MTN Uganda allows agents to buy electronic value by depositing cash into a bank
account at its partner bank. Once the deposit has been confirmed, MTN Uganda transfers the
electronic value to the agent. Since making deposits is free, this mechanism does not have any
explicit costs, but it still takes up agents’ time – again, for rural agents who live far from a branch
of MTN Uganda’s bank partner. This approach is a good option for operators who have
partnered with a bank that can settle cash deposits in real time. It is also relatively
straightforward: this approach does not require any modification to the bank’s ordinary deposit-
taking processes. Note, however, that buying electronic value from agents using this mechanism
requires the agent to have a bank account, into which the operator can deposit funds (which the
agent can then retrieve as cash).

In Thailand, where the banking infrastructure allows for instantaneous intrabank transfers, a True
Money Express agent can buy electronic value by transferring money from her bank account to
True’s (a transaction that is completed on a mobile handset), after which her account is
immediately credited with electronic value. (True enables this functionality by holding bank
accounts at roughly a dozen banks in the country.) However, unlike the previous options, this
approach has an explicit cost: a bank transfer fee of about 1%, which the agent pays. In addition,
it works only for selling electronic value to, rather than buying it from, agents – although since
True Money Express agents do not yet facilitate cash out, which would entail accepting and

9
  GSMA. Managing a Mobile Money Agent Network: A Handbook for Mobile Network Operators. May 2010. This
appendix was taken verbatim from this document.
10
   The few agents who find that they perform about as much cash-in as cash-out will have to restock much less
frequently; the hypothetical agent whose electronic value float requirements were exactly equal to her cash float
requirements would find it necessary to restock only when her business is growing.




                                                                                                                    Page 8
potentially accumulating a large volume of electronic money from customers, there is rarely a
need for agents to sell electronic value back to True.11

Option 2: Using super agents and master agents
In most markets, however, it is unrealistic to expect agents to travel to an operator-owned outlet
or a branch of the operator’s bank partner and impossible for the banking system to facilitate
instantaneous transfers and thus purchase of electronic value. In these cases, operators appoint
intermediaries to whom they will sell and from whom they will buy electronic value, who, in turn,
will sell and buy electronic value to and from agents. Like wholesalers in other distribution
systems, these entities earn a somewhat lower commission than regular agents do, because they
deal in bulk, but nevertheless they must be compensated for their role.

The most obvious candidates for this role are banks, ideally those with a relatively large network
of branches, and banks who agree to perform this function are sometimes designated super agents.
For a fee, super agents agree to buy and sell electronic value in exchange for cash. Safaricom has
signed agreements with several banks in Kenya to perform such a role.12 In this model, the
restocking fee can be paid either by the agent or by the operator. While this model still requires
agents to physically present themselves at a bank branch as they would in Option 1, it does
enable an operator to partner with multiple banks – and leverage multiple networks of branches –
to provide agents with more options. It also allows agents to convert cash into electronic value
and vice versa instantaneously.

While banks occasionally play this role, more commonly, it is taken on by figures called master
agents, who agree to manage the liquidity of a set of agents. (Master agents are almost always the
same entities as aggregators, but for clarity we distinguish these roles from each other, since in
theory their functions could be delivered by different entities.13 ) This means a master agent buys
electronic value from the operator and then resells it to agents under its umbrella. If a master
agent supports a group of agents who, net, perform more cash out than cash in, the master agent
will purchase electronic value from agents and sell it to the operator. To minimize the frequency
with which master agents need to trade directly with the operator, operators can insist that
master agents support agents in both urban and rural areas, balancing cash-in and cash-out
requirements.

Sometimes, master agents employ staff who can shuttle cash to and from agents. More generally,
they can be expected to take responsibility for ensuring that their agents are liquid and thus ready
to transact with customers. It is for this reason that most operators give master agents tools to
monitor the electronic value balances of its agents. That allows master agents to act pre-
emptively when an agent may need to buy more electronic value soon. Of course, it is not
possible to electronically monitor cash balances, but operators can encourage close
communication between agents and their master agents to ensure that cash doesn’t run out:
Vodacom Tanzania has recently issued its master agents with mobile numbers that are toll-free
for its agents so that they can communicate their liquidity needs freely, without worrying about
incurring the cost of airtime.

This difference in degree of responsibility between super agents and master agents is reflected in
the way that they are typically paid. Super agents are paid each time they buy or sell electronic
value from or to an agent, while master agents are paid for liquidity management indirectly, by

11
   For more information, see “True Money and M-PESA: Two Unique Paths to Scale” by Paul Leishman at
http://mmublog.org/south-east-asia/new-gsma-case-study-on-thailand’s-true-money/
12
   See “Three keys to M-PESA’s success: Branding, channel management and pricing,” a forthcoming article
by Ignacio Mas and Amolo Ng’weno, for a more detailed discussion of the liquidity processes that Safaricom
has put into place.
13
   For more on aggregators, see the GSMA’s ”Building a Network of Mobile Money Agents” at
http://www.mmublog.org/agent-networks/




                                                                                                             Page 9
sharing with the agent a cut of the commissions that the agent earns by transacting with
customers.14 By tying the compensation of a master agent to the success of its agents, operators
motivate master agents to ensure that their agents are liquid. Banks cannot assume this
responsibility (and in any case are not usually tasked with managing particular agents, as master
agents are) so it makes more sense to pay them on a per-transaction basis.




14
   Unlike airtime superdealers, mobile money master agents sell electronic value at the same price at which they buy it
from the operator.




                                                                                                                          Page 10
