M-Money Channel Distribution Case – Tanzania


         Vodacom Tanzania M-PESA
                                                                          Overview

In April 2008, Vodacom Tanzania went live with the second East African implementation of Vodafone
Group’s revolutionary mobile money transfer platform, M-PESA. After an extremely successful launch of
the system in Kenya just one year earlier, analysts were expecting the service to show the same signs of
rapid uptake and acceptance amongst Tanzanian mobile phone users. In June 2009, 14 months after the
launch of M-PESA in Tanzania, Vodacom announced that registrations had reached 280,000 users who
were transferring USD 5.5 million per month at about 930 agent locations. When this is compared to the
2.7 million users and 3,000 agents that had been registered in Kenya 14 months after the local launch of
M-PESA, it is clear that some key differences exist between the two implementations. The discrepancy in
registrations is a result of some important distinctions in country demographics, cultures, market
characteristics and strategic implementation decisions.

Over the last several months, Vodacom has made a number of strategic changes that have resulted in
increased subscriber registrations and has enabled a more rapid roll out of the agent network in Tanzania.
The changes include a simpler pricing model, a more targeted education-based marketing campaign, and
the introduction of an aggregator model to better manage and support its distribution network. Recently
the company announced that M-PESA now has more than a million customers transferring USD 12.8
million per month at about 2,000 agent locations since launching in April 2008.

Vodacom uses a trust structure that is similar to the operation in Kenya to protect deposits in the service.
A holding company has been registered in Tanzania, with independent directors, to act as a trustee of all
funds from the M-PESA business.

Vodacom Tanzania is a subsidiary company of South African Vodacom Group (Pty) Limited who owns a
majority share position of 65%, and is in turn 65% owned by Vodafone Group. The remaining 35% of
Vodacom Tanzania is privately owned by a Tanzanian shareholder; Mirambo Ltd. Vodacom Tanzania
was one of the first mobile operators in Tanzania and went live in August 2000. It now services 5.9
                                                               1
million of the country’s 14 million mobile phone subscribers. It is still the leading mobile operator in
                                                                                     2
Tanzania but faces strong competition from 3 other providers, Zain, Tigo and Zantel.

This paper discusses the original strategic tactics that Vodacom Tanzania employed during the launch of
M-PESA in April 2008 and describes how those tactics have evolved since to improve delivery and
penetration of the system in Tanzania.




1
    International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Report, 2009
2
    Zantel is a member of the Etisalat Group




                                                                                                               Page 1
                                                                    Success Factors


Anchor Product or Products
Since national remittance proved to be a successful anchor product for M-PESA in Kenya, Vodacom also
positioned the M-PESA service in Tanzania around national remittance. They adopted the familiar ‘send
money home’ campaign to initially advertise the service. However, money transfer services are less
needed in Tanzania than Kenya since the behavior of urban migrants sending money back to family is not
as prevalent in Tanzania and since there is less crime and insecurity in Tanzania. Since its launch, M-
PESA in Tanzania has also been extended to offer bill payment, airtime purchase, and microfinance loan
repayments.

Mobile Phone Penetration
Low – For the past eight years, mobile phone subscribers in Tanzania have increased from less than
                                                                      3
300,000 to over 14.09 million, translating to only 25% penetration. However, according to a recent
report from Business Monitor International, mobile phone penetration in Tanzania will surpass the 100%
mark by the year 2013.

Literacy Levels
Medium – Approximately 70% of the Tanzanian population is literate including 77.5% of the males and
                  4
62.2% of females.

Access to Finance
Low – In Tanzania 54% of people didn’t use any form of financial service; formal, semi formal or
informal prior to the launch of M-PESA while only 9% of the population had access to formal financial
        5
services

Demand for Services
High – Payments play an important role in enabling informal economic activity. Early uptake of the
service was in high demand by rural retailers sending payments to urban wholesalers, thereby
contributing to a strong rural-urban flow. However, unlike Kenya where 70% of remittances flow from
urban to rural areas, Tanzania does not demonstrate a clear dominant remittance pattern and flows tend to
be a mix of urban-rural, rural-urban, urban-urban and rural-rural.

Regulatory Environment
Conducive – The Central Bank of Tanzania is currently supportive of the deployment of mobile money
services and does not require the mobile network operator to officially partner with a bank. The various
mobile payment systems in Tanzania are regulated under different structures since some provide formal
banking services while others are positioned only as remittance and bill payment products.

Technology Adoption
Unprepared - prior to the launch of M-PESA many Tanzanian mobile phone users were familiar with the
basic operations of a mobile such as texting and making voice calls. However, only 15% of the adult


3
  International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Report, 2009.
4
  CIA World Factbook
5
  FinScope, 2006. FinScope National Survey on Access to and Demand for Financial Services in
  Tanzania


6/14/10
                                                                                                            Page 2
population owned a mobile phone and only another 14% had access to someone else’s phone.
Furthermore, not many users, including those that owned phones, were familiar with USSD which is the
technology protocol that Vodacom used to launch M-PESA.

Marketing Campaigns
Vodacom Tanzania launched their service with a similar marketing tagline to the one that was used in
Kenya, ‘send money home’. However, their ad campaign was not as simple and as clear as Safaricom’s.
As a result, the initial campaign was completely unsuccessful since it did not capture the target market
and portrayed the product as a premium service for high end users. Vodacom quickly corrected this
situation by re-launching their campaign to be more customer friendly and to depict usage scenarios for
the un-banked, rural population.

Ecosystem
The development of Vodacom’s M-PESA agent network was slow to start and this can be attributed to a
few factors. First, Vodacom initially pursued partnerships with their airtime distribution network of
which they only had 6 strong relationships so their ability to exert influence over the dealers was limited.
Second, Tanzania is a large country with a dispersed population so quickly reaching dealers in rural areas
was difficult and once they were reached they were not easily convinced of the business case since they
serve a much smaller local population. Finally, Vodacom did not invest as many resources in training
and managing the agent network in Tanzania as Safaricom did in Kenya.




6/14/10
                                                                                                               Page 3
                                                                     Key Challenges


Lack of Customer Education & Financial Literacy
Figure 1 shows that the number of mobile subscribers in East Africa is far greater than the number of bank
account holders which illustrates that financial literacy and exposure to the formal financial sector in
Tanzania is generally low.

              Figure 1: Mobile Subscribers vs. Bank Account Holders in East Africa




Source: Frost & Sullivan, 2009

Furthermore, as shown in Figure 2, more than half of the total population in Tanzania has never heard of
                                                      6
a debit card, an ATM machine or a current account. Only 9% of the population has access to formal
financial services and 54% don’t use any form of financial services. When compared to Kenya, we see that
19% of the population there has access to formal financial services and only 38% don’t have access to any
                          7
form of financial service. Kenya also has a stronger economy, a higher GDP (USD 890 per capita in
                                      8
Kenya versus USD 520 in Tanzania) and a more developed banking system (1.38 bank branches per
                                                        9
100,000 inhabitants in Kenya versus 0.57 in Tanzania) making it easier for a service like M-PESA to be
communicated.

Initially, Vodacom did not invest a lot of resources in consumer education and this may be one of the key
reasons that the service was slow to start. Recently, the company has started nationwide communication
campaigns to help users understand the product better. Furthermore, 2 of their 3 competitors have also
                                          10
launched similar money transfer services and their efforts to educate the general public have increased the
overall level of financial understanding in Tanzania.




6
  FinScope, 2006. FinScope National Survey on Access to and Demand for Financial Services in
   Tanzania.
7
  FinAccess, 2006
8
   The Swedish Institute of International Affairs, 2008
9
  Beck, T.,A Demirguc-Kunta, et al. 2007. “Reaching Out: Access to and use of banking services across
   countries.” Journal of Financial Economics
10
   Zantel launched Z-PESA in April 2008 and Zain launched Zap in May 2009. Tigo has yet to offer a
   mobile money transfer service in Tanzania


6/14/10
                                                                                                              Page 4
Key Challenges




                      Figure 2: Percent of the Tanzanian population that has never heard about…




          Source: Finscope, 2006

          Very Competitive Environment
          M-PESA was launched at roughly the same time (April 2008) in Tanzania as Zantel’s competing service,
          ZPesa. Zain followed with the launch of ZAP in February 2009 and the existence of these products has
          made it difficult for Vodacom Tanzania to capitalize on the churn reduction and stickiness that a mobile
          payment product usually offers to help justify the initial high investment required for the telecom
          operator.

          M-PESA in Tanzania also faces competition from informal money transfer channels such as the use of
          airtime as a currency. A significant number of Tanzanian mobile phone users send airtime to friends and
          family, often with the intention that this airtime will be converted back to cash. In this situation, a sender
          buys an airtime voucher and then texts the code in the voucher to the recipient who will sell the code to
          people who want to buy airtime. Although M-PESA may be a cheaper option since airtime vouchers can
          often be discounted anywhere from 10% to 40%, sending airtime is more convenient for the sender and
          receiver due to the extensive airtime distribution network that exists in Tanzania. Airtime transfers are
          not legal, but they have provided strong competition for recent mobile money launches in Tanzania.

          Finally, in Tanzania, people can send money through bus companies, at a commission of 10% but this
          poses a significant risk of theft.

          Large Geographic Spread

          The population of Tanzania is roughly around 40 million people but Tanzania is a large country with a
          dispersed population. This makes it difficult for operators to effectively roll out an extensive nationwide
          network of agents. The coverage area is large, requiring more training and management resources, and
          the revenue per agent is lower since they are serving a smaller base of local customers. Furthermore, with
          a dispersed population, consumer education tactics such as road shows and product demos can be costly
          and less effective.




          6/14/10
                                                                                                                           Page 5
                            Figure 3: Population Density of Tanzania




Source: Best Country Reports, 2009




6/14/10
                                                                       Page 6
                                                                   Additional Lessons
Business Model Assumed Dramatic Growth
After launching M-PESA in Kenya, Vodafone Global Services was restructured and a dedicated
department was formed to manage the roll-out of the platform in other countries. During this shift, the
Vodafone team decided that future implementations of the service would be offered to local subsidiaries on
a license fee model instead of the shared revenue model that was agreed with Safaricom in Kenya. As a
result, Vodacom Tanzania pays a fee to Vodafone Global Services for each registered M-PESA customer.
Given the success in Kenya, Vodacom had anticipated a much higher volume of transactions than they
actually received and this led to a proportionally higher cost than expected. Due to lower transaction
volumes than expected, fewer funds were available for further investment in the project in areas such as
increased consumer education campaigns and further agent network roll-out.

In addition to the lack of available funds, Vodacom Tanzania is purposely controlling the subscriber
growth in an attempt to limit registrations to active users because Vodacom Tanzania does not want to
pay fees to Vodafone Global Services for customers that may not transact over the Vodacom network.
These additional “non-Vodacom” customers have too much potential to be a cost rather than a revenue
stream for Vodacom. Because Safaricom has a shared revenue model with Vodafone, they are not
concerned with hosting inactive M-PESA subscribers on their platform.

Vodafone Global Services recently adjusted the fee amounts to accommodate for the poor subscriber
growth in Tanzania and to help improve Vodacom Tanzania’s business case but the model is still based
on the number of registered customers, meaning that it is likely that they will continue to show sustained
but careful subscriber growth.

Limited Market Share

Although both Safaricom and Vodacom are the leading operators in their respective markets, Vodacom’s
market share in Tanzania (41%) is significantly less than Safaricom’s in Kenya (79%) which translates
into a base of 13 million customers for Safaricom as opposed to only 5.9 million for Vodacom. This
difference may be another reason that the initial registration uptake for M-PESA in Tanzania was less than
that in Kenya.

                          Figure 4: M-PESA in Kenya and Tanzania (USD)

                                                   Safaricom                         Vodacom
            Market Share                              41%                              79%
        Subscribers (millions)                         13                               5.9
         Revenue (millions $)                          904                              367
        M-PESA Launch Date                         March 2007                        April 2008
        M-PESA Technology                             STK                              USSD
    # M-PESA Users (May 2009)                      6.5 million                        280,000
 Value Transactions as of May 2009                     170                              5.5
             (million $)
Source: Company Information, 2009

Ease of Registration Countered by Regulatory Environment

M-PESA is delivered in Tanzania using USSD which does not require any application to be stored on
the SIM card. Rather, the user dials a short number to receive a set of menu options. After each user
selection from the menu, data is sent back to the M-PESA server and a new menu, input field or
confirmation screen is sent back to the user. This process of query and result can be time consuming for
the user but is still relatively simple to use. The biggest benefit of USSD is that it does not require the
SIM to be swapped, making registration much simpler for both the agent and the customer. However, it
can be argued that the benefits of this technology on the registration process were eliminated by the strict
regulatory requirements and the lack of national ID in the country. As a result, even though Vodacom



6/14/10
                                                                                                               Page 7
took a positive step forward from the implementation in Kenya by investing in technology that would
improve the customer experience, they were not able to leverage the benefits of this technology due to the
regulatory environment and this may be one of the reasons that subscriber growth was not as high as they
originally predicted.

Broad Range of Services Required in Competitive Market

While M-PESA was originally launched as a service to ‘send money home’ Vodacom has recently
introduced a number of other value added services such as the ability to pay electricity, water and
television bills. Charitable donation payments and microfinance loan repayments have also been
introduced. This has helped to differentiate the service from competitors and may be one of the reasons
that subscriber adoption has increased since the middle of 2009. Competitive differentiation is especially
important for M-PESA since the other available services (ZAP and ZPesa) are closely linked to banks and
allow users to transfer funds between their bank account and mobile payment account.




6/14/10
                                                                                                             Page 8
                                                              Preliminary Requirements


Regulations
Responsibility for, and regulations related to, mobile money transfer were given to the Central Bank
under the Financial Institutions Statute (FIS) of 1993. However, the regulatory environment for mobile
money transfer in Tanzania is relatively similar to that of Kenya where the Central Bank of Tanzania has
approved the service for operation but has not fully regulated it under normal banking regulation.

In Tanzania, where there is no national ID, registration processes can be cumbersome, and it is not
uncommon for account activations to be delayed until further customer vetting has been done. Voter
registration cards are often used in replacement of national IDs to verify customer identity. Also, anti
money laundering (AML) requirements in Tanzania make registration procedures more complex for
consumers who wish to transact above around USD 1,300.

Vodacom has implemented a strict AML policy and a copy of an AML manual is distributed to each
agent for their compliance. Vodacom reviews the policy annually to update it according to changes in the
regulatory environment.
           st
On July 1 2009, a new KYC legislation was passed by the Tanzanian Communication Regulatory
Authority requiring all mobile operators to officially register customers purchasing a new SIM card. The
buyer must now show a valid ID with photo, which is far from easy in a country where there is no
                                                                      st
national ID system. The legislation also required that by January 1 2010, all existing pre-paid mobile
phone subscribers would have to undergo the same process of registration and providing formal ID for
identification or their accounts would be terminated. This presented an excellent opportunity for the
uptake of mobile money services since the KYC requirements for registering for an M-PESA account are
now similar to those for mobile phone activation.

Market Research
Based on the success of M-PESA in Kenya, little market research was conducted prior to the M-PESA
Tanzania pilot. This ended up being a fatal decision for Vodacom Tanzania since the market conditions
in the two countries proved to be quite different and in depth market research may have prevented
Vodacom from making some of the early mistakes they did.

After the launch in April 2008, the team realized that there was a need to better understand the market and
drivers of the service. A marketing agency was engaged to conduct secret shop visits and to observe
customer behavior. Customer surveys were also conducted. Based on the results of this research,
Vodacom expanded the product offering to include transactions such as electricity and water bill payment
and microfinance loan repayments.

Pilot Implementation
Vodacom conducted a short technical pilot of the M-PESA service in Tanzania but mainly relied on the
results from the Kenya launch in order to make strategic decisions regarding channel distribution tactics
and customer value proposition. The main focus of the pilot was to test the USSD gateway since the
USSD channel was not used in the Kenyan implementation.

Making the assumption that the Tanzanian market would mimic the results in Kenya was a critical error
for the project. In reality, although Tanzania is geographically close to Kenya and many of the market
factors are similar (such as language and certain cultural practices) there are also significant differences
between the two countries (such as population dispersion, crime rates, financial literacy and mobile
penetration). A full market pilot would have likely been able to identify these key differences and may
have persuaded the team the tweak their launch strategy accordingly.

A lengthy pilot was also not conducted in Tanzania since Vodacom was under a lot of pressure to be first
to market with their service. At that time, Zantel was actively developing their mobile money transfer



6/14/10
                                                                                                               Page 9
service, ZPesa, and Vodacom was well aware that the being first to market would create a significant
competitive advantage. Eventually M-PESA and ZPesa were launched around the same time frame (April
2008).

Marketing Strategy
Vodacom’s marketing strategy did not get off to a good start. The initial campaign targeted the wrong
audience and did not clearly identify the use of the product. One early advert showed images of people
buying textbooks in city bookstores which incorrectly positioned the service as something to be used by
the upper class. Vodacom did adopt the familiar M-PESA Kenya tagline, ‘send money home’ but their
ads did not clearly identify how the system could be used to do this and what the benefits would be to
users.

To correct this misconception, Vodacom has recently adjusted its marketing to make it more relevant to
the average customer. It is now focusing its marketing campaign on being more educational and
highlighting cases where “M-PESA is easy, affordable and for everyone.” Latest market surveys show
that customers now seem to be aware of the brand but the majority is still not aware of what the service
can offer and how they can register for it. Since the second half of 2009, the service has been marketed by
presenting different usage scenarios which over time should help to rectify this finding. The operator has
also recently shifted its campaign from above the line initiatives to below the line tactics since they can
be more effective as educational campaigns.

When the service was first launched in Tanzania, fees were tiered for all transaction types including
person-to-person transfers to registered users and cash withdrawals by registered users. This proved to be
extremely confusing and difficult to remember for the majority of customers. M-PESA in Tanzania now
uses a pricing scheme that is similar to M-PESA Kenya where a flat fee is charged for person-to-person
transfers to registered customers and tiered fees are charged for money transfers to unregistered customers.
Cash deposits are free along with cash withdrawals by unregistered users. Registered users pay a
withdrawal fee that ranges according to the amount they wish to withdraw. Customers are charged a small
fee for balance enquiries and when they wish to change their PIN. A detailed fee structure can be found in
Figure 5.




6/14/10
                                                                                                               Page 10
                         Figure 5: M-PESA Tanzania Transaction Fees (USD)

                  Value Transaction                                Value ($)           Charge
                                                              From          To           ($)

                     Cash Deposit                              3.70       370.00        Free
         Send Money To Registered Customer                     0.74       370.00        0.15
        Send Money To Unregistered Customer                    0.74         7.40        0.74
                                                               7.41        14.80        1.11
                                                              14.81        37.00        1.85
                                                              37.01        74.00        2.96
                                                              74.01       148.00        4.44
                                                              148.01      222.06        5.92
                                                              222.07      370.00        8.14
       Withdraw Money - Registered Customer                    3.70         7.40        0.26
                                                               7.41        14.80        0.37
                                                              14.81        37.00        0.74
                                                              37.01        74.00        1.11
                                                              74.01       148.00        1.85
                                                              148.01      222.06        2.96
                                                              222.07      370.00        5.18
      Withdraw Money - Unregistered Customer                   0.74       370.00        Free
                                  Additional Transactions
                   Balance Enquiry                                          0.04
                      Change PIN                                            0.04

                                  SOURCE: Company Information, 2010

As shown in Figure 6 a significant difference in pricing between Safaricom's and Vodacom's M-PESA
does not exist. At lower transaction amounts, it is much more expensive to send money in Kenya but
Safaricom’s service quickly becomes cheaper at higher transaction levels. For the most popular amount to
send, which is just over 20 USD in both countries, Safaricom charges 3.6% and Vodacom 4.5% of the
amount sent. The prices have been calculated to include the deposit fee (free), the transfer fee and the fee to
                     11
withdraw the money.




11
     Camner, Gunner and Sjöblom, Emil, 2009. “Can the Success of M-PESA be Repeated?”


6/14/10
                                                                                                                  Page 11
              Figure 6: Safaricom vs. Vodacom Fees (% of Amount Sent in USD)




Source: Camner & Sjöblom, 2009




6/14/10
                                                                               Page 12
                                                                            Agents


Network Development
M-PESA agents in Tanzania consist of Vodacom airtime dealers, operating one or more outlets around
Tanzania and other retailers with a substantial distribution network, such as banks, petrol stations and
super markets.

Initially, Vodacom used a similar strategy as Safaricom to roll out the agent network in Tanzania by
approaching existing airtime distribution channel partners to become M-PESA Agents. However, while
Safaricom had 1,000 retail partners, Vodacom only had relationships with 6 such dealers. This severely
limited their ability to scale quickly and exert enough influence over the dealers. After a few months,
Vodacom started focusing on establishing direct relationships with end retailers and these independent
                                                                    12
businesses now make up 80% of Vodacom’s M-PESA agent network.
                                                                                                  13
Recently, Vodacom also began to notice the success of Safaricom’s aggregator model in Kenya. In this
model, a single agency agreement is signed with a large master agent that in turn registers and manages
several M-PESA retail agent outlets. This tactic enables the operator to bring on a number of retail agents
by only signing agreements with a few master agents. Vodacom has started to implement the aggregator
model and is building a tiered network of agents that is separate from their airtime distribution partners.
This should help to alleviate the complex network recruitment and management processes that they
currently experience.

Vodacom uses M-PESA street promoters to recruit customers to the service. The promoters are hired by
retail agents and are required to sign up users and direct them to the agent location to make their first
transaction. In turn, the promoter receives a small portion of the commission that is paid to the agent by
Vodacom for the user registration. However, it has been found that only about 10% of these customers
                                                           14
continue to actively use the service after subscribing. Since Vodacom pays Vodafone a license fee for
each registered subscriber, they are now considering stopping the promoter model to avoid paying high
license fees for users that are not generating any profits.

In July 2009, Vodacom Tanzania signed the Bank of Africa as the first bank in the country to service M-
PESA customers. Pre-paid and post-paid Vodacom customers can register for M-PESA and transact at
                           15
any Bank of Africa branch. The company will also be signing deals with other banks in order to expand
its network of available agents.

One issue that continues to hinder the development of the agent network is that in Tanzania, business-
licensing requirements for agents not only impose direct costs of licensing, but also may create a tax
burden on businesses that might have previously operated informally.

Selection Criteria
To become a M-PESA agent in Tanzania, the agent must be a registered company with at least 5 outlets
ready to offer M-PESA services. At least 2 of these outlets should be located in rural areas. Agents are
required to comply with Vodacom’s anti money laundering policy, which stipulates they know the
customer regulations and procedures to be followed in the case of suspected fraud or money laundering.
Agents should also be able to show that they will be able to offer quality service by meeting staff resource
requirements and by implementing procedures to keep floats balanced. An investment in cash float of Tsh
2,000,000 (approx. USD 1,480) is required for each active M-PESA outlet.


12
   Camner, Gunnar and Leishman, Paul and Pulver, Caroline and Sjöblom, Emil, 2009. “What Makes a
Successful Mobile Money Implementation”. GSMA
13
   For more details on the aggregator model, please refer to M-Money Channel Distribution Case: Kenya
14
   Camner, Gunner and Sjöblom Emil, 2009. Valuable Bits, http://valuablebits.com.
15
   Cellular News, 2009. “Vodacom Tanzania Signs Local Bank for M-Pesa Mobile Banking Service”


6/14/10
                                                                                                               Page 13
There also exists a category of special agents who may not have the minimum number of outlets but
would be beneficial to have as agents (such as banks, hotels and major supermarkets). These companies
only need to operate one outlet to qualify for M-PESA services. However, the agent must be willing to at
least invest Tsh 5,000,000 (approx. USD 3,700) as the cash float for each outlet they apply for.

Roles & Responsibilities
Agents are responsible for facilitating cash withdrawals and deposits, registering users, following ‘know
your customer’ (KYC) rules, and educating users. The agents are provided with a handset and M-PESA
SIM that enables them to fulfill their role. Since there is no national ID system in place in Tanzania,
agents often use voter registration cards to validate a customer’s identity. Other valid forms of ID include
Pension Cards, Passports, and Company ID. The agents are required to take a copy of the ID and to
submit it Vodacom to keep on file for future customer validation.

If a copy of the ID document provided cannot be retained by the agent then the customer is registered as a
tier 1 customer and this means that the customer will be limited to an annual account through-put value
of Tsh1.7 million (approx. USD 1,258). If a copy of the identify document can be retained and is sent to
Vodacom for verification then the customer will be registered as a tier 2 customer and will be limited to
an annual account through-put of Tsh 50 million per annum (approx. USD 37,000).

Agents are also required to record transactions in a paper log book. For each transaction, the agent enters:
the MPESA balance, the date, agent ID, transaction ID, transaction type (customer deposit or withdrawal,
agent cash rebalancing), value, customer phone number, customer name, and the customer’s national ID
number. Most of this information is copied from the confirmation SMS that the agent receives.
Customers are then asked to sign the log for each transaction, which helps to discourage fraud.

Value Proposition
Due to the highly competitive telecom environment in Tanzania and the fact that 2 other mobile payment
services are available in the country, attracting and incentivizing agents is a difficult task. It seems that
the value proposition for M-PESA agents in Tanzania is not as clear cut as in Kenya but still includes
some attractive elements such as:

Revenue: Agents earn commissions on every deposit, withdrawal and new customer registration that they
process. The commission for a deposit is 0.4% of the transaction value and 0.6% for a withdrawal. A flat
fee of between USD 0.37 and USD 1.48 is paid for new customer registrations. Agents in Tanzania also
earn 5% of the face value of airtime sales through M-PESA.

Increased Footfall: One of the key benefits communicated to agents is that M-PESA transactions will
drive traffic into their place of business and this serves as an opportunity for them to increase their bottom
line as customers have increased occasion to shop at their retail outlets.

Meeting Customer Demand: By providing a service that is in high demand by the customer, agents
improve overall customer perception and loyalty for their core business. As an example, one textile shop
owner in Stone Town, Zanzibar started offering mobile money services after he noticed it was in high
demand with his customers. He then encouraged a friend in neighboring Pemba to also open an outlet
and created his own remittance corridor since many users travel between these locations. The service has
                                                                                         16
been extremely successful and has enabled him to open 3 other retail outlets in Tanzania.

Commission Structures
As shown in Figure 7, commissions paid to M-PESA agents for deposits and withdrawals in Tanzania is
based on a percentage of the transaction value whereas in Kenya, the commission is based on the
transaction value tier. Both services pay a commission for new subscriber registrations and on average,
this is roughly the same amount of USD 1 per new customer. Vodacom also offers their agents 5%

16
     Camner, Gunner and Sjöblom Emil, 2009. Valuable Bits, http://valuablebits.com.


6/14/10
                                                                                                                 Page 14
commission on airtime sold through M-PESA. The commission paid to agents by Zain for their ZAP
service is competitive with M-PESA.

               Figure 7: Agent Commission Structures in Kenya and Tanzania (USD)

      Product                  Deposit         Withdrawal         Registration              Extras
   M-PESA Kenya              $0.13-$0.19       $0.19-$0.45           $1.02
  M-PESA Tanzania               0.4%              0.6%            $0.37-$1.48       5% of airtime recharge
                                                                                            value
       Zain ZAP               $0.15                $0.37         $0.37 - $1.11
Source: Company Information, 2010

Liquidity Management
Vodacom Tanzania uses similar liquidity management tactics for M-PESA as Safaricom in Kenya. The
agent aggregator model enables master agents to transfer float to their sub agents as required and this
alleviates the burden on the network operator of monitoring thousands of individual shops.

However, one of the factors that contribute to the challenge of liquidity management in Tanzania is the
fact that the formal banking system is relatively undeveloped. The number of bank branches per 100,000
inhabitants is only 0.57 and this low level of density makes it difficult for agents to easily manage their
cash floats. Agents must travel long distances to find a bank branch where they can renew their floats
which means that they have less time in their shops and may not be able to top-up their floats as often as
they need to. As a result, agents in Tanzania face increased float management problems and customers
have often complained about this. Vodacom is still struggling with managing this problem and it is yet
to be seen if further implementation of the aggregator model will help to improve this situation.




6/14/10
                                                                                                              Page 15
                                                                           Support


Agent Training
The agent training program in Tanzania is very similar to the program that was designed for M-PESA in
       17
Kenya. Agents are trained on all aspects of the operation of the system including Vodacom’s anti
money laundering (AML) policies. The training is delivered by an external agency and is tailored to the
role of the person being trained, meaning that shop assistants receive training on the operation of the
handsets while head office staff receive training on the web screens and procedures for processing float
deposits and withdrawals. Training is an ongoing process that is updated regularly to reflect
developments to the platform and changes to AML laws and regulations, as well as money laundering
and terrorist financing trends and developments.

The AML training outlines how to comply with M-PESA Anti-Money Laundering Procedures and to
makes agents aware of the criminal and civil liability that they may face in the case of failure to report
suspicious activity. The agents are also required to ensure that any staff they hire or assign to process M-
PESA transactions have received the appropriate training. An AML test is administered by the agency to
ensure that agents have clearly understood the training. The training records are then kept on file by
Vodacom for a period of seven years.

Network Management
Following the same network management model as M-PESA in Kenya, Vodacom uses a small external
marketing agency named Afrikings PTY Ltd (headquartered in South Africa) to monitor agent activity. A
team of about 10 local Afrikings representatives are responsible for managing the M-PESA network. The
agency is responsible for training agents and providing them with copies point-of-sale material such as
brochures, banners, posters and agent number stickers. The agency is also responsible for collecting
training records and customer registration forms and delivering these to Vodacom Head Office for storage.

Secret shop visits has been an effective tool in monitoring and scoring agent compliance. In this
situation, the external agency sends a member of staff to pose as a customer and to score the agent on
criteria such as AML compliance, quality of service, adherence to branding requirements, availability of
float and knowledge of the service. This information is then used to help correct any issues identified at
the agent location.

Risk
Since M-PESA in Tanzania is based on the same platform as M-PESA in Kenya, similar risk mitigation
tools are available. This includes the detailed system audit trail, ability to flag suspicious activity, and
maker-checker functionality that requires more than one member of back-office staff to process large
transactions and bank reconciliations.

One key difference between the systems is the use of USSD in Tanzania versus the use of STK in Kenya.
STK is generally considered more secure since the application on the SIM card can generate encrypted
messages. However, to date the USSD platform has been relatively secure in Tanzania and the number
fraud attempts is still lower than in Kenya. This may also be due to the fact that there are significantly
less users in Tanzania.

While Safaricom spends a considerable amount of its budget on mitigating risk, Vodacom currently
seems to be focusing its resources (staff and budget) on scaling up usage and rolling out the agent
network. It is likely that when they see increased subscriber growth and value movement, they will begin
to allocate more resources towards risk mitigation.


17
  For more details and a sample schedule of the training program, please refer to M-Money Channel
Distribution Case: Kenya


6/14/10
                                                                                                               Page 16
Staff Requirements
Vodacom has formed a dedicated local team to support the development and management of M-PESA
including over 15 members of staff from Product Development, Customer Care, Technical, Finance, Sales
and Marketing. In addition, the operator has recruited an external agency to manage and train their agent
network.

Customer Training & Support
With three different mobile money services available in Tanzania, customers are receiving numerous and
varied messages regarding the value and use of these products. M-PESA has been communicated only as
a way of sending money while ZPesa has been promoted as mobile banking service and a bank in your
pocket. It’s no wonder that customers are confused about the capabilities of the different services. To date,
customer education campaigns offered by Vodacom have been limited but this is slowly starting to
change. Vodacom is now investing more resources in radio ads and print publications to clearly
communicate the benefits and use of their service. Agents are also being trained to offer increased
customer support and education.

An additional challenge with regards to customer education for Vodacom is the fact that they opted for a
USSD service as opposed to the SIM Application Toolkit (STK) that was used by Safaricom in Kenya.
While they both have their advantages and disadvantages, STK is known to be easier to maneuver, an
especially important characteristic when targeting an often illiterate customer base.

Like Safaricom, Vodacom provides a 24/7 dedicated customer care call center for users of M-PESA. Calls
to the customer care center are free and response times are quite good when compared to the support
provided for other Vodacom services. The queries that the call center receives for M-PESA are still of a
very basic nature, further indicating the high need for customer education.




6/14/10
                                                                                                                Page 17
