Republic of Fiji

                                                                                                      SABER Country Report
EDUCATION MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS                                                                               2017




  Key Policy Areas                                                                                                Status
    1. Enabling Environment
       The Fiji Education Management System (FEMIS) is supported by a policy document that specifies
       data collection processes, privacy assurances and allocation of responsibilities. FEMIS is supported
       by high political buy-in and its data ownership remains at the central level with the Ministry of
       Education, Heritage and Arts (MoEHA). The responsibilities of the data production process are
       clearly allocated at the school and district level. However, the policy document is not fully
       comprehensive. For instance, while there are different compliance requirements for different types
       of data reported, there are limited enforceable mechanisms to ensure timeliness of reporting
       processes. Data access is highly hierarchical with read only and data editing specifications. The
       MoEHA restricts data access and thus, potentially limits FEMIS use by some education
       stakeholders.

    2. System Soundness
       FEMIS has been tailored to Fiji’s unique country context taking Internet connectivity and existing IT
       resources into account. It has an established EMIS located at the schools, and managed by a
       FEMIS administrator or teacher on a daily basis. The system’s two primary modules, FESA and
       LANA, contain individual level information on school demographics, student progression,
       infrastructure, examination results and some human resource data including teacher qualifications.
       The Divisional Education Offices, District Education Offices and schools share the data production
       task. Schools enter information directly into FEMIS at the school level, which is then accessed by
       district offices and Ministry at the local and national level, respectively. However, there are only a
       limited set of indicators that are generated using the FEMIS. Most of these indicators, such as the
       net and gross enrollment rate are calculated manually by the staff, without any automated
       processes established.

    3. Quality Data
       FEMIS data is aimed to be comprehensive, accurate and timely. Data are collected from basic
       education levels: primary and secondary education. Currently, efforts are underway to link the early
       childhood education and technical education data into FEMIS, thereby tracking student progressing
       from ECE to technical colleges. Data validation mechanisms within the FEMIS ensure that the
       quality of data submitted is of good quality. However, timeliness of data submission is an issue
       given different compliance standards for different data types, making enforcement of deadlines
       difficult.

    4. Utilization for Decision Making
       Data utilization generally remains at the central level to improve the education system business
       processes such as allocation of school grants and provision of vouchers to students. The
       government has data utilization strategies in place, but data access is restricted to people outside
       the Ministry, and thus utilization is limited. Some isolated efforts are made at the school level to use
       the data in FEMIS to monitor student performance and inform classroom instruction. There needs to
       be stronger push from the government to promote a data-driven culture in the country.
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Introduction
In 2011, the World Bank Group commenced a multiyear program designed to support countries in
systematically examining and strengthening the performance of their education systems. Part of the
World Bank’s new Education Sector Strategy, this evidence-based initiative, called SABER (Systems
Approach for Better Education Results), uses diagnostic tools for examining education systems and their
component policy domains against global standards and best practices and in comparison, with the
policies and practices of countries around the world. By leveraging this global knowledge, the SABER tools
fill a gap in the availability of data and evidence on what matters most to improve the quality of education
and achievement of better results.

This report discusses the results of applying the SABER–Education Management Information Systems
(EMIS) tool in Fiji. The objectives of this report are to examine the system according to key policy areas,
identify successes and challenges in the system, and provide recommendations to support the continued
advancement of EMIS in Fiji.

Approach of SABER-EMIS
Information is a key ingredient in an effective education system. SABER–EMIS aims to help countries
improve data collection, data and system management, and data use in decision making. SABER-EMIS
assesses the effectiveness of a country’s EMIS, with the aim of informing policy dialogue and helping
countries better manage education inputs and processes to achieve overall efficiency and strong learning
outcomes.

A successful EMIS is credible, operational in planning and policy dialogue as well as teaching, and
learning. It produces and monitors education statistics within an education system and has a multifaceted
structure, comprising the technological and institutional arrangements for collecting, processing, and
disseminating data (Abdul-Hamid 2014). It is crucial for tracking changes, ensuring data quality and timely
reporting of information, and facilitating the utilization of information in decision-making.
                                                  Figure 1: SABER-EMIS Policy Goals and Levers
The SABER-EMIS assessment methodology is            Policy Goals
                                                                    Policy Levers: legal framework, organizational structure
built on four key policy areas that are               Enabling      and institutionalized processes, human resources,
essential to EMIS and must be assessed to           Environment     infrastructural capacity, budget, data-driven culture
understand and ultimately strengthen the                            Policy Levers: data architecture, data coverage, data
                                                     System
system. Each policy goal is defined by a set of     Soundness       analytics, dynamic system, serviceability
policy levers (actions that help governments                        Policy Levers: methodological soundness, accuracy and
reach the policy goal) and indicators               Quality Data    reliability, integrity, periodicity and timeliness
(measuring the extent to which the policy
                                                   Utilization for Policy Levers: openness to EMIS users, operational use,
levers are achieved) (figure 1).                  Decision Making accessibility, effectiveness in disseminating findings

                                                    Source: Abdul-Hamid 2014
A strong enabling environment lays the
foundation for an effective EMIS. Enabling
environment refers to the laws, policies, structure, resources, and culture surrounding an EMIS that make
data collection, management, and access possible. In essence, this policy area is the context in which an
EMIS exists. This defined scope of an enabling environment builds on lessons learned from studies of
education management systems.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                  2
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


System soundness ensures key processes, Figure 2: SABER Scoring and EMIS Development
structures, and integration capabilities in an                                                                4
effective EMIS. Education data are sourced                                                            Advanced
from different institutions, but all data feed                                           3           Comprehensive
into and make up EMIS. Databases within an                                      Established enabling
                                                                       2                             environment,
EMIS are not viewed as separate databases,                                      Enabling
                                                                 Emerging environment,               processes,
but as part of the whole EMIS. Key aspects of          1                        processes,           structure, data
                                                                Basic enabling
system soundness include what data are             Latent       environment,    structure,  data     management,
                                                                                management,          utilization, and
covered in EMIS and how they come together     Limited enabling processes,
                                                                                utilization in place integration in
                                               environment,     structure, data                      place, with
in the overarching system.                     processes,       management,     with some
                                                                                                     intelligent
                                                                             utilization       integration
                                                         structure, data                                         analytics
                                                         management,
Quality data establishes the mechanisms                  utilization
required to collect, save, produce, and utilize
                                                  Source: Abdul-Hamid 2014
information in an accurate, secure, and
timely manner. Data quality is a
multidimensional concept that encompasses more than just the underlying accuracy of the statistics
produced. It means that not only are the data accurate, but that the data address specific needs in a timely
fashion. Quality data lays the groundwork for utilization.

An effective EMIS is utilized in decision making by all users (parents, students, teachers, principals and
policy makers) across the education system. An EMIS needs to be used so that measures can be taken to
improve educational quality. Accurate information on education sector performance enables the design
of more informed policies and programs. It is imperative to understand where decision making occurs, if
the capacity to analyze and interpret education data exists, and if specific data are available to inform
decisions.
                                                     Figure 3: Policy Intent, Implementation and Outcomes Cycle,
                                                     with Examples
Using the EMIS data collection instrument,
policy levers are scored on a four-level scale             Policies                                    Utilization
(latent,    emerging,     established,    and              Vision & buy-in                             Processes
advanced) to assess the extent to which both               Standards                                   Institutionalization
                                                           Strategy                                    Budget
policy intent and implementation are                        documents                                   Human Resources
achieved (figure 2).                                                                                    Communication

Assessing Policy Intent and                                                Intent              Implementation
Implementation
The EMIS assessment examines policy intent
and the degree to which intended policies are
effectively implemented on the ground
(figure 3). Intent refers to the way in which
EMIS and its overarching purpose are                                                   Outcomes
articulated by decision makers and
                                                                              Teaching & Learning
documented in policies and legislation, as
                                                                              Management
well as standards and strategy documents.                                     Planning & Monitoring
Assessing intent alone only reveals only part                                 Transparency
of the picture.                                                               Governance




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                   3
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


As such, this EMIS assessment also evaluates policy execution. Implementation refers to the degree to
which intentions take place during the day-to-day activities of stakeholders (e.g., policy makers, county
administrators, principals, teachers, students, etc.). Implementation can be observed through utilization
of EMIS by stakeholders, budget allocation, distribution of human resources, availability of professional
development activities, communication and dissemination of information, as well as the extent of
institutionalization across the system. Once policy intent and implementation are analyzed, the EMIS
assessment explores the results of these two key components, with a focus on system effectiveness and
efficiency, in addition to teaching and learning, and management and planning. Strong education systems
will ultimately use these outcomes to inform the effectiveness of policies and education strategies and
make adjustments as necessary, creating the cyclical process illustrated in figure 3.

In Fiji, EMIS intent and implementation were assessed through desk research, analysis of system
applications and utilization, as well as interviews with a variety of stakeholders (table 1).

Methodology                                       Table 1: Measuring EMIS Intent and Implementation in
The EMIS assessment methodology consists of       Fiji
a review of written policies and technical                Policy Intent                Implementation
documents as well as interviews with key          • Multiple meetings with        • Analysis of data quality
stakeholders across the education system to         FEMIS team, and AQEP            and comprehensiveness
ensure proper implementation.                       team implementing             • Examination of
                                                    FEMIS                           professional development
Research and investigation for the Fiji EMIS      • Extensive review of             activities
                                                    relevant policies, national   • Review and analysis of
assessment took place between February-
                                                    strategies, standards, and      the utilization practices at
April 2017. The authors conducted a                 planning documents              all levels of the education
comprehensive review of policies, as well as        (provided by the EMIS           system
technical documents and other background            unit and AQEP)
materials. To further examine policy intent and   • Meetings with the
implementation, a series of interviews and          Ministry of Education,
meetings took place with the Ministry of            district governments, and
Education and Australian Government funded          schools
                                                  Source: Authors
Access to Quality Education Program (AQEP)
team.

Country Overview
Republic of Fiji is an upper middle income country located in the South Pacific and consists of more than
300 islands. The estimated population of Fiji in 2015 was 871,986 while the estimated number of children
from the age of 5 to 18 years old was 223,192 for the same year. Of this number, 17,245 children were 5
years old (of preschool age), 129,901 children were of primary school age (between 6 - 13 years of age)
and 76,046 were in the secondary school age group (between 14-18 years of age) (Ministry of Education,
2015). There are several ethnic groups, indigenous Fijians and Indo-Fijians being the prominent ones. The
geographical distribution contributes to the scattered distribution of schools and students, which poses
some challenges to the education system.

The country is divided into nine education districts and four divisions. Approximately 90 percent of
schools have access to the internet. Although only 90 percent of schools have Internet connections, the




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                      4
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


estimated remaining 10 percent of schools without Internet are typically small primary schools located in
rural or remote areas.

The school system is governed by the Education Act and the policies of the Ministry of Education,
Heritage, and Arts. The system is characterized by a public-private partnership, where approximately 98
percent of the schools are faith-based or community owned, but funded by the government. The rest 2
percent are government schools. The government initiated a Tuition Free Grant in 2014 to ensure that all
parents do not have to bear the burden of paying tuition fee for their children attending primary and
secondary schools (Ministry of Education 2015).

The overall budget for the Fijian Ministry of Education 2015 was $401,649,600 ($USD 193 million)
equating to 11.8 percent of the total government budget (MoEHA 2016). The ministry supports more
than 210,000 students including Early Childhood Education (ECE) and employs 5,815 Primary, 4,690
Secondary and 100 Special Education staff (FEMIS 2016).

The country’s GDP is approximately USD$4.5 billion            Table 2: Education Indicators at a Glance
and is one of the most developed countries in the             Number of Schools               2016
Pacific region. It is richly endowed with forests, minerals   ECE                             942
and fish. Agriculture is the main source of GDP and           Primary                         734
employs more than 70 percent of the workforce.                Secondary                       181
Remittances, particularly for military staff are increasing   Number of Students
steadily, eclipsing traditional sectors such as sugar and     ECE                             15,577
garment manufacturing Sugarcane contributed                   Primary                         145,867
significantly to the industrial growth, and sugar exports     Secondary                       66,827
and tourism add to the foreign exchange reserves.             Net Enrollment Rate
However, the presence of cyclones and coups have had          Primary                         100%
an adverse impact on investments and have posed a             Secondary                       83.6%
significant economic challenge.                               Student-Teacher Ratio
                                                              ECE                             14
                                                              Primary                         25
The education system is structured in a fashion that
                                                              Secondary                       13
the primary education runs for six years, and lower
                                                              Public Expenditure on
secondary and upper secondary runs for four and three
                                                              Education
years, respectively (see table 1 for basic education          % total government              13.7%
statistics). While education is not compulsory, it is free    expenditure
for the first eight years. These schools are mostly run by    % of GDP                        3.8%
either by government, religious communities, or the           Source: MoEHA, 2017
districts.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             5
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Development of the Fiji Education Management Information System (FEMIS)
This section describes the different stages of the system development as well as quality assurance within
FEMIS.

Early assessment of the Fijian education data system determined a need to integrate the ministry’s
major databases into a unified, web-based platform. At that time, the ministry had three main databases,
holding partially overlapping data. The databases did not communicate with each other. Development of
the FEMIS started in 2012 and was tailored to its surrounding environment taking into account the
national availability of Internet service, culture, per capita income, and existing ministry IT resources.

Development Stage I: Before FEMIS
The goal of the system development was to          Box 1: Three main databases prior to FEMIS
produce an EMIS with one single data source         FESA - Fijian Education Staffing Appointments: Used to
over four years. This demonstrated a                manage all aspects of teacher placements. FESA is web-
substantial change from the initial system,         based but only accessible on the government network.
where three databases made up the data
storage- SIMS (School Information System),          SIMS - School Information Management System: Used
                                                    to collect aggregated paper school survey data on
FESA (Education Staffing Information System)
                                                    teachers, students, finances and assets. SIMS was a
and LANA (Literacy and Numeracy Assessment
                                                    Windows based system installed on PCs at district offices
System) (box 1). Before FEMIS, all access to all    and the Statistics Unit.
databases was via computers on the ministry
network. Access to all databases via the            LANA - Literacy and Numeracy Assessments: Used to
Internet was blocked.                               issue, mark and report on years 4, 6 and 8 national
                                                    literacy and numeracy assessments. FILNA is web based
                                                    and accessible only on the government network and
Development Stage II: After FEMIS                   only within the Examination and Assessment Unit (EAU).
At time of writing, FEMIS consists of two
physical databases, LANA and FESA, the assessment and staffing databases respectively. The information
captured by SIMS database was merged and integrated into FESA. Each database has a corresponding web
application. The FESA application maintains staffing data in the FESA database. The LANA application
maintains assessment data in the LANA database, but schools administer the class lists in the LANA
database using FEMIS. The hardware design consists of a web server to serve web pages and reports over
the open Internet, connected to a single (large) database server housing the FESA and LANA databases
(figure 4).

Senior staff approved the prototype for general use in August 2012. Crucially, security was established to
allow as much visibility of data as practical while restricting edits and updates. For example, schools can
see their staffing records but cannot alter their pay. However, schools can comment that their staffing
data are incorrect, allowing districts to generate simple reports and follow up as required. The school-
centric approach brought rapid and substantial buy-in from schools. The first year of FEMIS focused on
rolling the system out to schools. An attendance module was quickly introduced along with rudimentary
modules for tracking school fees, acquittals against the grant, recording of parent information, student
health, an online library, and other features designed to engage schools in maintaining the core, ministry
required, student data on gender, date of birth, and class.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                   6
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


The success and affordability of FEMIS is why it now serves as potential model for other countries in the
region such as Vanuatu. It is an excellent example of low-cost system development, implementation, and
utilization. Much of the web technology was successfully attached to the existing EMIS, saving countless
hours of software development time. In Vanuatu, ministry buy-in to similar concepts is strong, and the
system is already improving staff and student data quality substantially. The parallel paper system in
FEMIS is crucial as a model for countries such as Vanuatu, where Internet connectivity is considerably
behind that of Fiji and paper remains the main data collection instrument.

                 Figure 4: Development Stage II: With FEMIS - Using the Internet




                                     LANA
                                    database
              Assessment
              office using LANA




Despite the success of FEMIS to date, substantial work remains for the future FEMIS development. This
includes:
    • Further work with senior MoEHA staff in the use of FEMIS as a decision support tool
    • Analysis of FEMIS data to monitoring teaching and learning
    • Students and the wider community accessing FEMIS
    • Integration of ECE, Technical Education and Higher Education to track longitudinal outcomes
    • Encouraging utilization of the eLearning, Online Library, and Educators Forum areas
    • Integration of the EMIS with other ministries, primarily the Ministry of Health
    • Integration with the Births Deaths Marriages database




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                              7
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Fiji EMIS Results
This section presents the main results of EMIS diagnostics described in the previous sections. Results and
scores for each policy goal are presented, along with supporting evidence.

Policy Area 1: Enabling Environment
Established 
Fiji’s enabling environment was assessed in the following areas: (1) Legal Framework, (2) Organizational
Structure and Institutionalized Processes, (3) Human Resources, (4) Infrastructural Capacity, (5) Budget,
and (6) Data-driven Culture.

The Ministry of Education, Heritage and Arts
(MoEHA) introduced a FEMIS policy in 2014 to Box 2: List of Supporting Policies for EMIS
support the functioning of FEMIS operations. The The supporting and relevant policy documents are:
purpose of the policy is to provide a framework • The Constitution of the Republic of Fiji – 2013
that will enhance and facilitate effective, efficient • ICT Development Policy
and timely data collection from schools and • Information Technology Centre Govnet Policy
reporting to the MoEHA and all stakeholders • National Strategic Development Plan (2015-20)
throughout Fiji. This policy is also designed to • Education Sector Strategic Development Plan
ensure that the collection and entry of data is             (2015-18)
undertaken with care and concern to continually         •   Education Act (1978)
raise the quality of data held in the Fiji Education    •   Examination Act
                                                        • Public Service Act 1999
Management Information System (MoEHA 2016,
p.2). The policy document builds on a number of Source:MoEHA 2016.
relevant policies and legislations (box 2). It is the
first step towards institutionalizing FEMIS in the country.

The policy document clearly articulates the Box 3: Reporting Requirements by the MoEHA
processes and mandates for successful
implementation of the system. The 10-page The MoEHA is required to share education data with
                                               the following entities:
document includes aspects such as FEMIS
                                               • Fiji Bureau of Statistics report
processes, validation mechanisms, timelines,
                                               • Ministry of Education Annual Report
allocation     of    responsibilities, privacy
                                               • MoE Strategic Development Plan (2015-18)
assurances, some indicator coverage, • Ministry of Finance Quarterly Report
government utilization and disciplinary action • Ministry of Strategic Planning, National
in case of wrong doings. It also sets forth         Development and Statistics Report
reporting requirements for the MoEHA. The • Peoples Charter for Change Peace and Progress –
MoEHA has to follow clearly outlined                2008
performance reporting requirements. By • Roadmap for Democracy and Sustainable Socio-
institutionalizing reporting requirements, the      economic Development (2009-14)
MoEHA ensures that the education data is • Implementation Coordinating Office (ICO) Report
integrated with other ministerial and • UNESCO Statistical Data on Educational
international donor reports (box 3). However,       Attainment
the document does not specify how often or     •    UNESCO’s  SDG and EFA achievements
what type of education data should be shared.  •    UNESCO  Institute  of Statistics
The next step would be to explicitly and Source: MoEHA 2016.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                           8
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


publicly state what data can be expected to be shared and whose responsibility within the MoEHA the
sharing process will be.

The ownership and responsibility of data collection and management rests with MoEHA. Clear data
ownership and responsibility are essential to ensure reliability and accuracy of the data. This is why, where
practical, FEMIS has a single entity responsible for each data area with numerous entities using that data.
At the same time, however, the entity responsible for maintaining an area of data must have significant
interest in the accuracy of that data. This is based on the premise that an entity maintaining data that
they do not use consistently results in poor quality data.

The successful development of EMIS in Fiji was due to the political support from the government as well
as the buy-in and involvement of staff at each level of the education system. The Ministry of Education
was keen in developing EMIS as a tool to better manage education system business processes
performance. To this end, creating awareness among all the different level of stakeholders was key. As a
result, during the early days of inception, a concept note was developed and shared across staff at
different levels to get their support. In addition, substantial effort was undertaken to train staff on the
concept and benefits of developing EMIS, and how the system could be a useful tool to help improve and
expedite their current work. At the ministry level, most senior staff demonstrate significant awareness of
FEMIS and yet detailed knowledge and an understanding of the system as well as its potential often are
not fully leveraged, until the potential of the data is fully understood and exploited by different
stakeholders. As EMIS develops, the focus should move from the use of data for monitoring business
processes to assessing the performance of the education system. Government should play a leading role
in making the data available to other education stakeholders so they can analyze and use the data to
improve the quality of education.

The ministry has a dedicated staff overlooking the functioning of EMIS. MoEHA supports an IT Unit
manager, an officer dedicated to training and support, a data cleaner that phones schools to ensure
accurate data, and a senior programmer. The Access to Quality Education Program (AQEP) 1 supports an
additional programmer and a data quality analyst. The data quality analyst is responsible for data quality
strategies and education. The assessment unit maintains two full time IT staff dedicated to maintaining
the assessment component in the EMIS to reduce dependence on third party software by increasing EMIS
assessment functionality such as online marking and distribution of exams. Additionally, AQEP is funding
temporary positions of an online training materials producer and a procedure writer. As the project nears
completion, the ministry will perform training remotely or on line at substantially reduced cost.

Continuous training to EMIS and IT staff at the Ministry of Education was another component that
promoted the growth of the system. This achieved three simultaneous objectives: (1) the ministry
became capable of providing ongoing support of the EMIS, which is a positive step towards its long-term
sustainability; (2) the use of ministry staff avoids the involvement of IT support companies with profit
driven agendas that typically run in opposition to, and are often destructive of, ministry needs; (c)
international organizations and donors are freed from the software development issues and can focus on




1
 AQEP is the agency working with the Ministry of Education and DFAT to implement FEMIS in the country. The
budget for the project is from the Australian government.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                              9
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


technical assistance. The Fijian EMIS was rolled out without the assistance of dedicated Technical Advisors
(TA) in other areas of the ministry. Despite the advantages of a ministry-focused approach, the delivery
of the EMIS could have benefitted substantially with dedicated TA supporting other areas of the ministry.
For instance, TA support in the human resource, finance and assessment areas typically place high
demands on an EMIS.

A key factor that led to the buy-in and support of EMIS was the provision of training in schools to
demonstrate the use and importance of student data. Schools that had access to Internet received
training on the use of data. This training had substantial logistical hurdles because of the number of
remote islands involved. ‘Train the trainer’ model was piloted, but was not successful. Direct sessions
required schools to complete the registration of all student records at the time of the training, sometimes
taking up to two full days. The training was repeated at the start of the school year and again at the end
of the school year. Training at the start of the school year focused on rolling over and setting up new
classes. Training at the end of the year focused on ensuring high accuracy of student data. This not only
solved the buy in dilemma in obtaining student data, but also allowed working examples of classes and
students. Tools were developed specifically to engage and coerce schools into in maintaining their own
data.

Although, training was designated as EMIS training, much of the training consisted of acquiring and
learning basic computer skills. Numerous approaches were used to identify those who were not
equipped to work on computers and provide additional training where possible. Over time, training was
refined to target those more in need than others. Data quality reports were developed to determine
which schools needed training and those that did not, reducing training costs and acknowledging
compliant schools. The training generally covered the basics skills that staff would need during the school
year such as for instance how to produce certain reports and how to enter requirements related to staff
into the system.

The training sessions at the central, district and school level contributed resulted in acceptance of FEMIS
as a handy tool for monitoring outcomes. Each school has a FEMIS administrator responsible to
maintaining and updating records in EMIS. Regular training sessions to the administrators and school
principals significantly helped them to understand the tool better, and work more efficiently. The IT
helpdesk at the Ministry of Education was a huge success in solving real time questions/ concerns the
schools had with regard to information being inputted in the system. At any point, if the administrator or
school teacher had a question, they would email the helpdesk and would get an immediate response that
helped smoothen the process. Moreover, the training provided to the staff at the Ministry helped them
use the system more effectively.

Schools supply and use much of the student data in FEMIS in real time. This combination of schools using
the data they provide has led to substantial ownership and data quality at the school level. While schools
use the student list for attendance, the ministry uses the same high quality student list for assessment,
grant calculation and other processes.

The FEMIS budget is largely driven by support from the partner agency AQEP, which has implications
on the long-term sustainability of the system. The core areas of EMIS (hardware and software) are funded
through external sources. The government funds are only dedicated towards staffing and preparation of
annual reports. Having a separate budget allocated to the EMIS Unit would be helpful in ensuring




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                           10
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


sustainability of the system. Funds received from donors should be channeled through the government
systems and documented in the EMIS budget.

Policy Area 2: System Soundness
Established 
Fiji’s EMIS soundness was assessed in five critical areas: (1) Data Architecture, (2) Data Coverage, (3) Data
Analytics, (4) Dynamic System, and (5) Serviceability.

FEMIS consists of two physical databases, LANA and FESA, the assessment and staffing databases
respectively. Each database has a corresponding web application. The FESA application maintains staffing
data in the FESA database. The LANA application maintains assessment data in the LANA database, but
schools administer the class lists in the LANA database using FEMIS. The hardware design consists of a
web server to serve web pages and reports over the open Internet, connected to a single (large) database
server housing the FESA and LANA databases. Each primary server has a matching redundant twin used
for backup in the event of catastrophic hardware failure of a primary server. The redundant pair also
function as the Quality Assurance testing area where new features are tried out and refined before
installation on the primary live servers. In addition to the above, a copy of the two main live databases is
taken each night and stored on the redundant server. This nightly copy is used exclusively for ad hoc
querying by statistics officers. This allows statistics officers to build and execute queries that are not in
standard reports in the EMIS. Typically, day old data suffices for most data queries received by the
statistics officers. This copy does not function as a data warehouse, instead the data is an exact replica of
live data.

One of the main positive features of the Fijian EMIS is its affordability. Some cost features were
particularly important contributors to the system’s affordability (table 4): (i) Structured Query Language
(SQL) database software was provided without cost to the ministry through licensing arrangements
already in place with federal IT body; (ii) Internet bandwidth has a cost and is also paid by the federal IT
body; (iii) Software development costs such as labor, desks and PCs are provided by the ministry; (iv) At
time of writing, recruitment is taking place to acquire a national resource for six months specifically to
develop online training materials. This will allow the ministry to cease the costly donor funded direct
training and independently sustain a more cost effective on line training program in the longer term; (v)
No laptops were provided to end users. All schools brought laptops and their own Internet connectivity
to all training without exception.
              Table 3: Cost of System Development
              Component                Tool                       Approximate Cost $USD
              Software development Microsoft Visual Studio        $600 to $1,500 per developer
              tools used to build web
              pages and reports
              Database technology Microsoft SQL Server            Approximately $3,000 for each of two
              used to store data                                  servers
              Server software          Windows Server 201X        Usually less than $1,000 for each of
                                                                  the four servers.
              Physical        Server   2x web servers plus 2x     $60,000 for all four servers
              Hardware                 database servers
              End user training        Ministry    staff    and   Approximately $100,000 per annum
                                       Technical Advisor(s)       (exclusive of Technical Advisor costs)
              Source: Authors.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                              11
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Each school has a FEMIS administrator who is
                                                           Figure 5: FEMIS Administrator inputting data into
responsible for maintaining FEMIS. Every school is EMIS at a Primary School
assigned an administrator whose primary role is to input
education data on a real-time basis into FEMIS. Every
morning, school teachers provide the administrators
with the attendance data which is inputted into FEMIS on
a daily basis, which makes it easy to track student
absenteeism on a daily basis. In addition, they keep
updating records and data as and when it becomes
available. Earlier, this work is done by teachers who
found it inconvenient as they couldn’t devote time to
teaching in classrooms. On the downside, this reduces
the interaction of teachers with FEMIS and its potential
utilization as they are not entering this information. In
terms of convenience and ease of use, one of the principals of a rural primary school commented, “FEMIS
helps reduce transaction costs as we don’t have to go to the district offices to submit paper-based census
form or any other manual requests from the Ministry”.

FEMIS abandons the census approach that collects pre-aggregated student and teacher data for use in
Net Enrollment Rate (NER) and Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) style reports can be problematic. This
approach can contribute directly to poor data quality. This is because, traditionally, this type of pre-
aggregated, census based data collection is used primarily by the ministry to calculate the school grants
where inflated student numbers are often submitted to attract additional grant. Without any
comprehensive audits in place, this inaccurate data is then re-aggregated into NER and GER style reports,
as was the case in Fiji before the FEMIS style of data collection was introduced, substantially reducing the
overall national student counts. Without the resources for ongoing individual school audits, the approach
in Fiji is not to use the data for the generation of aggregated reports (even though Fiji continues to report
for national and SDG compliance) but to expose the granular data to as many consumers as possible while
simultaneously using the data to underpin business processes that demand highly accurate data. By
actually using the data to run day to day operations (not for the generation of annual census reports),
higher quality data is produced on a daily basis. For example, individual student records are used
throughout the year repeatedly for; schools to record attendance, finance to acquit the grants,
assessment to issue and report on exams. The other obvious drawback with collecting pre-aggregated
data is that drilling down to individual student and teacher records is not possible, nor are complex data
correlations such as student attendance by gender against toilet conditions.

The school heads, District Education Offices and Divisional Education Offices share responsibilities in
the data production process. The school heads, head teachers and principals are responsible for data
entry of student data. They upload the required information directly into FEMIS and are personally liable
that this is done in a timely, complete and correct manner. The school management should submit the
data on school finances upon the request of the school head. The District Education Offices are
responsible for compiling the education data and ensuring a smooth process in data production
throughout the year. The Divisional Education Offices supervise the District Education Offices in their
responsibilities (figure 7). While there are guidelines for staff to adhere to these guidelines, limited
enforcement mechanisms are in place.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             12
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



 Figure 6: Division of Responsibilities at the Regional and Local Level

          Divisional    •Oversee the work of the District Education Offices
          Education     •Ensure that all policies are complied with
           Offices      •May recommend disciplinary action in case of non-compliance


                        District     •Responsible for distributing and collecting school census
                       Education      questionnaire forms and attendence sheets
                        Offices      •Processing data and forwarding it to the Divsional Education Offices
                                     •Resolving staff issues should they arise, e.g. assignment of teachers

                                                      •Data collection and entry into FEMIS
                                                      •Accurate and timely submission of data
                                         Schools
                                                      •Reporting of staff movement
                                                      •Class audits at specified times

   Source: MoE 2014; MoEHA 2016.


Figure 6 illustrates an example of how some school data compliance is reported in FEMIS. The District
Education Offices (and others) can generate a report, which provides them with an overview of teachers,
classes and students. Currently, the report does not show information on ECE school data as this

     Figure 7: Summary of School Data at the District Level




      Source: FEMIS
information is not yet been fully integrated into FEMIS.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                 13
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



FEMIS has ensured that all schools (government and community-based) are integrated into its system.
FEMIS is fully digitalized and generally data entry is done by uploading the data directly into FEMIS or
FEMIS extracts data from other systems. However, as approximately 10 percent of schools in Fiji remain
without internet connectivity. Most school-level data input pages have paper equivalents allowing non-
connected schools to complete and submit data to district offices for entry into the EMIS.

FEMIS includes individual-level data on assessments, enrollments, attendance and infrastructure for
basic (primary and secondary) education. Currently, FEMIS collects data from primary and secondary
schools, but there are plans to integrate early childhood education and technical colleges data. This would
allow information on student progression and performance from ECE to technical and higher education,
and would have important implications for designing interventions to monitor and improve outcomes.
Table 5 shows best practice examples of data, which should ideally be collected in an EMIS including
administrative, financial, human resource and learning outcome data.

Staffing and personnel data are also integrated into FEMIS. Data from the staffing system FESA are
displayed as read only data in FEMIS along with selected payroll/pay slip data from the national pay
system, leave balances, professional development history, qualifications and teacher registration data.
Teachers may not alter any of these data but can provide feedback to district offices in the form of a
comment on the staffing details page in FEMIS. Districts can list the feedback as the “Staffing Problems”
report and follow up as required (figure 8). Once an issue is resolved, the district can clear that issue from
the problem report. A tally of problems per district is visible on all ministry and district pages. Currently,
however, there is less use of this feature at the district level, and mostly the IT unit within the Ministry
resolves the issue of errors in reporting.
              Figure 8: Screenshot of FEMIS School Reported Staffing Problems




               Source: FEMIS

Registration for external exams is directly derived from FEMIS. One of the many achievements of FEMIS
is that student registration for external exams and national literacy and numeracy assessments is fully
integrated into the system. The Exams and Assessment Unit utilizes the student registry in FEMIS to
automatically enroll students for the appropriate external exams and LANA (year 5 and 7 since 2016;
previously Year 4, 6 and 8). This ensures additional buy-in from schools as it makes registration of all



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                              14
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


students in FEMIS a necessity while      Table 4: Best Practice on Data Coverage
eliminating a previously separate        Data Type         Best Practice              Fiji
cumbersome registration process          Administrative Demographic                   Demographic
and allowing for the entry of marks      data              Health                     Attendance
for some exams by schools and the                          Attendance (enrollment,    (enrollment,
printing of student assessment                             repetitions, dropout,      repetitions, dropout,
reports. This also facilitates the                         progression, etc.)         progression, etc.)
printing of some national exam
papers at schools, saving on vast        Financial data   Budget and revenues         Budget and revenues
resources previously required to                          Spending                    Cash Transfers and
                                                          Cash transfers and          Subsidies
securely ship exam papers.
                                                          subsidies                   Unit cost per student
                                                          Unit cost per student
Despite the comprehensive data Human                      General demographics     General demographics
captured     into   FEMIS,      some resource data        Salaries                 Some Professional
indicators are still calculated                           Performance evaluations  Development
manually. Despite improvements in                         Professional development
the system many indicators are still Learning             Classroom assessments    National Assessments
calculated manually. For instance, outcome data           National assessments
the net enrollment rate and gross                         International assessments
enrollment rate for primary and secondary education is still calculated manually, despite all the
information into FEMIS. This is because the focus currently has been to collect data to improve business
processes instead of calculating statistics for understanding the overall performance of the education
system. Advancements of the system over time should encourage the development of these indicators.

All students are equipped with unique identifiers. For Fijian students, the birth certificate ID along with
the student is also recorded; for foreign students, their passport number is recorded. This technically
allows for students to be tracked throughout their academic career. It also is easier to track student
movements at the beginning, during and at the end of the school year. This also allows the prevention of
schools claiming the same student in two schools simultaneously. Students with disability are also
integrated into the regular schools under the Special and Inclusive Policy and their special needs are
included in the FEMIS. Teachers are uniquely identified through their staffing system ID and also their
provident fund ID. Schools are uniquely identified by school registration numbers issued by the Assets
Management Unit. ECE centres are gradually receiving their own unique ID numbers a separate from their
attached primary schools. This latter process is ongoing. Numerous attempts to link the EMIS to the civil
registry have not been successful. The EMIS records height and weight of students for use by the ministry
of Health although data sharing has not progressed past initial meetings.

While some basic tools exist to analyze the data collected, analysis has been still weak. While basic
descriptive analytics and data tabulations are conducted by staff, data analytics are not automated in the
current EMIS. Instead, the EMIS Unit extracts data and runs analysis using excel. Moreover, the use of
analysis for planning, monitoring outcomes is not happening. Schools still manually collect data points to
track student performance.

Policy Area 3: Quality Data
Established
The quality of data captured by Fiji’s EMIS was assessed in four areas: (1) Methodological Soundness; (2)
Accuracy and Reliability; (3) Integrity; and (4) Periodicity and Timeliness.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                 15
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Clear data ownership and responsibility are essential to ensure reliability and accuracy of the data. This
is why, where practical, FEMIS has a single entity responsible for each data area with numerous other
entities using that data. At the same time, the ministry is responsible for maintaining overall accuracy of
the data. This is based on the premise that an entity using its own data will provide higher quality data for
use by itself, with other areas of the ministry benefiting by sharing the higher quality data, putting
additional pressure on data accuracy.

FEMIS has developed a comprehensive mechanism to main security of the system. FEMIS has four broad
account types; ministry, district, school and teacher (figure 9). The IT Unit manages only the ministry and
district accounts.
• Ministry-level access includes general ministry staff, emergency relief workers, engineers, finance,
    highly restricted Examination and Assessment Unit (EAU) access, etc. Ministry account types can see
    all schools in all districts with restrictions on what is visible within the school based on the actual
    account type. For example, engineers cannot see individual student records, emergency relief workers
    have restricted views of school data but can run disaster management reports on all schools. Ministry
    level accounts have extremely limited write access (if any) but tend to have broad visibility of data.
• District-level access is broken into two different types: (a) District read only users are the same as
    ministry users in that they can see all data and change nothing except this access type is restricted to
    viewing only schools in one district. (b) District read write users are also restricted to schools in one
    district but this user type can change school data sufficiently to act as a proxy for schools that do not
    have an Internet connection. Policy mandates these users to maintain data for schools without
    Internet service. Districts are responsible for managing passwords for all schools in their districts.
• School-level access allows a school to log on and manage all students in all grades in the school.
    School level access can also see all finance, facilities and teacher data for teachers currently in the
    school. Schools are responsible for managing passwords for all teachers attending the school. The
    staffing system FESA determines the school a teacher is in at any given time. If FEMIS determines any
    inconsistencies in the FESA staffing information, teacher access is denied until the issue is resolved.
    Schools log on with a school code.
• Teacher-level access allows a teacher to see their own professional development, leave and other
    staffing information. If the school level logon has assigned this teacher a class, the teacher can manage
    all students in that class including student attendance, student fees, student health, etc. The teacher
    can also view assessment results for students in their assigned class(es). Teachers log on using their
    teacher ID.
• Student-level access and parent/community level access are not yet developed.
• Public-level access is not currently permitted by the Ministry.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             16
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


The school heads are responsible for the accuracy of student, finance and other school data. The head
teachers and principals have to follow the guidelines presented by the MoEHA to ensure that the data are
current, correct and complete. If the school heads fail to do so or worse even deliberately falsify data,
they will be subject to disciplinary penalties. Disciplinary actions include, but are not limited to salary
suspension, disciplinary proceedings and criminal charges.
                Figure 9: Hierarchy of Data Access

                                              IT Unit Manages
                                                Approx. 600
                                             Ministry and District
                                                 Passwords



                                          Districts Manage Approx.
                                           1000 School Passwords




                                       Schools Manage Approx. 12,000
                                             Teacher Passwords




                              Teachers will in the future manage Approx. 200,000
                                                Student passwords




FEMIS is equipped with data validation mechanisms that ensure 95 percent accuracy of data. The FEMIS
administrator is responsible for updating and uploading accurate student, finance and other school data
into FEMIS at the school level. In addition, the FEMIS administrator is responsible for noting incorrect staff
movements that exist in the Fijian Education Staffing Appointments system (FESA) such as teachers on
leave not reflected in FESA. Moreover, the FEMIS administrator officer reports to key stakeholders (e.g.
head teachers and principals). Then, school heads and principals carry out mandatory class edits at
specified times. During those class edits, the head teachers or principals have to verify and confirm the
student enrollment data for each Year level. They have to check and compare all student data in the
following parameters: age, citizenship, ethnicity, new students, repeaters, start /end term and borders.
All of this is done electronically in the FEMIS database by simply ticking a box associated with the class for
the given term. Audited financial data is submitted by the school management within four weeks of the
school Annual General meeting, the school management is expected to submit all audited financial
reports. Figure 10 illustrates a screenshot of the class audit function.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                              17
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



       Figure 10: Screenshot of Data Audit Function at the School Level




         Source: FEMIS

Training sessions were provided to schools to ensure data entry and accuracy. Training sessions
conducted at the end of the year focused on ensuring high accuracy of student data. Data quality reports
were developed to determine which schools needed training and those that did not, reducing training
costs and acknowledging compliant schools. Reports include duplicate check numbers, duplicate invoice
numbers, students in two schools at the same time, missing birth certificate ID, etc. Figure 11 illustrates
a screenshot of options for FEMIS data quality reports.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                           18
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



  Figure 11: Screenshot of some FEMIS Data Quality Report Options




  Source: FEMIS



A Data Quality Analyst was recruited with the sole task of assuming responsibility for data to day quality
of the data across the system. A person for student records verification was also recruited with the sole
task of ensuring student data accuracy. This latter role involves numerous phone calls to schools where
students have transferred mid-year and one of the schools has not indicated the student has transferred
out. Schools also take interest in their own data, which is evident in the following two comments in the
forum. Each comment is a school publicly requesting another school to remove a student that has
transferred into their school (figure 12).

                  Figure 12: One Screen Shots of the FEMIS Forum Showing Schools Using the Forum
                  to Communicate with Other Schools to Clean Student Data




                    Source: MoEHA




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                          19
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


There are different timelines provided for data submission for different types of data, but this may not
be adhered to. Attendance data are normally allowed three weeks late at any one time, though this is not
enforced. Staffing information is continuously updated as teachers move around along with qualification,
leave, etc. Student and class registration has three separate term audits needed to receive grant funding.
The rest of the year, the student location and other data are just refined more and more accurate until
individual student movements are followed up during the assessment process. By clearly stating the
reporting requirements, the MoEHA ensures that data are delivered in a timely manner. However, at this
point, there are still some issues with compliance of timelines.


Policy Area 4: Utilization for Decision Making
Emerging
The utilization of Fiji’s EMIS was assessed by examining four areas: (1) openness; (2) operational use; (3)
accessibility; and (4) effectiveness in disseminating findings.

FEMIS is utilized for a variety
                                   Table 5: Operational Use, Best Practice
of basic reporting, tracking and   Use               Best Practice                   Fiji
resource allocation functions.
                                   In evaluation     • School performance
Currently, FEMIS data are used
                                                     • Student performance
for     national     assessment
                                                     • Growth reports
registration and dissemination,                      • Diagnostic reports
grant allocation, attendance                         • Graduation rates
tracking, determination of                           • Transition rates
textbook           requirements,                     • Teacher performance
calculation      of    transport   In governance     • Policy decisions              •      Some Planning
subsidies, school finances                           • Accountability                •      Management
including detailed expenditure                       • Planning
against allocation with budget                       • Management
tracking at school level, staff    By schools        • Academic performance
professional       development,                      • Teacher performance
teacher qualifications, teacher                      • Management
leave,                   teacher                     • Comparison with other
salaries/positions/history,                              schools
school        type,       school   By clients        • Parents’ access to EMIS
infrastructure, teacher subject                      • Communities’ access to
loading,     school    mapping,                          EMIS
                                                     • Use data to make decisions
disaster resource tracking, drug
                                                     • Use data to demand quality
usage, an online library and
                                   By government • Performance ratios                •      Infrastructure
forum, school library data,
                                                     • Infrastructure capacity       •      Teacher salaries
school      lease/property/legal
                                                     • Quality/outcome indicators    •      Some equality
data, substantial individual                         • Spending efficiency                  and quality
student data such as fees,                           • Teacher salaries                     indicators
health, assessments, family,                         • Equality indicators
subjects and determination of      Source: Adapted from Abdul-Hamid 2014.
staffing requirements.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                               20
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


The data is not yet used effectively to support senior level decision making or monitor the
implementation and effectiveness of policy, beyond SDG and parliament reporting. However, FEMIS
has the potential to be utilized for a broader variety of operational uses. For example, releasing 50,000
exam papers is fairly effortless but the skewed grades by gender where one gender is substantially more
absent than another is effectively ignored. Table 6 provides an overview of best practice standards of
EMIS utilization. It covers a broad range of utilization strategies and users. For instance, any EMIS could
be used for evaluation and governance purposes.

The introduction of individual student and teacher records at the school level encouraged schools to
consume their own data, driving up the quality of student data. This also improves communication in
schools between staff members as it is possible to monitor real time education data and respond to the
needs of individual students and teachers. Individual data records also enable government staff in
allocation of grants, resources and developing policies that cater to individual student characteristics.

Being an integrated system, it is possible to leverage the attendance reporting, national assessment
report, financial data, etc. to compare and draw inferences. For example, the outcome data on student’s
assessment can be linked to the attendance data and allocation of material resources. This is especially
useful while analyzing the impact of inputs on outputs. Schools can draw up their own attendance records
(students and teachers), data on facilities and financial data. Figure 16 illustrates some examples of
reports that are available through FEMIS for individual schools.

         Figure 13: Finance, Material Resources and Attendance Module in FEMIS




         Source: FEMIS Training Videos, Ministry of Education
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                           21
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


There is a strong culture of data retention for internal consumption, instead of making the data
available to external stakeholders. The MoEHA is very protective of education data and utilization.
Although data quality may be moderate to high, the ministry has a culture of retaining data for internal
consumption rather than sharing data transparently with stakeholders. At present data is used more to
drive and manage internal ministry processes than to support decisions and monitor policy. The use of
data in the ministry has seen improved management of finances and vast improvements in assessment
and other processes.

The MoEHA exercises full ownership and access to education data. A fully operational EMIS system,
which is used by all stakeholders has to be open, accessible and transparent to the public. Already in the
2014 Policy Document on FEMIS, the MoEHA clearly stated that all education data belongs to the ministry
and any access to data outside of the publicly available report can only be granted with the explicit
permission of the Permanent Secretary. Such strict policies and limited data dissemination restrict data
access for use.

Some dissemination initiatives are
taken, but there is no formal data          Box 4: Overview of Data Published in the Annual Report 2015
dissemination strategy is in place. The     The Annual Report 2015 includes the different types of data, e.g.:
annual report of 2015 is the latest         • Enrollment data (ECE, primary, secondary and partially also
available set of education data (box 4),        tertiary education), disaggregated by gender and districts
which is accessible to the public. These    • Teacher information and salaries (for ECE, primary and
reports are also disseminated to all            secondary on a national and regional level)
schools after the report is made publicly   • Professional development and workshops
available, and also discussed extensively   • Expenditure information
in education in conferences, and data is    • Scholarship data and tuition fees
published bi-annually in Fiji times and     • Data on disabilities
Fiji Sun. However, the FEMIS policy does    • Number of schools listed as government, private and non-
                                                government schools
not outline any dissemination strategy,
                                            • Maintenance and facilities upgrades
and most of the staff at the Ministry are
                                            • Number of newly built government schools
not aware of the annual reports or
                                            • Data on libraries (distribution, availability, etc.)
dissemination mechanism. This is            • Development of new school books
because the use of FEMIS is mainly          • Offences committed at school (by type of offence)
restricted to improving business
processes. Advancing to a next level of
data usage is essential.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                    22
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Recommendations and Proposed Activities
This section presents a set of recommendations and proposed activities based on the assessment of EMIS
in Fiji (table 6).

Recommendations and activities aim to Table 6: Fiji EMIS Rankings
improve the overall EMIS functionality in a                                        Established
                                                1. Enabling Environment
sustainable and effective manner, to ensure                                         
better access and use of information for                                           Established
decision making, planning, and student          2. System Soundness
                                                                                    
learning. Future activities to improve the EMIS                                    Established
should be strategically designed such that they 3. Quality Data
                                                                                    
incrementally boost dimensions of the EMIS to                                       Emerging
a more advanced level, ultimately improving     4. Utilization for Decision Making
                                                                                    
overall EMIS functionality in a sustainable and
effective manner. The Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities Threats (SWOT) identification (table 7)
summarizes key points from the needs assessment and informs recommendations.

 Table 7: Fiji EMIS SWOT Profile
                       Strengths                                               Weaknesses
 •   Strong political buy-in                            •   Different compliance requirements for different
 •   FEMIS policy institutionalizes operations              types of data not adhered to always
 •   Clear allocation of responsibilities               •   Data access and use remains mostly at the central
 •   Detailed timelines and requirements stipulated         level
     in policy documents                                •   Limited automated processes to calculate key
 •   Affordable system                                      indicators
 •   School-based management system                     •   Statistical handbooks are not published online
 •   Accurate data                                          regularly. The latest publicly available data is
 •   An established system of cost-efficient training       published in the 2015 Annual Report
     workshops                                          •   Poor quality of infrastructure data

                      Opportunities                                             Threats
 •   Ongoing development of establishing an EMIS        •   Dependence on donor funds and technical
 •   Including ECE and technical education data into        assistance can potentially threaten FEMIS in the long
     FEMIS                                                  term
 •   Utilization of data for monitoring education       •   Restricted data access to the public
     outcomes and improving teaching and learning       •   Data dissemination strategy not in place, and not
 •   Promoting research and data access to all              reflected in FEMIS policy
     education stakeholders
 •   Utilization of disability disaggregated data to
     improve the access and quality of education for
     children with disability
 •   Increasing compliance/ response rate by all
     schools to 100 percent

The EMIS is only as good as its utilization. This emphasizes the need for data to be utilized across the
entire education system. By doing so, system-wide efficiencies, teaching and learning practices can be
improved. The aim of any EMIS is to provide reliable, accurate and useful data for decision-making
processes while also improving learning and teaching through analysis of assessment data. Without being




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                   23
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


used, data uses its value and data collection seems pointless. Data utilization should occur at the central,
regional, school and local level, even including parents, students and the community.

The policy document on FEMIS of 2016 could be expanded to include additional aspects such as data
dissemination requirements and timelines. FEMIS would benefit from further institutionalization of data
utilization and dissemination by including it into the policy document. The data dissemination strategy
should include strict timelines so that the data remains timely, accurate and useful for the public. In
addition, special attention may be paid to data access standards.

The budget for FEMIS should be explicitly stated in the government budget to ensure long term
sustainability of the system. Currently, majority of the costs come from the donor budget, and the
detailed expenditure on line items are not accounted for. All donor funds should be routed through the
government system, and the budget should be clearly defined with a line for each of the following
categories: (a) Data collection; (b) Auditing mechanisms; (c) Staffing; (d) Training and professional
development; (e) Dissemination of materials (such as printing and publishing); (f) Infrastructure (software,
hardware), and (g) Regular maintenance of the system.
                                          Table 8: Examples of Data Dissemination Strategies in Chile
In order to provide accurate, reliable
                                          Assessment           Provide pedagogical support to school
and useful information, the list of
                                          guidelines           principals, pedagogical coordinators, and
indicators in FEMIS may be                                     teachers
expanded. Currently, data collected is    School report        Provide pedagogical support to school
used for improving education system                            principals, pedagogical coordinators, and
business processes. The focus is not                           teachers
on producing indicators, and the          National report      Inform policy to decision makers and general
indicators currently produced follow a                         public on student performance across grades
manual process. Expanding focus to                             and regions
regularly producing and publishing        Newspaper            Hold schools accountable by publishing data
information on education indicators       supplement           on school grades by subject across regions
will enable stakeholders to assess the    Parent report        Hold schools accountable and involve parents
                                                               in school
performance of the education system.
                                          Online bank item     Provide pedagogical support to teachers
                                                               through releasing test questions from all
Data openness and access to                                    subject areas and target grades
education data could be facilitated.      Press kit            Inform policy by providing materials to
Currently, the MoEHA retains full                              journalists and regional education offices
ownership of the data and only limited    Data files           Inform policy, provide pedagogical support,
access is granted to users outside the                         and hold schools accountable, depending on
ministry. Individual schools can run                           research topic, to researchers
reports in FEMIS based on their own       Data analysis tool   Inform policy, provide pedagogical support,
data, but no comparative data across                           and hold schools accountable, depending on
schools is available. Making data                              the type of analysis, for researchers and
available for additional buy-in from                           decision makers
                                          Geo-referential      Google Maps with the geographical location of
different stakeholder groups and
                                          system               schools and their mean scores for parents to
facilitates a data-driven culture.
                                                               hold schools accountable
                                          Ministry of          Inform policy, provide pedagogical support,
Data should be published in a timely      Education website and hold schools accountable
manner, disaggregated and in an           Source: Ramirez 2013.
appropriate format.     The latest




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             24
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


publicly available data is from 2015 in the form of an Annual Report. The data is often on an aggregate
basis and sometimes disaggregated by certain characteristics such as gender, type of school, grade or by
region. The report provides an overview of the education system, but there is only limited disaggregated
information included. To promote the data driven culture in the country, it is essential to make the
education data available to public.

Active data dissemination strategies encourage data buy-in and utilization by parents and the
community. Data dissemination strategies reach from publicly available individual school reports and
annual education reports to newspaper articles, radio contributions and television discussions. Fiji should
determine the best strategies in its country specific context taking geography, technology and other
factors into consideration. Table 8 illustrates an example of data dissemination.

Trainings to schools should focus more on utilization of data for improving teaching and learning,
management and planning. Currently, the focus of the FEMIS staff is to design training programs to teach
FEMIS administrators and principals on how to use the system and input data for compliance purposes.
This was extremely important during the initial stages of FEMIS implementation. The time is now right to
transition to a next stage of delivering trainings that empower school heads and teachers on how to utilize
the system to manage school operations, monitor school, teacher and student performance. Doing this
would also help overcome the issue of lack of interest in FEMIS data by teachers, who now turn to FEMIS
administrators for their work, and overlook the extremely useful data that is generated from the system
to inform classroom instruction.

At the school level, individual school report cards may be used to provide feedback to the staff, parents
and the wider community. School report cards should be developed that provide information related to
structure of education system, teachers, student performance, infrastructure needs, etc. It is important
to design the school report cards effectively, so that the schools can utilize the information presented to
them. They need to be clear, accurate and useful. By ensuring that every school receives individual
feedback, which (aside from highly sensitive data) is accessible to the general public facilitates comparison
between different schools. Not only would such a feedback loop improve data access and utilization, but
it would also aide schools in the achievement of their planning and development goals. Many countries
such as Australia have already implemented such report cards and have also designed an index, which
enables parents to compare index scores nationwide (box 8). This is essential for promoting a data driven
Box 5: Examples of Feedback Mechanisms in the Form of School Report Cards

 In Australia, feedback mechanisms have been established to include individual school report cards. Education
 stakeholders can compare school performance on the “mySchool” website, where the information is publicly
 available. mySchool calculates an index scores and provides an overview of general school indicators, which
 allow parents to compare schools from all over the country (ACARA 2016).

 Similarly, in Chile school performance data is made publicly available to provide feedback to the schools, parents
 and other stakeholders. The school performance data is all accessible online and parents can use a search option
 linked to the unique school’s ID number. In addition, Chile publishes a ranking of best performing schools in the
 country. The highest ranked schools are rewarded with financial benefits (Bruns, Filmer and Patrinos 2011).

 In Uganda, the Ministry of Education provides feedback to schools and parents in the form of school report
 cards. These school profiles are based on the data provided by the annual school census. They are distributed
 to headmasters, parent-teacher associations and elected officials. The school report cards have been well-
 received and make it possible for headmasters, parents and the community to track the performance of the
 school (Cameroon 2012).




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                     25
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


culture as parents need to have enough information to make school choices and have information on
education performance across these schools.

Unique student, teacher and school identifiers can be helpful in tracking individual performance
throughout their academic careers. Fiji already has an effective unique identifier system in place for all
local and foreign students by using their national identification and passport number, respectively. This
means that FEMIS is equipped with tracking mechanisms for students and teachers. Longitudinal tracking
of students, teachers and schools allows for important policy conclusions, which can be utilized directly
to improve student learning outcomes. This will also allow for specialized services to be provided for
children with disability.

Utilization of data at the school level is important. As the frontline of data collection, schools are essential
to the overall success of an EMIS. As a result, efforts to ensure that teachers and principals are not only
simple inputters of data, but also thoughtful users of those data will strengthen the overarching EMIS.
One way to do this is to establish collaborative networks around data utilization. This could take the form
of a professional development community where principals and teachers of different schools in any given
area come together to think of innovative ways to use data to manage schools, students and classroom
learning.

A sustainable and well-functioning EMIS requires the knowledge that EMIS is more than an IT system.
At the central and local levels, a common trend that was observed during interviews was that EMIS was
seen as an IT system used for automation of the previous work that the Ministry was doing. A common
problem with EMIS implementation is the belief that it is primarily technology. For EMIS to be successful,
a holistic approach should be pursued that takes into account the many factors, people, processes, and
technology, that contribute to long-term success and sustainability.

Given FEMIS’s successful implementation and buy-in from all the education stakeholder at the local and
central level, the time is right for MoEHA to transition from a compliance-focused approach to a learning
focused one. The journey from a compliance-focused EMIS to a learning-focused EMIS is complicated, but
it is also a game changer. At the core of this transition is a behavior change in the way that data are valued.
The shift moves from seeing data as a tool to monitor progress, to understanding that data, as well as the
larger EMIS, can be used to promote teaching and learning as well as management and planning. When
designing a new system, start with the policy questions that key stakeholders want the system to answer.
By answering this question early in the process, the risk of ending up with a fragmented and limited system
is reduced. For this, multiple efforts to build consensus across a variety of departments and stakeholders.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                26
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Regional Comparison Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Samoa
The Pacific countries, namely, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Samoa and the Solomon Islands have working
towards developing an effective EMIS that monitors education outcomes in their respective countries. A
SABER evaluation was conducted which provides an overview of the current status of the systems in the
four policy areas (table 9). Fiji and Papua New Guinea have advanced further than most of their neighbor
countries in the establishment of an EMIS, while Samoa and the Solomon Islands lag behind in some areas.
However, each EMIS experience can provide others with lessons learnt and additional insights into the
establishment of an EMIS.
              Table 9: Overview of SABER-EMIS Benchmarking Scores
                         Policy Goals             Fiji    Papua New             Samoa       Solomon
                                                            Guinea                           Islands
              Enabling Environment            Established Emerging            Emerging     Latent
              System Soundness                Established Emerging            Latent       Emerging
              Quality Data                    Established Established         Latent       Emerging
              Utilization for Decision Making Emerging    Emerging            Latent       Latent
              Note: The comparison is based on the 2015 SABER-EMIS assessment of Papua New Guinea,
              Samoa and the Solomon Islands.

Fiji may serve as a potential role model for these four countries and others in the region. For instance,
Vanuatu is already looking towards FEMIS to gain insight on the process to establish a functional EMIS.
The strength of FEMIS lies in its design as a low-cost education data system, including development and
implementation. Much of the web technology was successfully attached to the existing EMIS saving
countless hours of software development time. Similar to Fiji, the Vanuatu EMIS used an existing database
and simply added web functionality with additional features and access to schools. The parallel paper-
system in FEMIS is crucial as a model for countries in the region, where internet connectivity is
considerably behind that of Fiji and paper remains the main data collection instrument. In fact, internet
connectivity is crucial for a timely, accurate and well-functioning EMIS. This is why timing of the roll out
of a national EMIS should coincide with very early availability of general Internet nationally. If the roll out
takes place after the availability of Internet at schools, third party EMIS vendors will sell EMIS software to
the larger schools or schools will download free EMIS software. A scenario of multiple systems operating
across numerous school sites is an extremely complex architecture to reconcile and/or roll back to a single
national data source. In the case of Fiji, schools were adopting technology faster than the ministry and
others initially anticipated.

In terms of the enabling environment, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, and Samoa all have introduced policies
that officially establish and institutionalize EMIS. Papua New Guinea bases the institutionalization of EMIS
on the following policies: the National Education Plan (2005–14) and Information and Communication
Technology Policy and Universal Basic Education Plan (2010–19). The policies have strengthened
infrastructure, standards, and processes, but they do not commit to strong data-driven decision making
in practice. In Samoa, the Education Sector Plan (ESP 2012–18) commits to the creation of an integrated
EMIS at all levels of the education system, which is supported by other official policies. In the Solomon
Islands, the National Education Action Plan (2004–15) has laid the foundation for EMIS, but they do not
explicitly support or define EMIS operations. None of the four countries have dedicated EMIS budget lines
in the Ministry of Education’s budget, and the EMIS budget often stems from donor organizations, which
may harm EMIS sustainability in the long term. Political buy-in and extensive training for EMIS staff
fostered the development of a data-driven culture in Fiji. In fact, the development of EMIS policies is often
a reflection of the buy-in and support from the senior management that with an EMIS governments can



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                               27
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


solve problems related to payment of teacher salaries, allocation of grants and monitoring expenditures.
Once the ministry is heavily invested in using the system, the data quality improves, and only then will
senior staff actually make decisions based on the data because they are finally assured of its reliability.
This is why in the initial phase of an EMIS data access and the emphasis of data-driven education decision
making remains at the central level. No policies are in place that stress the importance of data access for
all education stakeholders. Generally, the public receives access to aggregate education statistics in the
form of the annual statistical yearbook.
In terms of budget, all of the four countries rely significantly on donors for funding and support on EMIS
operations. The Ministry does not have a dedicated EMIS budget and a line item to EMIS operations, which
may have consequences for long term sustainability of the system.

In terms of system soundness, Fiji has successfully established a low cost, affordable EMIS, that is able to
produce a broad range of education statistics related to assessment, human resources, finance and
infrastructure. Each school has a school-based information system which is run by a FEMIS administrator,
which helps in reducing transaction costs involved with paper-based census forms. This low-cost system
is a good model for small island countries, who do not need expensive complicated systems to collect and
manage their education data. The system also allows for easy data integration as the web-based platform
can consist of different modules which can be easily integrated and analyzed.

Fiji has been able to maintain accurate and quality data because of its non-conventional method of
abandoning the census approach that collects pre-aggregated student and teacher data for use in NER
and GER style reports can be problematic. This approach can contribute directly to poor data quality.
Traditionally this type of pre-aggregated, census based data collection is also used by the ministry to
calculate the school grants where inflated student numbers are often submitted to attract additional
grant. Without detailed student level audits, the inaccurate pre-aggregated data is then re-aggregated
into NER and GER style reports implying a valid data set when reports trend normally for years as is the
case in Samoa and Solomon Islands.

Papua New Guinea has also made significant advancements in the quality of data collected using their
system. First, they have developed a comprehensive EMIS Operations Manual, complete with metadata,
data fields, and indicators that links to the national education strategy. In addition, the country has
developed an extensive data validation mechanism with validation occurring at multiple times of the data
flows: (1) at the District Education Office; (2) Provincial Division of Education; and (3) Department of
Education. The process is supported by automated validation processes that flag discrepancies.

Data utilization and lack of data-driven culture continues to remain a challenge for the four countries. In
general, data is mainly (or exclusively) utilized at the central level and here the focus is primarily on
managing business processes such as allocation of grants or voucher systems.

In Papua New Guinea, there is a considerable gap between EMIS awareness and usage between central
and subnational education staff. At the regional level, staff are often unaware of the system’s data usage
capabilities. In Samoa, the annual statistics report is disseminated to all schools by the end of the
collection cycle, but the report provides only an aggregate overview, which does not empower schools to
truly make use of the education data. Similarly, in the Solomon Islands a two-page school feedback report
is sent to schools containing a brief analysis of school performance (e.g. enrollment rates, repetition rates
and student-teacher ratio), but it is rarely used in practice. FEMIS allows schools to own and produce their
own attendance, enrollment and financial reports, but there is no standardized system to compare school




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                             28
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


performance or track schools towards their goals. Currently, parents, students or the community cannot
access education data for informed decision making. Moreover, improvements in data dissemination are
needed so that users are made more aware of data and are able to utilize it effectively. After all, any EMIS
is only as good as its utilization.


Acknowledgments
This report was prepared by SABER-EMIS team members Husein Abdul-Hamid (Task Team Leader),
Namrata Saraogi and Diana Mayrhofer in collaboration with the AQEP team lead by Dr. Priscilla Puamau.
Fred Brooker (CEI International) led a team to complete this report as part of an independent evaluation
of FEMIS. The report benefited immensely from the guidance and support of MoeHA staff: Mr. Iowane
Tiko (Permanent Secretary for Education), as well as the entire team at MoEHA. The team is also grateful
to the AQEP staff: Narain Sharma (MoE Liaison & Quality Education Coordinator), Semiti Tamo
(Monitoring & Evaluation Coordinator), Bianca Murray (Social Protection Specialist) and Colin Connelly (IT
Specialist). Finally, the team is especially grateful for the insights provided by principals, teachers and
administrators of the schools visited in Fiji. Special thanks to colleagues who provided support: Cassia
Miranda and Manar El-Iriqsousi.


Abbreviations

 AQEP             Access to Quality Education Program
 DEO              District Education Officers
 FEMIS            Fijian Education Management Information System
 FESA             Fijian Education Staffing Appointments
 GER              Gross Enrollment Rate
 LANA             Literacy and Numeracy Assessments
 MoEHA            Ministry of Education, Heritage and Arts
 NER              Net Enrollment Rate
 SIMS             School Information Management System




References
Abdul-Hamid, Husein. 2014. “SABER EMIS Framework Paper.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Andrabi, Tahir, Jishnu Das, and Asim Khwaja.. 2015. “Report Cards: The Impact of Providing School and Child Test
   Scores        on      Educational     Markets.”      World       Bank      Group,       Washington,       DC.
   https://www.openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21670.
Ministry of Education. 2014. “Policy on Fiji Education Management Information System”. Accessed December 10,
     2016.
Ministry of Education, National Heritage, Culture and Arts. (2014). Annual Report 2014 Ministry of Education,
     National Heritage, Culture and Arts. Suva: Ministry of Education, National Heritage, Culture and Arts.
Dr. John Cocke, George Radin, Joel Birnbaum, Frances Allen. (n.d.). RISC Architecture. Retrieved 06 3, 2016, from
     IBM: http://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/ibm100/us/en/icons/risc/




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                 29
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


FEMIS. (2016, 06 10). UIS Survey Table A5- A6. Retrieved 03 10, 2016, from FEMIS:
     http://www.femis.gov.fj/femis/ReportCriteria/Report_70_10_UIS_Survey.aspx
Fiji Access to Quality Education Program—Framework for Delivery. (2010, 10). Retrieved 06 03, 2016, from
     http://dfat.gov.au: http://dfat.gov.au/about-us/publications/Pages/fiji-access-to-quality-education-program-
     framework-for-delivery.aspx
Fonseca, M. (2015, 1 12). The Biggest Technology Failures of 2014. Retrieved 06 03, 2013, from
     http://www.intelligenthq.com/: http://www.intelligenthq.com/technology/the-biggest-technology-failures-of-
     2014/
Kanaracus, C. (2013, 12 30). The worst IT project disasters of 2013. Retrieved 06 03, 2016, from
     http://www.infoworld.com/: http://www.infoworld.com/article/2609011/applications/the-worst-it-project-
     disasters-of-2013.html
Ministry of Education, Heritage and Arts (MoEHA). 2016. “Policy on Fiji Education Management Information System”.
     Accessed December 10, 2016. http://www.education.gov.fj/images/2016/FEMIS_Policy_-Reviewed_2016.pdf
Ramirez, Maria Jose. 2013. “Disseminating and Using Student Assessment Information in Chile.” Systems Approach
     for Better Education Results (SABER) student assessment working paper no. 3. World Bank, Washington, DC.
     http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/01/ 16238811/disseminating-using-student-assessment-
     information-chile.
Short Set of Questions on Disability. (2015, 11 06). Retrieved 06 03, 2016, from Centres for Disease Control and
     Prevention: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/washington_group/wg_questions.html




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                 30
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017




Appendix A: Summary of Policy Lever Benchmarking


              Policy goal                    Policy lever                    Scorea   Weight   Benchmark
                                Legal framework                               2.01     17%     Established
                                Organizational structure and                  2.67      17     Established
                                institutionalized processes
     Enabling environment       Human resources                              2.19      17      Established
                                Infrastructural capacity                     2.64      17      Established
                                Budget                                       2.26      17      Established
                                Data-driven culture                          0.00      15        Latent
                                Data architecture                            2.67      20      Established
                                Data coverage                                2.40      30      Established
       System soundness         Data analytics                               0.44      15        Latent
                                Dynamic system                               3.28      15       Advanced
                                Serviceability                               2.70      20      Established
                                Methodological soundness                     2.21      25      Established
                                Accuracy and reliability                     2.68      25      Established
           Quality data
                                Integrity                                    1.94      25       Emerging
                                Periodicity and timeliness                   2.33      25      Established
                                Openness                                     0.96      15        Latent
                                Operational use                              1.20      50       Emerging
 Utilization in decision making Accessibility                                1.50      20       Emerging
                                Effectiveness in disseminating               1.40      15       Emerging
                                findings
a. 0–0.99 = Latent; 1–1.9 = Emerging; 2–2.9 = Established; 3–4 = Advanced.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                               31
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


Appendix B: Extended Rubric, Fiji Scores Highlighted in Red


                                                                                                                                      Scoring
                                                                        Description of
       Policy levers                     Indicators
                                                                        best practices             Latent              Emerging             Established             Advanced

                                                                       The system contains
                                                                       crucial components
                                                                       of a comprehensive
                                                                                                                    The system
                                                                       enabling              The system lacks                            The system contains
                                                                                                                    contains basic                             The system contains
                                                                       environment, which    major components of                         most components of
                                                                                                                    components of a                            crucial components of
 POLICY AREA 1: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT                                   addresses related     a comprehensive                             a comprehensive
                                                                                                                    comprehensive                              a comprehensive
                                                                       policy elements and   enabling                                    enabling
                                                                                                                    enabling                                   enabling environment
                                                                       enables the           environment                                 environment
                                                                                                                    environment
                                                                       functioning of an
                                                                       effective and
                                                                       dynamic system
                           Institutionalization of system: EMIS is
                           institutionalized as an integral part of
                           the education system and the
                           government
                           Responsibility: responsibility for
                           collecting, processing, and
                           disseminating education statistics is
                           given to a clearly designated institution                                                Basic components
                           or agency                                   An existing legal                            of a legal                                 There is an existing
                                                                                                                                         Most elements of a
                           Dynamic framework: the legal                framework supports    A legal framework is   framework or                               legal framework to
 1.1     Legal framework                                                                                                                 legal framework are
                           framework is dynamic and elastic so         a fully functioning   not in place           informal                                   support a fully
                                                                                                                                         in place
                           that it can adapt to advancements in        EMIS                                         mechanisms are in                          functioning EMIS
                           technology                                                                               place
                           Data supply: the legal framework
                           mandates that schools participate in
                           EMIS by providing education data
                           Comprehensive, quality data: the
                           requirement for comprehensive,
                           quality data is clearly specified in the
                           EMIS legal framework



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                 32
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                        Scoring
                                                                       Description of
       Policy levers                      Indicators
                                                                       best practices              Latent                 Emerging               Established               Advanced


                             Data sharing and coordination: the
                             legal framework allows for adequate
                             data sharing and coordination between
                             the Ministry of Education and agencies
                             and/or institutions that require
                             education data
                             Utilization: the legal framework
                             emphasizes data-driven education
                             policy

                             Budget: the education system budget
                             includes a line item for EMIS

                             Confidentiality: the legal framework
                             guarantees that respondents’ data are
                             confidential and used for the sole
                             purpose of statistics
                                                                      The system is
                                                                                                                                              The institutional
                                                                      institutionalized                               The institutional                               The system is
                                                                                                                                              structure of the
                                                                      within the            The system is not         structure of the                                institutionalized
                                                                                                                                              system is defined
                                                                      government, has       specified in policies,    system is not                                   within the
         Organizational                                                                                                                       within the
                                                                      well-defined          and what exists does      clearly specified in                            government, has well-
         structure and       Organizational structure and                                                                                     government, it has
 1.2                                                                  organizational        not have well-defined     policies, it has some                           defined organizational
         institutionalized   institutionalized processes                                                                                      defined
                                                                      processes, and has    organizational            organizational                                  processes, and has
         processes                                                                                                                            organizational
                                                                      several               processes; EMIS has       processes, and its                              several functionalities
                                                                                                                                              processes, but its
                                                                      functionalities       limited functionalities   functionalities are                             beyond statistical
                                                                                                                                              functionalities are
                                                                      beyond statistical                              limited                                         reporting
                                                                                                                                              limited
                                                                      reporting
                                                                      Qualified staff       Minimum standards         Some staff are
                                                                                                                                              The majority of staff   All staff are qualified
                                                                      operate the system,   of qualification are      qualified to operate
                                                                                                                                              are qualified to        to operate the system,
                             Personnel: the core tasks of EMIS are    and opportunities     not met for the           the system, and
                                                                                                                                              operate the system,     and well-established
 1.3     Human resources     identified and EMIS is staffed with      are available to      majority of staff that    limited
                                                                                                                                              and frequent            opportunities are
                             qualified people                         improve their         operate the system        opportunities are
                                                                                                                                              opportunities are       constantly available to
                                                                      performance and       and opportunities are     available to
                                                                                                                                              available to improve    improve staff
                                                                      retention             not available to          improve staff




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                       33
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                   Scoring
                                                                     Description of
       Policy levers                    Indicators
                                                                     best practices               Latent             Emerging             Established               Advanced

                                                                                            improve their        performance and       staff performance       performance and
                                                                                            performance and      retention             and retention           retention
                           Professional development: professional                           retention
                           training is available for EMIS staff



                           Data collection: tools for data
                           collection are available
                           Database(s): databases exist under the   The system has a
                                                                                                                                                               The system has a well-
                           umbrella of the data warehouse and       well-defined
                                                                                                                                       The system has an       defined infrastructure
                           have both hardware and software          infrastructure to
                                                                                                                                       infrastructure that     to fully perform its
                           means                                    perform data            The system lacks a   The system has a
         Infrastructural                                                                                                               allows it to perform    data collection,
 1.4                       Data management system: a system is      collection,             well-defined         basic or incomplete
         capacity                                                                                                                      some of its functions   management, and
                           in place that manages data collection,   management, and         infrastructure       infrastructure
                                                                                                                                       in an integral          dissemination
                           processing, and reporting                dissemination
                                                                                                                                       manner                  functions in an
                                                                    functions in an
                           Data dissemination: data dissemination                                                                                              integral manner
                                                                    integral manner
                           tools are available and maintained by
                           the agency producing education
                           statistics
                           Personnel and professional
                           development: the EMIS budget
                           contains a specific budget for EMIS                                                                         The system budget
                           personnel and their professional                                                                            contains the majority
                                                                    The system budget is                                                                       The system budget is
                           development                                                                                                 of required
                                                                    comprehensive,          The system suffers   The system has a                              comprehensive,
                                                                                                                                       categories to ensure
 1.5     Budget            Maintenance: the EMIS budget             ensuring that the       from serious         basic or incomplete                           ensuring that the
                                                                                                                                       that most parts of
                           contains a specific budget for system    system is sustainable   budgetary issues     budget                                        system is sustainable
                                                                                                                                       the system are
                           maintenance and recurrent costs          and efficient                                                                              and efficient
                                                                                                                                       sustainable and
                                                                                                                                       efficient
                           Reporting: the EMIS budget contains a
                           specific budget for reporting costs




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                34
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                          Scoring
                                                                      Description of
       Policy levers                      Indicators
                                                                      best practices                Latent                Emerging               Established                 Advanced


                             Physical infrastructure: the EMIS
                             budget contains a specific budget for
                             physical infrastructure costs

                             Efficient use of resources: processes
                             and procedures are in place to ensure
                             that resources are used efficiently
                                                                                                                                                                        A data-driven culture
                                                                     A data-driven culture                                                                              exists that prioritizes
                                                                                                                      The system has a
                                                                     prioritizes data as a   The system suffers                                                         data management and
                                                                                                                      data-driven culture     A data-driven culture
                                                                     fundamental             because there is not a                                                     utilization within and
                                                                                                                      that demonstrates       exists that prioritizes
                                                                     element of              data-driven culture                                                        beyond the education
         Data-driven                                                                                                  a basic appreciation    data management
                             Data-driven culture                     operations and          that prioritizes data                                                      system, and evidence
         Culture                                                                                                      of data and interest    and utilization within
                                                                     decision making,        management and                                                             of that culture is
                                                                                                                      in developing           and beyond the
                                                                     both inside and         data utilization in                                                        present in daily
                                                                                                                      better data             education system
                                                                     outside of the          decision making                                                            interaction and
                                                                                                                      utilization practices
                                                                     education system                                                                                   decision making at all
                                                                                                                                                                        levels
                                                                                                                      The system has          The system has
                                                                     The processes and                                                                                  The processes and
                                                                                                                      basic processes         some processes and
                                                                     structure of EMIS                                                                                  structure of the
                                                                                             The system lacks         and a structure         a structure, but they
                                                                     are sound and                                                                                      system are sound and
 POLICY AREA 2: SYSTEM SOUNDNESS                                                             processes and            that do not support     do not fully support
                                                                     support the                                                                                        support the
                                                                                             structure                the components of       the components of
                                                                     components of an                                                                                   components of an
                                                                                                                      an integrated           an integrated
                                                                     integrated system                                                                                  integrated system
                                                                                                                      system                  system
                                                                                                                                              The system's data
                                                                                                                      The system's data       structure has most
                                                                     The data
                                                                                             The system's data        architecture            elements of the data      The data architecture
                                                                     architecture is well
                                                                                             structure does not       includes some           architecture;             is well defined to
 2.1     Data architecture   Data architecture                       defined to ensure
                                                                                             have a well-defined      components;             however, it has some      ensure full system
                                                                     full system
                                                                                             data architecture        however, it is          deficiencies that         functionality
                                                                     functionality
                                                                                                                      incomplete              affect the system's
                                                                                                                                              functionality




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                         35
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                          Scoring
                                                                      Description of
       Policy levers                    Indicators
                                                                      best practices                 Latent                Emerging              Established              Advanced


                          Administrative data: EMIS contains
                          administrative data                        The data in the
                                                                     system are
                                                                                              The data in the
                          Financial data: EMIS contains financial    comprehensive and                                 The data in the        The data in the        The data in the system
                                                                                              system are far from
                          data                                       cover administrative,                             system include         system include most    are comprehensive
 2.2     Data coverage                                                                        being comprehensive,
                                                                     financial, human                                  some of the data       but not all of the     and cover all data
                          Human resources data: EMIS contains                                 and coverage is
                                                                     resources, and                                    areas                  data areas             areas
                          human resources data                                                limited
                                                                     learning outcomes
                          Learning outcomes data: EMIS contains      data
                          learning outcomes data
                                                                                                                       Basic tools and
                                                                                                                       processes are
                                                                     Tools and processes                               available, but the
                                                                                                                                              Tools and processes    Tools and processes
                                                                     are available to                                  system is not
                                                                                              Tools and processes                             are available;         are available to
                                                                     perform data                                      capable of
 2.3     Data analytics   Data analytics                                                      are used to perform                             however, data          perform data analytics
                                                                     analytics at different                            conducting
                                                                                              limited tabulations                             analytics are not      at different levels on a
                                                                     levels on a regular                               advanced analytical
                                                                                                                                              performed regularly    regular basis
                                                                     basis                                             steps (e.g.,
                                                                                                                       predictive models,
                                                                                                                       projections)
                          Quality assurance measures: the
                          system is dynamic and maintains                                                              The system in place
                                                                                              The system in place is
                          quality assurance measures                 The system in place                               is not easily                                 The system in place is
                                                                                              not easily adaptable
                                                                     is elastic and easily                             adaptable and          The system in place    elastic and easily
                          Data requirements and considerations:                               to changes
                                                                     adaptable to allow                                requires significant   is easily adaptable,   adaptable to allow for
 2.4     Dynamic system   mechanisms exist for addressing new                                 /advancements in
                                                                     for changes                                       time and resources     but it remains         changes/
                          and emerging data requirements                                      data needs, as no
                                                                     /advancements in                                  to accommodate         reasonably complex     advancements in data
                          System adaptability: EMIS is elastic and                            quality assurance
                                                                     data needs                                        changes and/or                                needs
                          easily adaptable to allow for changes                               standards are used
                                                                                                                       advancements
                          and/or advancements in data needs




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                       36
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                        Scoring
                                                                      Description of
       Policy levers                    Indicators
                                                                      best practices               Latent               Emerging              Established               Advanced


                           Validity across data sources:
                           information brought together from
                           different data and/or statistical
                           frameworks in EMIS is placed within       Services provided by                                                                          Services provided by
                           the data warehouse using structural       the system are valid                                                                          the system are valid
                           and consistency measures                  across data sources,                                                                          across data sources,
                                                                     integrate                                                                                     integrate
                           Integration of noneducation databases
                                                                     noneducation                                                                                  noneducation
                           into EMIS: data from sources collected
                                                                     databases into EMIS,   Serious issues exist    Inconsistencies        The data are            databases into EMIS,
                           by agencies outside EMIS are
                                                                     and archive data at    related to data         exist related to       consistent and valid;   and archive data at
 2.5     Serviceability    integrated into the EMIS data
                                                                     the service of EMIS    validity and            data validity and      however, some           the service of EMIS
                           warehouse
                                                                     clients by ensuring    consistency             consistency            concerns still exist    clients by ensuring the
                           Archiving data: multiple years of data    the relevance,                                                                                relevance,
                           are archived, including source data,      consistency,                                                                                  consistency,
                           metadata, and statistical results         usefulness, and                                                                               usefulness, and
                           Services to EMIS clients: services        timeliness of its                                                                             timeliness of its
                           provided by the system to EMIS clients    statistics                                                                                    statistics
                           include ensuring the relevance,
                           consistency, usefulness, and timeliness
                           of its statistics
                                                                                                                                           The system has most
                                                                                                                                           mechanisms in place
                                                                     The system has the                                                    needed to collect,      The system has the
                                                                     mechanisms                                     The system has         save, and produce       required mechanisms
                                                                     required to collect,                           basic mechanisms       timely, high-quality    in place to collect,
                                                                                            The system lacks
                                                                     save, produce, and                             to collect, save,      information for use     save, produce, and
                                                                                            mechanisms to
                                                                     utilize information,                           and produce            in decision making;     utilize information,
                                                                                            collect, save, or
 POLICY AREA 3: QUALITY DATA                                         which ensures                                  timely, quality        however, some           which ensures
                                                                                            produce timely, high-
                                                                     accuracy, security,                            information;           additional measures     accuracy, security,
                                                                                            quality information
                                                                     and timely, high-                              however, its           are needed to           and timely, high-
                                                                                            for decision making
                                                                     quality information                            accuracy might be      ensure accuracy,        quality information
                                                                     for use in decision                            questionable           security, and/ or       for use in decision
                                                                     making                                                                timely information      making
                                                                                                                                           that can be used for
                                                                                                                                           decision making




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                    37
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                           Scoring
                                                                       Description of
       Policy levers                    Indicators
                                                                       best practices                 Latent                Emerging              Established                Advanced


                          Concepts and definitions: data fields,
                          records, concepts, indicators, and
                          metadata are defined and documented
                          in official operations manuals along
                          with other national datasets and                                                              The methodological
                          endorsed by the government                  The methodological                                                       The methodological
                                                                                               The methodological       basis for producing                             The methodological
                                                                      basis for producing                                                      basis for producing
                          Classification: defined education                                    basis for producing      educational                                     basis for producing
                                                                      educational statistics                                                   educational statistics
                          system classifications are based on                                  educational statistics   statistics follows                              educational statistics
                                                                      from raw data                                                            follows most
         Methodological   technical guidelines and manuals                                     does not follow          the basics of                                   from raw data follows
 3.1                                                                  follows                                                                  required
         soundness        Scope: the scope of education statistics                             internationally          internationally                                 internationally
                                                                      internationally                                                          internationally
                          is broader than and not limited to a                                 accepted standards,      accepted                                        accepted standards,
                                                                      accepted standards,                                                      accepted standards,
                          small number of indicators (e.g.,                                    guidelines, or good      standards,                                      guidelines, and good
                                                                      guidelines, and good                                                     guidelines, and good
                          measurements of enrollment, class                                    practices                guidelines, and                                 practices
                                                                      practices                                                                practices
                          size, and completion)                                                                         good practices
                          Basis for recording: data-recording
                          systems follow internationally accepted
                          standards, guidelines, and good
                          practices
                          Source data: available source data
                          provide an adequate basis for
                          compiling statistics                                                                          Source data and        Source data and
                                                                      Source data and
                                                                                                                        statistical            statistical techniques   Source data and
                          Validation of source data: source data      statistical techniques
                                                                                               Source data and          techniques have        follow most required     statistical techniques
                          are consistent with the definition,         are sound and
         Accuracy and                                                                          statistical techniques   basic soundness        elements to be           are sound and
 3.2                      scope, and classification as well as time   reliable, and
         reliability                                                                           lack soundness and       and reliability, but   sound and reliable,      reliable, and statistical
                          of recording, reference periods, and        statistical outputs
                                                                                               reliability              statistical outputs    but statistical          outputs sufficiently
                          valuation of education statistics           sufficiently portray
                                                                                                                        do not portray         outputs do not           portray reality
                          Statistical techniques: statistical         reality
                                                                                                                        reality                portray reality
                          techniques are used to calculate
                          accurate rates and derived indicators




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                           38
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                              Scoring
                                                                         Description of
       Policy levers                     Indicators
                                                                         best practices                  Latent                 Emerging               Established                 Advanced


                           Professionalism: EMIS staff exercise
                           their profession with technical                                                                  Education statistics
                                                                                                                                                    Education statistics
                           independence and without outside                                                                 contained within                                  Education statistics
                                                                                                                                                    contained within the
                           interference that could result in the                                                            the system are                                    contained within the
                                                                                                  Education statistics                              system are mostly
                           violation of the public trust in EMIS        Education statistics                                guided by limited                                 system are guided by
                                                                                                  contained within the                              guided by principles
                           statistics and EMIS itself                   contained within the                                principles of                                     all three principles of
 3.3     Integrity                                                                                system are not                                    of integrity (two of
                                                                        system are guided by                                integrity (one of the                             integrity:
                           Transparency: statistical policies and                                 guided by principles                              the three principles
                                                                        principles of integrity                             three principles of                               professionalism,
                           practices are transparent                                              of integrity                                      of professionalism,
                                                                                                                            professionalism,                                  transparency, and
                           Ethical standards: policies and practices                                                                                transparency, and
                                                                                                                            transparency, and                                 ethical standards
                           in education statistics are guided by                                                                                    ethical standards)
                                                                                                                            ethical standards)
                           ethical standards
                           Periodicity: the production of reports
                           and other outputs from the data                                        The system produces       The system              The system produces
                                                                        The system produces                                                                                   The system produces
                           warehouse occur in accordance with                                     data and statistics       produces some           most data and
         Periodicity and                                                data and statistics                                                                                   all data and statistics
 3.4                       cycles in the education system                                         neither periodically      data and statistics     statistics periodically
         timeliness                                                     periodically in a                                                                                     periodically and in a
                           Timeliness: final statistics and financial                             nor in a timely           periodically and in a   and in a timely
                                                                        timely manner                                                                                         timely manner
                           statistics are both disseminated in a                                  manner                    timely manner           manner
                           timely manner
                                                                        The system is wholly      There are no signs        The system is used      The system is used        The system is wholly
                                                                        utilized by different     that EMIS is utilized     by some education       by most education         utilized by different
                                                                        users for decision        in decision making by     stakeholders, but       stakeholders but is       users for decision
 POLICY AREA 4: UTILIZATION FOR DECISION MAKING
                                                                        making at different       the majority of           not for major           not fully operational     making at different
                                                                        levels of the             education                 policy decision         in governmental           levels of the
                                                                        education system          stakeholders              making                  decision making           education system
                           EMIS stakeholders: EMIS primary              The system is open        The system lacks          The system is open
                                                                                                                                                    The system is open        The system is open to
                           stakeholders are identified and use the      to education              openness to               to some education
                                                                                                                                                    to the majority of        all education
                           system in accordance with the legal          stakeholders in           education                 stakeholders in
                                                                                                                                                    education                 stakeholders in terms
 4.1     Openness          framework                                    terms of their            stakeholders in terms     terms of their
                                                                                                                                                    stakeholders in           of their awareness
                           User awareness: current and potential        awareness and             of their awareness        awareness and
                                                                                                                                                    terms of their            and capacity to utilize
                           EMIS users are aware of EMIS and its         capacity to utilize       and capacity to utilize   capacity to utilize
                                                                                                                                                    awareness and             the system
                           outputs                                      the system                the system                the system




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                                39
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                       Scoring
                                                                       Description of
       Policy levers                     Indicators
                                                                       best practices                Latent              Emerging             Established                 Advanced


                           User capacity: EMIS users have the                                                                              capacity to utilize the
                           skills to interpret, manipulate, and                                                                            system
                           utilize the data produced by the system
                           to ultimately disseminate findings
                           Utilization in evaluation: data produced
                           by EMIS are used to assess the
                           education system
                           Utilization in governance: data
                           produced by EMIS are used for                                                             Data produced by
                           governance purposes                                                                       the system are        Data produced by
                                                                      Data produced by        Data produced by the                                                   Data produced by the
                           Utilization by schools: data produced                                                     used in practice by   the system are used
                                                                      the system are used     system are not used                                                    system are used in
                           by EMIS are used by schools                                                               some education        in practice by the
 4.2     Operational use                                              in practice by the      in practice by                                                         practice by the main
                                                                                                                     stakeholders          majority of
                           Utilization by clients: data produced by   main education          education                                                              education
                                                                                                                                           education
                           EMIS are used by clients (including        stakeholders            stakeholders                                                           stakeholders
                                                                                                                                           stakeholders
                           parents, communities, and other
                           actors)
                           Utilization by government: the system
                           is able to produce summative
                           indicators (derived variables) to
                           monitor education system
                           Understandable data: data are
                           presented in an easily digestible
                           manner
                                                                      Education statistics                                                                           Education statistics
                           Widely disseminated data: education
                                                                      are presented in an                                                                            are presented in an
                           statistics are disseminated beyond the
                                                                      understandable                                                                                 understandable
                           Ministry of Education and/or the
                                                                      manner and are          The system suffers     The system has        The system has            manner and are
                           education statistics–producing agency
 4.3     Accessibility                                                widely disseminated     from serious           major accessibility   minor accessibility       widely disseminated
                           to other EMIS stakeholders
                                                                      using clear platforms   accessibility issues   issues                issues                    using a clear platform
                           Platforms for utilization: platforms are   for utilization,                                                                               for utilization,
                           standardized across EMIS and are           complemented by                                                                                complemented by
                           customizable to user needs                 user support                                                                                   user support
                           User support: assistance is provided to
                           EMIS users upon request to help them
                           access the data



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                      40
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                             SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017


                                                                                                                                     Scoring
                                                                   Description of
       Policy levers                      Indicators
                                                                   best practices                Latent               Emerging             Established               Advanced


                            Dissemination strategy: national                                                                            A dissemination plan
                            governments have an information                                                                             has been
                            dissemination strategy in place                                                                             implemented;
                                                                  Dissemination of                                Dissemination is                              The dissemination of
         Effectiveness in                                                                 Dissemination is                              however, room
                                                                  education statistics                            reasonably                                    education statistics via
 4.4     disseminating                                                                    neither strategic nor                         exists for
                            Dissemination effectiveness:          via EMIS is strategic                           strategic, but                                EMIS is strategic and
         findings                                                                         effective                                     improvement (for
                            dissemination of EMIS statistics is   and effective                                   ineffective                                   effective
                                                                                                                                        full effectiveness in
                            effective                                                                                                   relation to strategic
                                                                                                                                        engagement)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                  41
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017



Appendix C: Structure of the Ministry of Education (2014)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS

                                                                         42
FIJI ǀ EMIS                                                                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2017




                                                                                www.worldbank.org/education/saber




       The Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) initiative
       collects data on the policies and institutions of education systems around
       the world and benchmarks them against practices associated with
       student learning. SABER aims to give all parties with a stake in
       educational results—from students, administrators, teachers, and
       parents to policy makers and business people—an accessible, detailed,
       objective snapshot of how well the policies of their country's education
       system are oriented toward ensuring that all children and youth learn.

       This report focuses specifically on policies in the area of Education
       Management Information Systems.




         This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
         expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
         governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
         boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
         part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS

                                                                                                                              43
