SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS
A Brief for Policy Makers1

More than 1 billion people have lifted themselves out of poverty in the past
15 years, but climate and disaster risks threaten these achievements. Global                                    Climate and disaster
asset losses’ from disasters are now reaching an average of more than US$300                                    risks are threatening
billion a year. A recent World Bank report finds that the impacts of disasters on                               achievements in poverty
well-being are equivalent to a US$520 billion drop in consumption (60 percent                                   reduction
more than the asset losses usually reported) and force some 26 million
people into poverty every year (Hallegatte et al., 2017). Moreover, countries
face increasingly complex threats that often compound the negative impacts                                                    $520 bn
                                                                                                                        losses accounting for
of disaster and climate shocks, ranging from migration caused by fragility and
                                                                                                                         impact on wellbeing
conflict situations, to the risk of pandemics. For instance, it is estimated that
93 percent of people facing extreme poverty today are living in countries that
are politically fragile or environmentally vulnerable, and in many cases both.
The United Nations’ humanitarian appeal for 2017, for example, stands at a
record US$22.2 billion, to help almost 93 million people affected by conflicts                                                $300 bn
                                                                                                                             asset losses
and natural disasters.

Climate change exacerbates some of these risks by increasing the frequency
and intensity of extreme weather events. In addition, economic growth and
rapid urbanization increase exposure. Building resilience is therefore crucial
to safeguard poverty reduction efforts and promote sustainable and inclusive
development—particularly for the poor and vulnerable, who are the least able to
cope with and adapt to increasing risks.


This briefing note was prepared by the World Bank. It is based on the technical report entitled Sovereign Climate and Disaster Risk Pooling prepared by the
World Bank Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program (DRFIP), drawing on inputs from internationally renowned experts, at the request of the Federal
Ministry for Cooperation and Development of Germany (BMZ) to inform discussions on disaster risk financing and pooling with the G20 member countries.
Current post-disaster response financing, including donor assistance and commercial
insurance, covers only a fraction of disaster losses, creating a protection gap. On
average only about 30 percent of catastrophe losses have been covered by insurance
over the past 10 years. That means that about 70 percent of catastrophe losses           Financial protection helps
have been borne directly by individuals, firms and governments (SwissRe, 2016).          ensure predictable and
Donor assistance is struggling to keep up with growing needs, with an estimated          timely response, reducing
funding gap for humanitarian action of US$15 billion (UN, 2016).                         the costs and impacts of
                                                                                         disasters
FINANCIAL PROTECTION: PLANNING AHEAD FOR
IMPROVED RISK MANAGEMENT
A growing number of governments are moving toward a proactive (and more cost-
effective) approach to financial planning to protect national budgets as well as the
lives and livelihoods of their citizens from the impacts of disasters. This approach
complements other elements of a comprehensive disaster risk management strategy,
ranging from investments in risk reduction, to improved preparedness and resilient
recovery and reconstruction.

Financial protection involves planning ahead to better manage the cost of disasters,
ensure predictable and timely access to much needed resources, and ultimately
mitigate long-term fiscal impacts. By combining various financial instruments—such
as contingency funds, contingent loans and grants, and risk transfer solutions—
financial protection allows governments to manage the full range of disaster impacts.
Different instruments help address different risks (ranging from recurrent to more
rare events) and different funding needs (ranging from short-term emergency relief to
recovery and reconstruction).




A COMPREHENSIVE DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK

                                                                      Financial protection is an integral part of a
    PILLAR 1                      Risk assessment and
                                                                      comprehensive disaster risk management
    RISK IDENTIFICATION           risk communication
                                                                      framework.

                                  Structural and nonstructural
    PILLAR 2                                                          To sustainably reduce the impact of disasters
                                  measures—infrastructure,
    RISK REDUCTION                land-use planning, regulations      on people, livelihoods and national budgets
                                                                      governments should always consider ways to
    PILLAR 3                                                          identify and reduce the underlying drivers of risk.
                                  Early warning systems,
    PREPAREDNESS                  contingency planning                Financial protection complements risk reduction
                                                                      by helping governments address risks that cannot
                                                                      be mitigated (residual risks). It helps shift the
    PILLAR 4                      Assessing and reducing
                                  contingent liabilities, financial   paradigm of risk management towards a more
    FINANCIAL PROTECTION          planning for disaster response      proactive approach focused on planning financial
                                                                      responses in advance, rather than relying on fund-
    PILLAR 5                      Resilient recovery and              raising efforts after disasters.
    RESILIENT RECOVERY            reconstruction policies




2                                                                              SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS
Rapid financing allows for                      In the immediate aftermath of a disaster, being able to rapidly access financial
early action that reduces                       resources is crucial to save lives and livelihoods. Quick-disbursing financial protection
humanitarian impacts                            instruments, such as contingent credit and insurance, can reduce humanitarian
                                                impacts and save money by enabling rapid crisis response and relief efforts. In
                                                Ethiopia, for example, every US$1 secured ahead of time for early drought response
$1 SPENT FOR EARLY                              can save up to US$5 in future costs. (Wiseman and Hess 2007)

DISASTER RESPONSE
                                                Catastrophe risk pools are emerging as a promising vehicle to help countries access
SAVES UP TO                                     quick liquidity for disaster response. They allow countries to (i) pool risks in a diversified


$5                                              portfolio; (ii) retain some risk through joint reserves/capital; and (iii) transfer excess
                                                risk to the reinsurance and capital markets. By putting a price tag on risk, risk pools
                                                increase the value of risk information and create incentives to invest in risk reduction.
IN FUTURE COSTS




A TIMELINE OF POST-DISASTER FINANCING NEEDS

                            Relief   Recovery                                         Reconstruction
Resource Requirements ($)




                                                                       Time


Different levels of post-disaster funds need to be available at the appropriate time following a disaster to cover relief,
response, and reconstruction efforts. In the aftermath of a disaster, the government does not require money for
the entire reconstruction program at once, while immediate liquidity is crucial to support relief and early recovery
operations. Likewise, businesses and households need to have access to timely financing to ensure business
continuity and avoid negative coping strategies.

Risk pools, as vehicles for quick-disbursing risk transfer solutions, play an important role in enabling rapid response.



SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS                                                                                                            3
SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS AROUND                                                      Sovereign catastrophe
THE WORLD                                                                                    risk pools help access
                                                                                             financial solutions for
Over the past 10 years, 26 countries in three regions—Africa, the Pacific, and the
                                                                                             rapid response financing
Caribbean and Central America—have joined sovereign catastrophe risk pools. They
have purchased parametric catastrophe risk insurance for an aggregate coverage of
US$870 million and an aggregate premium volume of US$56.6 million (2016/17),
backed by more than 30 reinsurance companies. The three pools have so far made               3 POOLS
payouts for a total of just over US$105 million.
                                                                                             26 COUNTRIES
Parametric insurance solutions allow for rapid payouts in the event of a disaster,
providing liquidity within a couple of weeks and facilitating rapid response. For example,   $57M
having purchased insurance through the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and
                                                                                             ANNUAL PREMIUM
Financing Initiative (PCRAFI), the government of Vanuatu received a payout of almost
US$2 million just seven days after Tropical Cyclone Pam made landfall in March
2015. This amount was eight times the government’s emergency provision and was
                                                                                             $870M
critical for funding a number of urgent priorities, including flying nurses to the most      ANNUAL COVERAGE
affected areas and providing lifesaving assistance.
                                                                                             $105M
There are opportunities to expand risk pools to new countries and regions. Given             INSURANCE PAYOUTS
their high exposure to floods, cyclones, earthquakes, and droughts, a number of
Asian countries are individually using disaster risk financing mechanisms, and a
possible sovereign catastrophe risk pool for Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic
                                                                                             30+ INTERNATIONAL
Republic, and Myanmar is currently being discussed. In addition, India, Pakistan,            REINSURERS
and the Philippines are exploring subnational structures for disaster risk financing.
Subnational approaches can be effective solutions in larger countries where local
government entities (such as provinces or states) have substantial power and
responsibility in the financial response to disasters. For example, Mexico’s disaster
fund, which acts as a national-level risk pool, provides indemnity coverage, where           Untapped opportunities,
payouts are based on actual losses on public infrastructure.                                 especially in Asia…

But differences in risk profiles as well as in economic and geographical size have so far
hampered the establishment of an Asian regional sovereign risk pool. In Latin America,
however, Chile Colombia, Mexico, and Peru are exploring a multicountry (parametric)
catastrophe bond against earthquake risk under the auspices of the Pacific Alliance.

Governments can also take steps to promote domestic catastrophe risk pools to
transfer disaster risks from households and small and medium enterprises to the              … and at the national
private insurance and reinsurance markets (the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool            level
is an example). The role of the government is essential in such endeavors, which
must align incentives and generate a sustainable demand for catastrophe risk
insurance, especially where insurance literacy and penetration are low.




4                                                                                   SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS
EXISTING SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS




                          CCRIF
                                                                                                                       PCRAFI



Anguilla    Dominica       St. Kitts                                             ARC               Marshall Islands

                           & Nevis

                                                                                                   Samoa

Antigua     Grenada        Saint Lucia                            Burkina Faso   Niger
& Barbuda
                                                                                                   Tonga

                                                                  Mali           Senegal
Barbados    Haiti          Trinidad &
                           Tobago                                                                  Cook Islands

                                                                  Mauritania     The Gambia
Belize      Jamaica        Turks &                                                                 Vanuatu
                           Caicos Islands



Cayman      St. Vincent    Nicaragua
Islands     & the
            Grenadines




                                         An enabling legal and regulatory framework is key to the success of any pool
                                         structure. This is especially true when the government is the policyholder, as in
                                         sovereign risk pools, and premium payments have to be included in the national
                                         budget. In Indonesia, for example, the government had to pass a new regulation to
                                         explicitly allow the Ministry of Finance to purchase insurance. In countries where
                                         there is no legal and institutional framework regulating sovereign insurance, the
                                         resulting uncertainty complicates the allocation of responsibility among government
                                         entities and leaves the insurance program vulnerable to political changes.




SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS                                                                                          5
10 LESSONS FOR POLICY MAKERS
TO BRING CATASTROPHE RISK
POOLS TO SCALE
A decade of experience has shown that political commitment, sound operational
design, and financial sustainability are at the foundation of successful risk pools.
When those foundations are in place, risk pools can in turn generate positive
externalities that further enhance their impact, by fostering political, operational, and
financial effectiveness. To build on this experience and bring catastrophe risk pools
to scale, policy makers should keep in mind the following 10 lessons.



POLITICAL COMMITMENT IS BOTH A PRECONDITION
FOR SUCCESSFUL CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS AND
A BY-PRODUCT OF COLLABORATION

1.       POOLS CAN SUCCEED ONLY WITH STRONG POLITICAL
         COMMITMENT AT THE NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL LEVEL                                 …can succeed only
                                                                                            with strong political
Sovereign catastrophe risk pools require strong political momentum and coordination         commitment at
among participating countries, especially during the design and preparation stage.          the national and
A strong regional organization is often critical to facilitate the political and policy     international level
coordination needed between participating governments.



2.       POOLS OFTEN RELY ON STRONG DONOR SUPPORT

Humanitarian and development donors have a role to play in creating incentives
for investments in pre-agreed risk management and risk financing solutions (both
at the country level and within donor organizations), and in reducing reliance on           …often rely on strong
unpredictable and uncertain post-disaster humanitarian assistance. Concessional             donor support
financing from donors or multilaterals may be necessary to create the enabling
environment and incentives for systematic adoption of disaster risk finance and
insurance solutions, including catastrophe risk pools.



3.       POOLS CAN STRENGTHEN DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND
         CRISIS RESPONSE

Catastrophe risk pools are part of a comprehensive approach to disaster risk
management and play a key role in efforts to strengthen preparedness and crisis
response.
                                                                                            …strengthen disaster
Not all disasters and crises can be prevented. Governments need to be ready to              preparedness and crisis
manage the impacts of such residual risks through pre-agreed post-disaster plans,           response
backed by pre-planned financing.

The process of developing such post-disaster actions plans and identifying related
costs can also generate risk information and create incentives to step up investments
in prevention and adaptation to reduce risks in the first place.



6                                                                                  SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS
 COORDINATED PLAN FOR POST-DISASTER ACTION AGREED IN ADVANCE

 FAST, EVIDENCE-BASED DECISION-MAKING PROCESS

 PRE-PLANNED FINANCING TO ENSURE PLAN CAN BE IMPLEMENTED

 •	 Ensures funds are available quickly when – and only when – they are required
 •	 Binds partners to pre-agreed objectives, decision processes, and implementation
    modalities
 •	 Greater discipline, transparency, and predictability in post-disaster spending
 •	 Ensures rapid mobilization of funds, reducing humanitarian costs and potentially
    saving money




                            4.      POOLS CAN FOSTER POLICY DIALOGUE ON RISK MANAGEMENT
                                    AND RISK OWNERSHIP

                            In addition to offering financial protection, catastrophe risk pools can facilitate
                            regional policy dialogue and improved collaboration between participating countries
                            and donors on risk reduction and risk management. They offer a vehicle to anchor
…foster policy dialogue     (i) financial planning (with participation in a risk pool an integral part of a more
on risk management and      comprehensive disaster risk financing strategy that brings together various financial
risk ownership              instruments); (ii) contingency planning; (iii) ownership of and collaboration on the
                            climate risk management agenda between and within countries; and (iv) risk-informed
                            investments in risk reduction through the pricing of climate and disaster risks.

                            In addition, pools help clarify who “owns” the risk and encourage countries to
                            plan for disaster response. Many developing countries still rely on appeals-based
                            mechanisms and seek donor assistance to help fund relief and response activities
                            following a shock. Although it may come at no cost to the recipient country, such aid
                            is unpredictable and uncertain, and often takes time to materialize.



                            SOUND OPERATIONAL DESIGN MAXIMIZES IMPACT
                            AND GENERATES PUBLIC GOODS


                            5.      POOLS CAN MAXIMIZE IMPACT BY DEVELOPING PRE-AGREED
                                    DISASTER RESPONSE PLANS
…maximize impact by
developing pre-agreed       Pre-agreed disaster response plans ensure a timely, transparent and efficient use
disaster response plans     of funds in the aftermath of a disaster, thereby maximizing the impact of rapid cash
                            injections. Linking financial instruments, including risk pools, to pre-agreed post-
                            disaster programs, can help ensure that funds are efficiently channeled to support
                            targeted post-disaster responses. For example, payouts from risk pools could
                            potentially be used to scale up support from existing national safety net programs




SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS                                                                               7
to poor and vulnerable household in the event of a disaster. Likewise, pre-agreed
response plans can help identify critical infrastructure to prioritize in the aftermath of
a disaster. However, response plans should always allow for some flexibility to ensure
they can address unexpected expenses.

By engaging a wide range of stakeholders, including civil society members, the
process of developing such plans can also contribute to raising awareness of the
benefits offered by risk reduction and financial protection.



6.       POOLS CAN CREATE PUBLIC GOODS

The creation of risk pools has driven the development of catastrophe risk models and
other public goods (such as improved insurance literacy, institutional capacity, and
disaster risk data and modeling capacity) that have proved to be valuable in multiple
areas. For example, the Pacific Risk Information System (a platform that includes
an exposure database of over 4 million assets in the region) and its associated
                                                                                             …create public goods
catastrophe risk model have been used by domestic insurers and brokers to inform
their underwriting and pricing decisions. In Fiji, the model was used to inform the
provision of catastrophe risk insurance for hotels and resorts. The model has also
been used to explore the feasibility of crop insurance in some Pacific islands. Another
example is offered by Africa RiskView, the in-house modeling platform of African Risk
Capacity (ARC), which estimates drought impacts in terms of population affected and
response costs. This information can be used by member states as an early warning
tool and to inform financial planning.



FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY ALLOWS
CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS TO PROVIDE ACCESS
TO COST-EFFECTIVE INSURANCE AS PART OF A
STRATEGIC APPROACH TO FINANCIAL PROTECTION


7.      POOLS CAN OFFER COST-EFFECTIVE INSURANCE SOLUTIONS

Pools can make risk transfer more cost-effective by helping to (i) diversify risk across
                                                                                             …offer cost-effective
multiple countries with different risk profiles; (ii) establish joint reserves to self-
                                                                                             insurance solutions
insure a part of the risk managed by the pool; (iii) facilitate access to international
reinsurance and capital markets; (iv) share operational costs, such as program
development and day-to-day back office operations; and (v) build up a better
foundation of risk information.

By helping countries develop standard products based on their respective needs, and
structuring a portfolio of diversified country risks, risk pools offer larger transaction
sizes that are more attractive to global reinsurance and capital markets.

In addition, risk pools can reduce premiums by reducing the cost of capital, operating
costs, and the cost of risk information. Pools cannot reduce the underlying climate
and disaster risks countries face. But they can create incentives for risk reduction
measures by putting a price on risk.




8                                                                                   SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS
 CATASTROPHE RISK INSURANCE PREMIUM DECOMPOSITION
WITHOUT risk pooling
WEAK risk information



       COST OF INFORMATION                               Standardized                              AFTER risk pooling
                                                         information systems                       IMPROVED risk information


                                                                                                         COST OF INFORMATION
            COST OF CAPITAL
              (reserves and cost of
                  risk transfer)                         Diversified portfolio structure
                                                         Joint reserves retain first losses                   COST OF CAPITAL
                                                                                                                 (reserves and cost of
                                                                                                                     risk transfer)


                                                         Economies of
           OPERATING COSTS                               scale benefits
                                                                                                             OPERATING COSTS


                                                                  Underlying risk
     ANNUAL EXPECTED LOSS                                          is unchanged                         ANNUAL EXPECTED LOSS


Note: The size of the boxes is not meant to be proportional to each component’s actual contribution to the insurance premium.




                                               8.         POOLS ARE PART OF A COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL
                                                          PROTECTION STRATEGY

…are part of a                                 The parametric insurance products offered by risk pools provide rapid (but limited)
comprehensive financial                        liquidity in the immediate aftermath of infrequent and severe disasters. Other financial
protection strategy                            instruments, such as contingency funds and contingent loans, can be used to finance
                                               recovery and reconstruction efforts, as well as the cost of more frequent disasters.

                                               Governments can strengthen financial resilience by combining financial instruments
                                               that address different needs and have different cost implications. For example,
                                               insurance may provide cost-effective cover against severe events, while budget
                                               reserves or contingent credits may be more cost-effective for addressing more
                                               frequent and less severe events. Since climate change may over time affect a
                                               country’s risk profile by potentially increasing the frequency and intensity of such
                                               hazards, the combination of financial instruments used to address disaster impacts
                                               will also need to evolve to account for changes in risk and other considerations
                                               beyond pure financial aspects.




SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS                                                                                                         9
A LAYERED APPROACH TO FINANCIAL PROTECTION

Low frequency/                                                                                                         Not all instruments



                  MARKET-BASED
                  INSTRUMENTS
High severity                           Sovereign Risk Transfer                                                        serve the same purpose
                                    • Insurance (including through risk pools)                                         and governments
                                    • Derivatives




                                                                                       (unpredictable and uncertain)
                                                                                                                       can take a layered
                                    • Cat bonds




                                                                                          International Assistance
                                                                                                                       approach to financial
                                                                                                                       protection by combining
                                                                                                                       instruments with different
                                           Contingent Credits
                  FINANCING




                                   Financial instruments that provide access to                                        characteristics.
                                 liquidity immediately after an exogenous shock
                                                                                                                       Such risk layering ensures
                                                                                                                       that cheaper sources
                  INSTRUMENTS




                                                                                                                       of money are used first,
                   BUDGETARY




                                          Budget Reserves/                                                             with the most expensive
High frequency/                          Budget Reallocations                                                          instruments used only in
Low severity                                                                                                           exceptional circumstances

          HAZARD TYPE




9.
	
         POOLS REQUIRE UP-FRONT PAYMENT OF AN INSURANCE
         PREMIUM, FACILITATING A SHIFT TOWARD PROACTIVE
         RISK MANAGEMENT

Catastrophe risk pools require participating countries to pay up front an insurance                              …require up-front
premium that reflects actual risk exposure in exchange for the insurance coverage,                               payment of an insurance
thereby shifting payment so it takes place in predictable installments before disaster                           premium, facilitating a
strikes. It may be challenging for countries that previously relied on donor support                             shift toward proactive
to start paying for climate and disaster risks with national resources through an                                risk management
insurance premium. However, moving in this direction, even partially, can provide the
right incentives for proactive planning and risk-informed investments in risk reduction.



10.          POOLS CAN BE SUSTAINABLE ONLY WITH MORE FORMAL
             AND PREDICTABLE APPROACHES TO PREMIUM FINANCING

One of the main challenges affecting the sustainability of sovereign catastrophe
risk pools is a lack of certainty about payment of insurance premiums from year
to year. By definition, insurance premiums present an up-front cost, which may not
                                                                                                                 …can be sustainable
produce a financial return in the near (or even medium) term. Governments can face
                                                                                                                 only with more formal
public and political pressure where payments for premiums on high-profile sovereign
                                                                                                                 and predictable
insurance do not yield a payout in the event of a disaster that does not meet the pre-
                                                                                                                 approaches to premium
agreed criteria for a payout. At the country level, allocating budget for the payment
                                                                                                                 financing
of premiums is generally not a permanent part of budgetary processes and the
expenditure is still treated as atypical.

Concessional insurance (through targeted premium subsidies or concessional loans)
can help countries secure premium financing for several years while they progressively
include premiums as a budget item in their national budget. In addition, building the
capacity and awareness of decision makers on the benefits of risk management for
financial and humanitarian resilience can help increase ownership and commitment. 


10                                                                                SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS
                            PROPOSED PRIORITIES
                            FOR G20 ACTION
                            Building on the lessons learned about political commitment, financial sustainability,
                            and operational design of sovereign catastrophe risk pools, the G20 could promote
                            a set of priority action areas designed to reduce the protection gap in vulnerable
                            developing countries. These actions would advance financial protection against
                            climate and disaster risks, in part by encouraging the scale-up of catastrophe risk
                            pools at the supranational, national, and subnational levels. Specifically, the G20
                            could promote activities that support the following priority action areas:

                            •	   Facilitate the adoption of financial protection strategies that include a mix of
                                 financial instruments against disaster and climate risks, such as budgetary
                                 instruments, contingent credit, and catastrophe risk transfer, to increase the
                                 ownership, impact, and cost-efficiency of disaster response financing.

                                 Activities under this action area could include

                                 »»   Technical assistance to support the development of financial protection
                                      strategies, including diagnostic reviews of countries’ approach to financial
                                      protection, and identification of policy options for strengthened financial
                                      resilience
                                 »»   Technical assistance and investments to support the implementation of
                                      national financial protection strategies, including for specific line ministries
                                      or sectors

                            •	   Support the development of pre-agreed disaster response plans backed by
                                 financial protection strategies to help poor and vulnerable households and
                                 protect key lifeline infrastructure. Such plans can help raise awareness of the
                                 benefits of risk reduction and financial protection by engaging a wide range of
                                 stakeholders, including members of civil society.

                                 Activities under this action area could include

                                 »»   Knowledge exchange to learn from experience and consolidate good
                                      practices in disaster response planning
                                 »»   Technical assistance and investments to develop shock-responsive
                                      scalability mechanisms for existing social safety nets to protect the poor
                                      and vulnerable
                                 »»   Technical assistance and investments to identify, prioritize, and protect
                                      critical infrastructure at risk, both ex ante (by mainstreaming disaster risk
                                      reduction in investment planning) and ex post (by developing pre-agreed
                                      financial plans for post-disaster reconstruction).




SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS                                                                                   11
•	   Promote institutional and legal frameworks that enable the implementation
     of financial protection strategies. This includes creating the legal base that
     enables governments to establish disaster risk management funds, pay
     insurance premiums, manage insurance proceeds, and join supranational
     financial entities such as catastrophe risk pools.

     Activities under this action area could include

     »»   Knowledge exchange among countries to learn from experience in public
          financial management of climate and disaster risks
     »»   Technical assistance to incorporate climate and disaster risks into public
          finance frameworks

•	   Develop new concessional financing for catastrophe risk transfer instruments
     to incentivize vulnerable developing countries to develop and adopt sustainable
     financial protection strategies.

     Activities under this action area could include

     »»   Cofinancing of capitalization and operating costs of catastrophe risk pools
     »»   Cofinancing of premiums for insurance solutions (designed to incentivize
          countries to progressively increase their contributions over time)

To achieve the overarching objective of reducing the protection gap in vulnerable
developing countries, and to catalyze action around these priority areas and activities,
the G20 could promote the creation of a Global Partnership for Climate and Disaster
Risk Finance and Insurance Solutions.

The Global Partnership could bring together relevant partners from developing and
developed countries, international organizations, the private sector, and civil society.
To achieve maximum impact, the Global Partnership would leverage the comparative
advantages of all partners and build on the work of existing platforms and initiatives.
In particular, it would leverage the technical expertise and capacity of the private
insurance and reinsurance industry.

The G20 could develop a work program structured around the four priority action
areas identified above to specify how countries would support specific activities.
Such efforts would not only promote financial protection and help close the protection
gap, but would also support the broader disaster and climate resilience agenda.




12                                                                                SOVEREIGN CATASTROPHE RISK POOLS
