The
RISING TIDE
      A New Look at Water and Gender

                         Maitreyi Bordia Das
                             with Gaia Hatzfeldt
About the Water Global Practice
Launched in 2014, the Word Bank Group's Water Global Practice brings
together financing, knowledge, and implementation in one platform.
By combining the Bank's global knowledge with country investments,
this model generates more firepower for transformational solutions to
help countries grow sustainably.

Please visit us at www.worldbank.org/water or follow us on Twitter
@WorldBankWater.
The
RISING TIDE
      A New Look at Water and Gender

                         Maitreyi Bordia Das
                             with Gaia Hatzfeldt
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank

1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433

Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,

interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The

World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,

colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any

judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement

or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of

its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long

as full attribution to this work is given.

Please cite the work as follows: Das, Maitreyi Bordia. 2017. “The Rising Tide: A New Look at Water
and Gender.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank

Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;

e-mail: pubrights​@­worldbank.org.

Cover photo: © David Bokuchava/Shutterstock.

Cover design: Kamila Galeza/Bill Pragluski, Critical Stages, LLC.
 Contents

Foreword	v
Acknowledgments	vii
Abbreviations	ix


Summary	1
Main Messages	                                                        1
Why Water and Gender, and Why Now?	                                   2
What Does This Paper Do and Whom Is It For?	                          3
Assets, Services, Spaces: A Thinking Device	                          4
Methodology and Process	                                              5
Shaping the Tide to Lift More Boats	                                  6


Chapter 1  Introduction	                                              9
What Does This Paper Do and Whom Is It For?	                         11
Assets, Services, Spaces: A Thinking Device	                         12
Methodology and Process 	                                            13
Roadmap of the Paper	                                                14
Note15


Chapter 2  Water as an Asset	                                        17
Jobs from Water: Assets for Employment	                              19
Not Just an Asset: Water as a Liability and Risk	                    22
Notes	25


Chapter 3  Water as a Service	                                       27
Do Men and Women Think of Water-Related Services Differently? 	      27
How Water as a Service Affects Men and Women	                        29
Notes	35


Chapter 4  Water as a Space	                                         37
Notes	42


Chapter 5  A Tide That Lifts More Boats: Moving Toward
Greater Gender Equality	                                             43
Who Drives Change? 	                                                 44
What Kinds of Policies and Programs Can Help in Lifting More Boats
      toward Gender and Social Inclusion?	                           46
Shaping the Tide to Lift More Boats	                                 51
Note55




The Rising Tide                                                       iii
Chapter 6  Conclusion	                                                                     57


Appendix A  Steps for Review for the Study	                                                59


References	61

Boxes
2.1.	 The Gendered Nature of Bangladesh’s Shrimp Industry	                                 20
4.1.	 Sioux Women Have Resisted the Dakota Access Pipeline	                                 41
5.1.	 Brazil: A Municipal Governance Project Provides More Than
     Protection against Floods	                                                            49
5.2.	 Step 1 toward Greater Gender Equality in Water: Asking the Right Questions	          54


Figures
S.1.	 A Thinking Device for Gender and Water	                                                5
1.1.	 A Thinking Device for Gender and Water	                                               13
2.1.	 Males Are More Likely to Die from Drowning	                                           25
3.1.	 Men’s and Women’s Views of the Top Problems Facing the Country
     That the Government Should Address	                                                   28


Tables
3.1.	 Over Two-Fifths of African Respondents Say Their Government Is
     Handling the Water and Sanitation Situation Well	                                     29
3.2.	 Men Cite Water Quality and Women Cite Control and Convenience as
     Reasons for Installing a Private Tube Well	                                           29
3.3.	 Water Supply and Sanitation Services: Illustrative Effects on Females
     across the Lifecycle	                                                                 30
3.4.	 Male Family Members Are More Likely to Defecate in the Open in Northern India	        32
5.1.	 What Can Utilities, the Private Sector, and the State Do to Attract and
     Retain Female Professionals?	                                                         47
5.2.	 Influencing Gender Equality in Water: Snapshot of Actions	                            52




iv                                                                              The Rising Tide
 Foreword

Issues of equity and inclusion are currently center stage on the world’s policy agenda.
Ensuring that nobody is left behind has been a cornerstone of recent global agreements and
commitments, and closing gender gaps is among the most effective ways to make this ambi-
tion a reality. So how do we think about gender gaps in the broad canvas that water offers?
The task, while daunting, is essential if we are to contribute to delivering the Sustainable
Development Goals and the World Bank Group’s commitment to end extreme poverty and
boost shared prosperity.
  The World Bank recently launched an exciting new initiative—the Global Water Security
and Sanitation Partnership (GWSP). Inclusion is one of GWSP’s five priority themes for the
World Bank’s Water Global Practice. That is because water belongs to everyone, yet many
are  excluded from its benefits and often from ownership and control of this critical
resource.  Ensuring that a project is inclusive requires better knowledge on the nature of
water inequality and enhancing the capacity of practitioners and policy makers for better
outcomes. Gender equality rests squarely within this broad commitment.
  The World Bank Group also embarked on a new Gender Strategy, one that commits us to
working toward closing gender gaps through four key objectives: improving human endow-
ments; creating more and better jobs; increasing women’s ownership and control of assets;
and enhancing women’s voice and agency, while engaging men and boys. The new strategy
aims to help countries go the last mile in addressing long-standing challenges, such as
maternal mortality, while tackling emerging challenges, such as aging populations, climate
change, slowing economic growth, and the global jobs crisis.
  In the context of these ambitious commitments, The Rising Tide: A New Look at Water and
Gender reviews a vast body of literature and offers a framework for visualizing water as an
asset, a service, and a space. It shows how water is an arena where gender relations play out
in ways that often mirror inequalities between the sexes. And it examines how norms and
practices related to water often exacerbate ingrained gender and other hierarchies. Informal
institutions, taboos, rituals, and norms all play a part in maintaining these hierarchies and
can even reinforce gender inequality.
  The report’s key message is clear—interventions in water-related domains are important in
and of themselves and for enhancing gender equality more broadly. The report discusses
examples of initiatives that have had intended and unintended consequences for gender
equality, and makes the important point that gender inequality does not always show up
where we might expect. The report underscores the importance of good diagnostics before
designing actions.




The Rising Tide                                                                             v
     Over the past 20 years, a rising tide of social, economic, and technological trends has lifted
many boats, but still too many have been left behind. We believe this report will help those
who want to advance social inclusion in water, close gender gaps, and lift those who all too
often are left behind or left out.


Guangzhe CHEN	                                               Caren Grown
Senior Director, Water Global Practice	                      Senior Director, Gender




vi                                                                                   The Rising Tide
 Acknowledgments

This paper was written by Maitreyi Bordia Das with Gaia Hatzfeldt, under the guidance of
Guangzhe CHEN, Senior Director, Water Global Practice. The formal peer reviewers were
Kiersten Johnson (USAID), Aude-Sophie Rodella, Caroline van den Berg, and Emcet Tas
(World Bank). Written comments also came from Louisa Gosling (WaterAid) and Erwin De
Nys, Anders Jagerskog and Libbet Loughnan of the World Bank. The team is grateful for
their advice and comments.
  Valuable inputs early in the process or through discussions on successive drafts were
received from World Bank colleagues Luis Andres, Christian Borja-Vega, Claire Chase,
Tamoya Christie, Benedicte De La Briere, Caren Grown, Jing Guo, Sabrina Haque, Ede Ijjasz-
Vasquez, Soumya Kapoor-Mehta, Toyoko Kodama, Aphichoke Kotikula, Craig Kullmann,
Nishtha Mehta, Kristina Mikulova, Rosemary Rop, Vivek Srivastava, Chris Walsh and Martha
Chen (WIEGO).
  Esha Chatterjee and Zakia Nouri provided inputs to the larger review of the literature.
Kamila Galeza conceptualized the graphics and designed the cover, in addition to providing
valuable comments on various drafts. Alona Nesterova provided logistical assistance.
Finally, Isabel Hagbrink and Martin Hall gave valuable advice on communications and
Erin Barrett provided publications assistance.




The Rising Tide                                                                         vii
 Abbreviations

ADB	              Asian Development Bank
AWWEE	            Association of Women in Water, Energy and Environment
GP	               Global Practice
GWSP	             Global Water Security & Sanitation Partnership
ICT	              information and communications technology
ILO	              International Labor Organization
IWA	              International Water Association
KP	               Khal Panchayats
MGNREGA	          Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
MHM	              menstrual hygiene management
PWWA	             Pacific Water and Wastewater Association
SDG	              Sustainable Development Goal
SEWA	             Self-Employed Women’s Association
STEM	             science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
UN	               United Nations
USAID	            United States Agency for International Development
WASH	             water supply, sanitation and hygiene
WHO	              World Health Organization
WIEGO	            Women in Informal Employment Globalizing and Organizing
WAAW	             Working to Advance STEM Education for African Women




The Rising Tide                                                             ix
 Summary

      Main Messages
      1.	 Water can be thought of as an asset, a service, and a space. It has distinct eco-
         nomic, as well as noneconomic and nonmonetary values. In many cases, the
         latter values are spiritual or social and the underlying norms and practices
         that play out are often deeply gendered.

      2.	Water is an arena where gender relations play out in ways that often mirror
         inequalities between the sexes. For instance, women’s lower access to land is
         mirrored in their lower access to water-related natural resource assets.

      3.	Gender inequality in water, as elsewhere, reflects complexities that are not eas-
         ily predicted. For example, not all women are disadvantaged, nor all men privi-
         leged. People have multiple identities based, among other things, on their
         ethnicity, race, caste, religion, socioeconomic status, location, disability status,
         and sexual orientation. The intersection of identities creates unique situations
         that require specific solutions.

      4.	Norms and practices related to water often exacerbate ingrained gender and
               hierarchies. Informal institutions, taboos, rituals, and norms all play a part
         other ­
         in cementing the status quo. Therefore, water often reflects, and even reinforces,
         gender inequality.

      5.	The nonmonetary, noneconomic values of water are important for policy and
         practice. That is because they influence the behavior of individuals and
         ­
                 particularly their response to water-related reforms or interventions.
         groups, ­

      6.	Interventions that balance gender relations in water-related domains can have
         a strong influence in furthering gender equality more broadly.

      7.	Policies and programs can influence change. They are particularly effective
         when they improve the ability, opportunity, and dignity of those likely to be
         left out.




Water encompasses every aspect of life, and since individuals have gender identities, the
relationship between water and gender is salient to progress on water security and gender
equality more broadly. Water is so intricately linked with social, economic, spiritual, and
cultural systems that it becomes a theater for the play of social and gender relations.
  The relationship between water and gender plays out in at least four critical ways.
  First, the relationship between water and gender mirrors gender inequalities in various
realms. These include, among others, ownership and control over assets, employment,




The Rising Tide                                                                                 1
wages, household division of labor, exposure to and management of risk, access to services,
and decision making, all of which are often mirrored in water-related domains.
    Second, water has unique noneconomic and nonmonetary values, such as in the spiritual and
social realms, with underlying norms and practices that are often deeply gendered. Why does
this matter for policy and practice? It is important because such values have a bearing on the
behavior of individuals and groups, especially their responses to water-related reforms or inter-
ventions, since belief systems often mediate human actions. For instance, people may actively
boycott or passively reject a policy reform if it goes against their belief system.
    Third, noneconomic, nonmonetary values of water are important not only because they
may impede or enable behavior change, but also because they are often active instruments
to solidify hierarchies and the status quo, such as through taboos, rituals, and norms. These
affect men and women differently.
    Fourth, the relationship between water and gender presents an opportunity, since water in
many ways mirrors and even reinforces gender inequality. Therefore, it follows that inter-
ventions that equalize gender relations in water-related domains also influence gender
equality overall. This makes the relationship between water and gender of interest to profes-
sionals working in water-related domains, and to those interested in social inclusion and
gender equality more generally. Since water spills over to many different domains, interven-
tions toward greater gender equality in water transcend water-related “sectors” and need to
be embedded in other “sectors” as well, such as in agriculture, health, education, and infor-
mation and communications technology, to name a few.


Why Water and Gender, and Why Now?
This is an opportune moment to reflect on the deep association between water and gender,
because of large-scale shifts in global trends and patterns. Social and economic changes
that  would have been impossible to foresee even 20 years ago, globally and within most
countries, seem to be unfolding right before our eyes. Poverty has declined; households
have more assets than ever before; educational attainment has risen for males and females;
the demographic transition is firmly in place (even while population is declining in some
countries); and infrastructure-based services have improved across the board, including in
water supply and sanitation. Women’s status has advanced almost everywhere; more
women are visible in public places; and there is greater awareness of different types of
inequality and more spaces to discuss them. A new formulation of gender has taken root in
many countries—away from the male-female binary, and broader than the more dated heter-
onormative formulation. The advent of social media has transformed modes of communica-
tion and new hopes and fears abound. This is a rising tide.
    The proverbial tide has lifted many boats, but has left others behind. Individuals and
groups who belong to certain ethnicities, religions, tribes, castes, races, disability statuses,
locations, or sexual minorities have not been lifted by the rising tide. They have lower
access to assets, such as land, water, and housing, and to services like education, health,




2                                                                                     The Rising Tide
and childcare, as well as water supply and sanitation, waterways, and other transport.
They fare worse in the labor and credit markets and have lower access to physical, politi-
cal, and social spaces. They are disproportionately affected by poor water governance
and scarcity. Each of these has implications for water-related domains on the one hand
and social inclusion on the other, with gender equality being an important aspect of the
progress toward social inclusion.
  Given the shifts in global trends, there is increasing recognition about the importance of
social inclusion more generally and the role of water in achieving it. The World Bank Group’s
Water Global Practice (GP) has made three important commitments over the past few years:

•	 Contributing to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

•	 A new Gender Strategy (2016–23)

•	 The new Global Water Security and Sanitation Partnership (GWSP).

  The framing in this paper is in keeping with Goal 6 of the SDGs, which covers water in
broad terms. The framework is also aligned with Goal 5 on gender equality. Moreover, its
underlying principle of social inclusion is squarely in keeping with the tenets of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Each of these global commitments underscores the impor-
tance of “leaving no one behind”—the rallying cry of Agenda 2030—which acknowledges
exclusion based on gender as an important part.
  The World Bank’s Gender Strategy announced in 2015 has raised the bar for deepening
gender equality in World Bank Group operations. This paper is part of the Water GP’s com-
mitment to further deepen its work on gender.
  Finally, the new multi-donor trust fund, the GWSP, commits the Water GP to five priority
themes. The theme of “inclusion” reflects a renewed commitment to address gender issues.
GWSP aims to do this by furthering knowledge, deepening capacity, and making the
World Bank’s water portfolio more attuned toward social inclusion and gender.



What Does This Paper Do and Whom Is It For?
This paper adapts the framework for social inclusion developed by World Bank (2013) to
build a “thinking device” to help visualize the relationship between water and gender. The
device and this paper build on a small but solid body of literature that conceptualizes vari-
ous aspects of the relationship between water and gender. It views water in all its forms and
manifestations. Although daunting, it is essential for understanding the interplay between
gender and water in its complexity and nuance. To our knowledge, this is one of the very few
analyses that takes such a broad view of water and makes the connection to gender inequality.
The intended audience for the paper comprises academics, policy makers, development
practitioners, and private sector actors, to enable them to think about the complex and
distinct ways in which water and gender interface with each other. The paper is expected to
assist them in thinking about the design of policies and programs while keeping the nuance




The Rising Tide                                                                               3
and evidence in mind. We also hope it is useful for engaged citizens looking to learn more
about these issues.
    It is likely that the ambition of the paper will raise legitimate expectations—that it will pro-
vide “answers” to questions about what should be done for greater gender equality and how.
The main aim of the paper is to enable broad and integrated thinking about water and gender.
In doing so, it frames questions, challenges assumptions, and presents evidence. Indeed,
one of its overarching messages is that to get the right answers, we first need to ask the right
questions. The paper also reflects on how change toward gender equality can take place,
who can drive it, and how. The conclusion indeed provides some pointers about where
policy and programming can focus, but this is not a “how-to” piece. It is preceded by a series
of “operationally relevant” resources and toolkits intended for World Bank teams to do a
better job of integrating gender into their projects.


Assets, Services, Spaces: A Thinking Device
The thinking device in this paper sees water as manifesting in three ways—as an asset, a
service, and a space—with each manifestation having gendered connotations. Assets arising
from water become productive through infrastructure that processes natural resources or
transports water, labor that renders assets productive, and technology that aids both. In
that, assets are interlinked with employment. However, water can also be a risk when it is
unexpectedly abundant or scarce, such as during floods or droughts. It can thus be thought
of as a liability that has different implications for males and females. Climate change exac-
erbates these risks. The idea of services is slightly more straightforward. Water-related ser-
vices comprise water supply, sanitation, and hygiene and include irrigation, waterways, and
information and technology. In contrast, the idea of spaces is more complex to compre-
hend. But it is this idea that brings out the physical and esoteric dimensions of water. That
is because although water certainly occupies physical space, it also carries cultural, social,
political, and religious significance. Therefore, the idea of spaces is at once real and sym-
bolic. Perhaps the most helpful use of the construct of “space” is to highlight the intangible
aspects of water—that it is also rooted in belief systems that often dictate human behaviors.
The paper also highlights change in behavior, which frequently lies at the heart of reforms
related to water, and often depends on cognizance of the nonmonetary, noneconomic,
esoteric values of water.
    As figure S.1. shows, assets, services, and spaces are interrelated. Sometimes the same ele-
ment can be an asset and a service and have implications for spaces. Take the example of
technology. The infrastructure that supplies technology and the human capital that makes it
productive are assets. Yet, technology is also a service when it interfaces directly with
citizens. Further, in empowering individuals and freeing up their time, technology is linked
to space. The assertion of rights arising from water may involve water bodies as assets, but
may also constitute the assertion of political space. Finally, ownership and control of




4                                                                                     The Rising Tide
FIGURE S.1.    A Thinking Device for Gender and Water                      water-related assets confer status and power to individuals
                                                                           and groups. This then enables them to demand and secure
                                                                           services and spaces.

      HOW DO WE
                                                                            The paper uses the metaphor of a rising tide to highlight
      THINK ABOUT                                                          both opportunity and the danger that some boats may be
     THE GENDERED                                                          left behind. It asks: how can the tide lift more boats? And
       NATURE OF
        WATER?
                                                                           for whom? World Bank (2013) argues that societies can
                                                Natural resource
                                                                           realize social inclusion by improving the “ability, opportu-
                                                Infrastructure
                                                Jobs emanating from        nity and dignity of individuals and groups who are disad-
                                                water
                                     Asset                                 vantaged on the basis of their identity.” It is clear that not
                                                Risk/Liability
                                                                           all women are equally disadvantaged, nor all men equally
            Water supply
            Sanitation                                                     privileged. Age, race, ethnicity, religion, location, socio-
                                                         Political space
            Transport
                           Service           Space       Physical space    economic status, and occupation all determine advantage
            Irrigation
                                                         Cultural space
            Information                                                    and disadvantage. Moreover, every individual has multi-
                                                         Religious space
            Technology
                                                                           ple identities. Thus, an indigenous woman who is wid-
Source: Authors.                                                           owed and has a disability is likely to be far more
                                       disadvantaged than a rich widow in an urban setting. However, the latter is likely to have
                                       lower voice and status than a man from the same income decile living in the same area
                                       and heading a household. In other words, context matters a great deal and exclusion is
                                       relative. It is the intersection of multiple identities that intensifies disadvantage, often
                                       referred to in the literature on social exclusion as “intersectionality.” Further, the con-
                                       struct of gender is not shorthand for women, and the interplay of gender and water does
                                       not mean that we need to address only female vulnerability.


                                       Methodology and Process
                                       One of the contributions of this paper is that it is firmly anchored in the literature on water
                                       and gender. It draws from a broad-based review, conducted in several stages. In addition,
                                       discussions on gender and water in various social media and online platforms were followed
                                       to ground the paper in the contemporary discourse on the subject. The review of the litera-
                                       ture was supplemented with a series of consultations and discussions with a wide range of
                                       actors. They included World Bank staff, development partners, government counterparts
                                       from World Bank projects, civil society partners, and researchers.
                                         Three themes dominate the vast literature on water and gender. First, analyses of barriers
                                       to water supply and sanitation are preponderant in the literature on services. Although these
                                       studies are often strong in data and methods, they usually lack a sound theoretical under-
                                       pinning that would explain their gendered results. Regardless, when we use relevant results
                                       from these studies, and place them within the schema that this paper has developed,
                                       they acquire an added salience. The second strand of the empirical literature is on water and
                                       agriculture. This strand is empirically robust and theoretically grounded in the feminist




                                       The Rising Tide                                                                                 5
and other traditions. The third strand focuses on collective action to secure water rights.
It encompasses issues of participation, voice and agency, and decision making.
    In terms of disciplinary perspectives, the literature on gender and water comes mainly
from economics, anthropology, and geography. Feminist perspectives have made a strong
contribution to much of the literature. Although many of the feminist contributions tend to
be primarily theoretical and often radical in nature, several are also empirically grounded.
In development policy focus, the dominant fields are agriculture, land, and health. A strand
of the literature that focuses on rainfall shocks comes from a social protection perspective,
and new literature focuses on the impact of poor water supply and sanitation on education
outcomes. Much of the empirical literature comes from South Asia (mainly Bangladesh,
India, and Nepal), Africa, and the United States. Consequently, and because innovations in
these countries are better documented, admittedly in English, this paper also contains a pre-
ponderance of evidence from South Asia and Africa. There is a strong body of feminist liter-
ature on social movements and collective action in Latin America, but, perhaps due to the
progress in coverage of water and sanitation services and the declining importance of agri-
culture, much of the literature on gender and water from Latin America is dated. Finally,
there is a marked shortage of robust impact evaluations across the board, although there are
many case studies documenting process and change. We use these case studies rather spar-
ingly, since most appear to lack a solid methodology.


Shaping the Tide to Lift More Boats
Just as many facets of “water writ large” reinforce gender inequality, it follows that water
is a potent instrument to advance gender equality. The tide of progress has lifted many
boats. How can we ensure that it lifts many more? How do we help policy and practice in
thinking about what could work? As we emphasize the role of water in making a dent in
gender inequality more broadly, project personnel may ask the following. “We are
extending coverage to an entire area. Should that not lead to benefits across the board?
Why emphasize gender inequality here?” Or, “our program deals with water supply.
What does gender or social exclusion have to do with it?” These are important questions
to address.
    It also deserves underscoring that an area-based approach or indeed a household-based
approach does not ensure that all members can or do participate. This is because there are
significant inequalities in intra-community and intra-household dynamics that often impede
the ability, opportunity, and dignity of those who may need the intervention the most. And
interventions that focus on just one domain, such as better delivery of water supply, without
attention to power relations and inequality, may not reach historically excluded groups, of
which women may be one. Deficits in power and status arising from lack of assets in the form
of land, boats, or tractors may also make those groups less likely to assert their rights on a
new water supply project. In short, not just the design but the delivery of policies and




6                                                                               The Rising Tide
programs matters for gender equality. The paper therefore highlights ways in which progress
can be made in advancing gender equality in water-related domains, by following an inte-
grated approach.
  The Rising Tide: A New Look at Water and Gender is at once a contribution to the world of
ideas and a reflection on the path to action. Using the metaphor of a rising tide that may leave
some boats behind, the paper is forward looking and asks: how can the tide lift more boats?
It asks practitioners to start with the right diagnostic of the problem they intend to solve,
and emphasizes that what policies do is as important as how they do it. Finally, it points out
that interventions that enhance gender equality in water-related domains need to go beyond
water-related “sectors” or ministries. Since water affects every aspect of life, the policies
and programs need to be grounded in many and not just a few sectors or areas.




The Rising Tide                                                                               7
            © Flore de Preneuf/World Bank




Chapter 1   Introduction

            For Indigenous People, nature is everything, water is everything. We live close to the river and the trees

            because we draw our daily sustenance from them. Without them, we’d all die.

                                       —Ayoreo woman in Paraguayan Chaco, as told to a World Bank team on video

                                                                                                 (World Bank 2016b)

                                               Sometimes if I have no money to buy water, I have to close my business.

                                                                             —Female street vendor, Nukuru, Kenya

                                                                                                        (Roever 2014)


            How do we think about water and gender? It is like asking how we think about the whole
            world, because water literally encompasses every aspect of life, and individuals have gender
            identities. But the question is particularly important because the relationship between water
            and gender is salient to progress on water security and to gender equality more broadly.
            Water is so intricately linked with social, economic, spiritual, and cultural systems that it
            becomes almost a theater for the play of social and gender relations.
              The relationship between water and gender plays out in at least four critical ways.
            First, this relationship mirrors gender inequalities in various realms, such as, inter alia, the
            ownership and control over assets, employment, wages, household division of labor, expo-
            sure to and management of risk, access to services, and decision making, which are
            often  mirrored in water-related domains. Second, water has unique noneconomic and




            The Rising Tide                                                                                         9
nonmonetary values, such as in the spiritual and social realms, with underlying norms and
practices that are often deeply gendered. Why is this important for policy and practice? It is
important because such values have a bearing on the behavior of individuals and groups,
especially their responses to water-related reforms or interventions, since belief systems
often mediate human actions. For instance, people may actively boycott or passively reject a
policy reform if it goes against their belief system. Third, noneconomic, nonmonetary val-
ues of water are important not only because they may impede or enable behavior change,
but also because they are often active instruments to solidify hierarchies and the status
quo, such as through taboos, rituals, and norms. These affect men and women differently.
Fourth, on the positive side, the relationship between water and gender presents an oppor-
tunity, since water in many ways mirrors, and even reproduces, gender inequality. It follows
that interventions that would equalize gender relations in water-related domains would also
have a strong influence in enhancing gender equality overall. This makes the relationship
between water and gender of interest not just to professionals working in water-related
domains, but to those interested in social inclusion and gender equality more generally.
A corollary of this is that interventions toward greater gender equality in water transcend
water-related “sectors” and spill over to agriculture, health, education, and information
and communications technology, to name a few.
  This is an opportune moment to reflect on the deep association between water and gender,
because of large-scale shifts in global trends and patterns. Social and economic changes that
would have been impossible to foresee even 20 years ago, globally and within most coun-
tries, are a reality today. Poverty has declined; households have more assets than they ever
did; educational attainment has risen for males and females; the demographic transition is
firmly in place (although some countries are seeing a decline in their population); and
infrastructure-based services have improved across the board and water supply and sanita-
tion are no exception. Women’s status has advanced almost everywhere; more women are
visible in public places; and there is greater awareness of different types of inequality and
more spaces to discuss them. A new formulation of gender has taken root in many countries—
away from the male-female binary, and broader than the more dated heteronormative
formulation. The advent of social media has transformed modes of communication and new
hopes and fears abound. This is a rising tide.
  The proverbial tide has lifted many boats, but has left others behind. Individuals and
groups who belong to certain ethnicities, religions, tribes, castes, races, disability statuses,
locations, or sexual minorities have not been lifted by the rising tide. They have lower access
to assets, such as land, water, and housing, and to services like education, health, and child-
care, but also water supply and sanitation, waterways, and other transport. They fare worse
in the labor and credit markets and have lower access to physical, political, and social spaces.
They are disproportionately affected by poor water governance and scarcity. Each of these
has implications for water-related domains on the one hand and social inclusion on the other,
with gender equality being an important aspect for progress toward social inclusion.




10                                                                                The Rising Tide
  Given the shifts in global trends, there is increasing recognition about the importance of
social inclusion more generally, and the role of water in achieving it. The Water Global
Practice (GP) of the World Bank Group has made three important commitments over the past
few years: the Sustainable Development Goals, a new Gender Strategy (2016–23), and a new
partnership called the Global Water Security and Sanitation Partnership (GWSP). The fram-
ing in this paper is in keeping with Goal 6 of the Sustainable Development Goals, which
covers water in broad terms. The framework is also aligned with Goal 5 on gender equality.
Moreover, its underlying principle of social inclusion is squarely in keeping with the tenets
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Each of these global commitments under-
scores the importance of “leaving no one behind”—the rallying cry of Agenda 2030—of which
exclusion based on gender is acknowledged as an important part. The Gender Strategy of the
World Bank (2015) has raised the bar for deepening gender equality in World Bank Group
operations. In support of the Gender Strategy, the Water GP has developed an internal
“follow-up note” that identifies actions that it can promote to close the gaps between females
and males, toward the goal of improving outcomes in the priority areas identified in the
strategy. The contribution of the follow-up note is twofold: it identifies the knowledge gaps
that the Water GP should pay attention to and points to the way forward. This paper is part
of the Water GP’s commitment to deepen the agenda on gender. GWSP commits the Water
GP to five priority themes, of which “inclusion” is one, with a push to better address gender
issues. GWSP aims to do this by furthering knowledge, deepening capacity, and making the
World Bank’s water portfolio more attuned toward social inclusion and gender.


What Does This Paper Do and Whom Is It For?
This paper adapts the framework for social inclusion developed by World Bank (2013) to
build a heuristic device1 to help think through the relationship between gender and water. In
colloquial terms, it is a “thinking device.” The device and the paper within which it is situ-
ated build on a small but solid body of literature that conceptualizes different aspects of the
relationship between gender and water. It views water in all its forms and manifestations—as
an asset, a service, and a space, as will be described in more detail. That is indeed daunting,
but also essential for understanding the interplay between gender and water in its complex-
ity and nuance. To our knowledge, this is one of the very few analyses that takes such a
broad view of water and makes the connection to gender inequality. The intended audience
for the paper comprises academics, policy makers, development practitioners, and private
sector actors, to enable them to think about the complex and nuanced ways in which water
and gender interface with each other. The paper is expected to assist them in thinking about
the design of policies and programs while keeping the nuance and evidence in mind.
  It is likely that the ambition of this paper will fire legitimate expectations—that it will pro-
vide “answers” to questions about what should be done for greater gender equality and how.
The main aim of the paper is to enable broad and integrated thinking about water and gender.
In doing so, it frames questions, challenges assumptions, and presents evidence. The final




The Rising Tide                                                                                11
exhortation is to start by asking the right questions. That being so, the paper also reflects
on how change toward gender equality can take place, who can drive it, and how. The con-
clusion indeed provides some pointers about where policy and programming can focus,
but  this is not a “how-to” piece. It is preceded by a series of “operationally relevant”
resources and toolkits intended for World Bank teams to do a better job of integrating gender
into their projects. These resources are an addition to the already vast set of resources that
assist practitioners in various ways. In that respect, the paper is a view from a distance.


Assets, Services, Spaces: A Thinking Device
Defining social exclusion in terms of social identity and as being about adverse terms for
certain individuals and groups that are marked and differentiated by their identity, World
Bank (2013) went on to ask—inclusion in what? The answer was: in markets, services,
and spaces. Markets comprise land, labor, credit, and housing; services include education,
health, transport, childcare, water supply, sanitation, and information and technology.
Finally, the idea of “spaces” comprises physical spaces, like cities, schools, and clubs, as well
as social, political, and religious spaces. This paper adapts this framework to the relationship
between water and gender.
  The thinking device in this paper sees water as manifesting in three ways—as an asset,
a  service, and a space—with each manifestation having gendered connotations. Assets
arising from water become productive through infrastructure that processes natural
resources or transports water, labor that renders assets productive, and technology that
aids both, in that assets are interlinked with employment. However, water can also be a
risk when it is unexpectedly abundant or scarce, such as during floods or droughts. It can
thus be  thought of as a liability that has different implications for males and females.
Climate change exacerbates these risks. The idea of services is slightly more straightforward.
Water-related services comprise water supply, sanitation, and hygiene; but they also
include irrigation, waterways, and information and technology. In contrast, the idea of
spaces is more complex to comprehend; yet, it is this idea that brings out the physical
and  esoteric dimensions of water. Water certainly occupies physical space, but it also
carries cultural, social, political, and religious significance. Therefore, the idea of spaces
is at once real and symbolic. Perhaps the most useful use of the construct of “space” is to
highlight the intangible aspects of water, that it is also rooted in belief systems that often
dictate human behaviors.
  Figure 1.1. shows that assets, services, and spaces are interrelated. It is difficult to place
them in mutually exclusive categories. Sometimes, the same element can be an asset and
a service and have implications for spaces. Take the example of technology. The infra-
structure that supplies technology and the human capital that makes it productive are
assets. Yet, technology is also a service when it interfaces directly with citizens. Further,
in empowering individuals and freeing up their time, technology is linked to space. The
assertion of rights arising from water may involve water bodies as assets, but may also




12                                                                                 The Rising Tide
FIGURE 1.1.   A Thinking Device for Gender and Water                       constitute the assertion of political space. Finally, owner-
                                                                           ship and control of water-related assets confer status and
                                                                           power to individuals and groups. This then enables them

      HOW DO WE
                                                                           to demand and secure services and spaces.
      THINK ABOUT                                                            This paper uses the metaphor of the rising tide to highlight
     THE GENDERED                                                          both opportunity and the danger that some boats may be left
       NATURE OF
        WATER?
                                                                           behind. How can this tide lift more boats? And for whom?
                                                Natural resource
                                                                           World Bank (2013) argues that societies can realize social
                                                Infrastructure
                                                Jobs emanating from        inclusion by improving the “ability, opportunity and dignity
                                                water
                                     Asset                                 of individuals and groups who are disadvantaged on
                                                Risk/Liability
                                                                           the basis of their identity.” It is clear that not all women are
            Water supply
            Sanitation                                                     equally disadvantaged, nor all men equally privileged. Age,
                                                         Political space
            Transport
                           Service           Space       Physical space    race, ethnicity, religion, location, socioeconomic status, and
            Irrigation
                                                         Cultural space
            Information                                                    occupation all determine advantage and disadvantage.
                                                         Religious space
            Technology
                                                                           Moreover, all individuals have multiple identities. Thus, an
Source: Authors.                                                           indigenous woman who is widowed and has a disability is
                                                                           likely to be far more disadvantaged than a rich widow in an
                                       urban setting. However, the latter is more likely to have lower voice and status than a man
                                       from the same income decile living in the same area and heading a household. In other
                                       words, context matters a great deal and exclusion is relative. It is the intersection of multiple
                                       identities that intensifies disadvantage, often referred to in the literature on social exclusion
                                       as “intersectionality.” Further, the construct of gender is not shorthand for women and the
                                       interplay of gender and water does not mean that we need to address only female
                                       vulnerability.


                                       Methodology and Process
                                       One of the contributions of this paper is its grounding in the literature on water and gender.
                                       It draws from a broad-based review of the literature since 1990. This cutoff year was chosen
                                       because it signifies the runup to the Fourth World Conference on Women, in Beijing, just
                                       prior to which a substantial body of research was produced on gender and development. The
                                       review for this paper was conducted in several stages. The steps are laid out in appendix A.
                                       Overall, this work is informed by a review of more than 380 knowledge products. A subset of
                                       the larger review is cited in this paper, but a longer bibliography is available upon request.
                                       The most important benefit of this laborious review process was our understanding of the
                                       strands of literature and discourses on the issue of water and gender. In addition, discus-
                                       sions on gender and water in various social media and online platforms were followed to
                                       ground the paper in the contemporary discourse on the subject. The review of the literature
                                       was supplemented with a series of consultations and discussions with a wide range of actors.
                                       They included World Bank staff, development partners, government counterparts from
                                       World Bank projects, civil society partners, and researchers.




                                       The Rising Tide                                                                                  13
 The literature on gender and water is clearly vast, as evidenced by the results of our review.
This is unsurprising given the breadth of the subject. Three themes dominate the empirical
literature. First, analyses of barriers to water supply and sanitation are preponderant in
the literature on services. Although they are often strong in data and methods, the analyses
usually lack a sound theoretical underpinning that would explain their gendered results.
Regardless, when we use relevant results from these studies, and place them within the
schema that this paper has developed, they acquire an added salience. The second strand of
the empirical literature is on water and agriculture. This strand is empirically robust and
theoretically grounded in the feminist and other traditions. The third strand focuses on
collective action to secure water rights. It encompasses issues of participation, voice and
agency, and decision making.
 In terms of disciplinary perspectives, the literature on gender and water comes mainly
from economics, anthropology and geography. Feminist perspectives have made a strong
contribution to much of the literature. Although many feminist contributions tend to be
primarily theoretical and often radical in nature, a large number are also empirically
grounded. In terms of development policy focus, agriculture, land, and health are the
dominant fields. A strand of the literature that focuses on rainfall shocks comes from a
social protection perspective and new literature focuses on the impact of poor water sup-
ply and sanitation on education outcomes. Much of the empirical literature comes from
South Asia (mainly Bangladesh, India, and Nepal), Africa, and the United States.
Consequently, and because innovations in these countries are better documented, admit-
tedly in English, this paper also contains a preponderance of evidence from South Asia
and Africa. There is a strong body of feminist literature on social movements and collec-
tive action in Latin America, but, perhaps due to the progress in coverage of water and
sanitation services and the declining importance of agriculture, much of the literature on
gender and water from Latin America is dated. Finally, there is a marked shortage of robust
impact evaluations across the board, although case studies documenting process and
change are copious. We use these case studies rather sparingly, since most appear to lack
a solid methodology.


Roadmap of the Paper
The paper is divided into six chapters. This chapter lays out the motivation and framing of
the paper. It introduces the chapters that ensue through a glimpse of the thinking device.
Chapter 2 discusses water as an asset, chapter 3 as a service, and chapter 4 as a space. The
question of how the rising tide can lift many more boats—in which diverse, gendered indi-
viduals and groups travel—is the subject of chapter 5. It is intended to provide examples
of initiatives that have directly addressed gender or those that have had incidental and
unexpected gendered outcomes. Chapter 6 concludes and provides pointers to where to
intervene and how.




14                                                                               The Rising Tide
Note
1.	 Scott and Marshall (2009, 267) define a heuristic device as a “procedure which involves the use of an artificial construct to
   assist in the exploration of social phenomena. It usually involves assumptions derived from extant empirical research. …(It)
   is, then, a form of preliminary analysis. (and) is usually employed for analytical clarity, although it can also have explana-
   tory value as a model.”




The Rising Tide                                                                                                               15
            © UN Photo/Logan Abassi




Chapter 2   Water as an Asset

            Water is an asset in several ways, but it can also be a liability or risk, in that extreme events
            related to water, such as floods and droughts, have gendered ramifications. Assets arising from
            water as a natural resource become productive through infrastructure that processes or trans-
            ports water, labor that renders assets productive, and technology that aids both. Tourism
            boosts economies and often relies on water as a natural resource or arena for sports.
            Infrastructure that processes water in different ways is also an asset on its own. Hydropower
            dams, for instance, are national or local assets that turn water into power. Reservoirs, irriga-
            tion systems, treatment plants, sewerage systems, and waterways are other examples of
            water-related infrastructure. These can be public or private assets and are often important
            sources of employment. A large body of global experience on “doing infrastructure” by ensur-
            ing that its benefits are shared has accumulated worldwide. For example, social safeguards in
            most hydropower projects try to ensure that women gain employment during the construc-
            tion phase. Not just large infrastructure, but smaller infrastructure, such as handpumps, water
            conservation structures, and toilets, are assets that are owned by the community or individual
            households. Moveable assets, such as boats, fishing equipment, ferries, and tools and imple-
            ments that enable the smooth application of water assets to productive use are all assets in
            their own right. Ownership, control, and decision making about assets in general are deeply
            gendered, and water-related assets are no exception, as this chapter illustrates.




            The Rising Tide                                                                               17
 In practice, water and land are almost inseparable as natural resource assets, especially in
rural areas. Individuals and households do not think conceptually about their lived realities,
such as whether the body of water on their land is a separate entity, unless they are seeking
legal action, in which case it is sometimes possible to separate the two (Hodgson 2004).
Land encompasses water, forests, arable land, nontimber forest products, fish, and other
assets. These may be tradable and are often the foundation of status and power, or may sim-
ply be usufruct and enforced by formal or informal rules and relationships.1 The conflation
of land and water is perhaps truer in rural areas, where bodies of water are located on or
along public or private lands. Rivers, ponds, tanks, irrigation systems, canals, and aquifers
may well be public goods and fall within regimes of common property, or be state owned,
but they may equally run the risk of being captured by large landowners and elites.  For
instance, large or upstream landholders may block water from flowing downstream. Countries
that have large rural populations and areas are also often agrarian societies, where land and
water can be highly contested resources. The urban reality is different. Larger bodies of
water, such as ponds or lakes, located within city precincts are often designated as public
property and complex systems of land zoning may separate land assets from water assets.
For instance, in urban areas, private water assets could be in the form of household-level
water systems such as piped water into the home and storage tanks; among wealthier house-
holds, they may be in the form of swimming pools or privately-owned water systems.
 A significant body of literature focuses on women’s exclusion from property, such as land,
especially in developing countries, and that this forms the basis of their disadvantage.
Property rights regimes are heterogeneous across the world. There is often a disjuncture
between de facto and de jure rights that women, indigenous people, those with disabilities,
or groups considered in some way “inferior” enjoy (see, for instance, Benda-Beckmann et al.
(1997) for examples of regimes as applied to water rights). However, ownership and control
of assets related to land and water can attenuate the negative effects of water scarcity, low
wages, and other forms of disadvantage (Deininger, Goyal, and Nagarajan 2010). Such own-
ership is often the basis on which individuals and households claim other benefits. For
instance, women may be less likely to receive extension services, information, or technol-
ogy for irrigation, since women are less likely to own land and other assets, or may be hold-
ers of small plots. The same is true of credit. Individuals without assets lack the collateral
that would enable them to receive loans. These disadvantages can be addressed if policy
and programs specifically address persons without assets, such as through group lending
and other microfinance initiatives or by targeting information and extension services to
smallholders and women, who often work on farms without owning them.
 Decisions about and control over water-related assets are related to prevalent laws and
norms and can have important gendered implications. Benda-Beckmann et al. (1997) give
the example of the Andes, where women can participate in the construction of irrigation
systems and so establish their rights to the irrigation water. These rights can be passed down
to their daughters even if they are not linked to rights to the land, but men dominate the




18                                                                              The Rising Tide
written registration process and decision-making bodies. By contrast, in Tanzania, local laws
prevent women from operating water infrastructure facilities (Benda-Beckmann et al. 1997).
This chapter shows that women’s interface with the gamut of infrastructure is usually as
users of services, rather than decision makers.


Jobs from Water: Assets for Employment
Water assets are intimately connected with jobs, since human labor makes water-related
assets productive. Scanning the International Standard Industrial Classification of All
Economic Activities at the one-digit level gives an indication of the importance of water in
almost every industry cluster, of which some, like agriculture and water supply, are the most
obvious (UN Statistics Division 2008). Others, such as manufacturing and services, are also
closely connected with some aspect of water. However, men’s and women’s representation
in occupations within each industry group varies greatly. This is part of the overall structure
of the labor market, where occupational sex segregation and wage differentials are the norm
in almost all economies.
  Not only is agriculture the largest user of water, it is also the largest employer of women
in low-income and lower-middle-income countries. Agriculture is dependent on water,
through rainfall or irrigation. Globally, in 2015, one-fourth of all economically active women
were engaged in agriculture. Although women’s assignment to agriculture has decreased
over the past two decades, it is still the most important source of employment for women in
low-income and lower-middle-income countries. In Southern Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa,
for example, over 60 percent of all employed women are engaged in agriculture (ILO 2016).
This may be an underestimate, since women who work on family farms do not always report
themselves as being employed. Furthermore, agriculture constitutes an important source
of women’s unpaid work. A host of norms and practices assign men and women to different
tasks within agriculture. Women are more likely to work in rice cultivation and less so in
wheat. Such practices vary widely even within countries.
  Fisheries constitute a subgroup of agriculture where women play an important role.
Women account for almost half of the fishing workforce; about 56 million jobs in the harvest
and postharvest subsectors are held by women (World Bank 2012a). Contrary to the conven-
tional portrayal of men as fishers and women as fish sellers and processors, the reality is
more complex. In many countries (for example, Benin, Cambodia, the Republic of Congo,
Mali, and Thailand), women own boats and may even hire men as crew. Female fish buyers
sometimes finance fishing trips in return for a guaranteed supply of the fish caught. In con-
trast, in Papua New Guinea, women cannot go fishing in the “Mona” (the traditional Mona
canoe used for fishing). “Women are not allowed to cross over the Mona or get into the
canoe. The act of crossing over the canoe brings bad luck to the fishermen. Women can go
fishing but stand in the water and use lines to try and catch fish; they can collect shells.”2 In
some parts of South Asia, fishing is associated with certain castes, with clear roles for men
and women. Box 2.1 describes the gendered nature of Bangladesh’s shrimp industry.




The Rising Tide                                                                               19
      BOX 2.1.   The Gendered Nature of Bangladesh’s Shrimp Industry


      Shrimp plays an important role in Bangladesh’s economy. It is the second largest foreign
      currency earner, following the garment industry. A value chain analysis found the shrimp
      industry to be deeply segmented by sex, with a clear separation of roles and time use
      between women and men. Women and girls make up 62 percent of processing and exporting
      work and 39 percent of fry catching, but they are conspicuously absent from all other parts
      of the shrimp value chain. There are no recorded women working in areas such as transport or
      retail and wholesale, and female intermediaries and farmers are largely excluded from the
      value chain.

      An analysis of wage differentials between men and women across the shrimp value chain
      shows that women earn consistently less than men, even for the same tasks performed. For
      example, women earn 64 percent of what men earn in catching and sorting fry. In shrimp
      farming—including pond repair, day labor, and maintenance—women earn around 82 percent
      of men’s wages for the same tasks. Although women are well represented in shrimp
      processing, here too, they earn significantly less than their male counterparts. Women’s
      earnings range from 60 to 83 percent of men’s earnings for tasks such as cooking, packing,
      refrigerating, and de-heading.

      Women’s lower wages are linked to the nature of their contracts. When they are engaged
      in the chain of fry catching, farming, and processing, women’s work is usually seasonal,
      temporary, or casual. By contrast, men far outnumber women in permanent work. Even in
      processing, a female dominated link in the chain, only 8 percent of women have permanent
      jobs, compared with 36 percent of men.

      The low participation of women in the shrimp industry is underpinned by social norms
      and sanctions that prescribe the types of occupations in which women can and cannot
      engage. Their limited mobility and constraints on engaging with men outside their
      community prevent them from being intermediaries in the purchase and sale
      transactions. Similarly, social expectations that women should not enter bodies of
      water bar them from catching shrimp fry that are caught in the surf. These norms
      contribute to occupational sex segregation within the industry, and to women’s lower
      wages as a result.
      Source: Gammage et al. 2006.




 In addition to agriculture and fisheries, women have different levels of participation and
employment trajectories in other water-related jobs as well. For example, water-related utili-
ties oversee large infrastructure assets that administer the storage and distribution of water
or administer waterways. Utilities are institutional assets and a source of employment in
technical and managerial professions. These entities are often deeply gendered. In that respect,
they are no different from other utilities that provide infrastructure services, such as




20                                                                                            The Rising Tide
transport or power companies. Each of these reflects the sex segregation in the overall labor
market, as well as the paucity of trained female workers, and the two may be mutually rein-
forcing. According to a 2014 report by the International Water Association on human resource
capacity in 15 developing countries in the water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) sec-
tor, an average of only 17  percent of staff in the water and sanitation sector are female.
Especially in technical fields in the public and private water sectors, there is a stark gender
gap (IWA 2014).
  The low numbers of women in water-related technical roles reflects their overall exclusion
from such jobs. Women are underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) jobs and educational programs, although female participation in
­tertiary education surpasses male participation in half the developing countries (and in most
developed countries) (UN 2015). In the United Kingdom and Canada, for instance, less than
50 percent of women graduates with a STEM degree go on to work in STEM-intensive occu-
pations (Women’s Engineering Society 2014; Council of Canadian Academies 2015). In
research, female engineering faculty lag far behind their male colleagues in numbers, salary,
rank, and tenure in most countries, and the numbers drop even more significantly for
women working in the fields of engineering and technology. Social and institutional barriers,
gender stereotyping, lack of female role models, and a so-called “engineering culture” that
is traditionally male dominated contribute to the absence of women in these fields (Udas and
Zwarteveen 2010).
  Women are not just underrepresented in technical jobs; they are overrepresented in
unpaid work. Whereas the literature on gender and water supply and sanitation focuses
heavily on the time and health burdens of carrying and managing water for domestic pur-
poses, such activities also contribute to women’s share in unpaid work. Fetching water is
primarily women’s responsibility in most contexts, especially those that lack piped water
within the home, and could result in several hours spent doing unpaid work. A recent World
Bank report on Niger, where water scarcity, high levels of poverty, and ongoing conflict
multiply the burden on households, confirms that women are the main collectors of water,
although men and boys also contribute (Rodella, Sanoh, and Maiga 2017). However, with
increased coverage of infrastructure-based services such as water and sanitation, smaller
families, and greater employment opportunities, women’s unpaid work in tasks such as
collecting water has seen a decline (UN 2015).
  If women’s time spent on unpaid work like fetching water was to be reduced, would they
enter paid employment? It is almost a truism to say that if development frees up women’s
time in fetching water and firewood and having to go outside the house for toilet needs, they
would enter the labor market and make more productive use of their time. By implication,
this would contribute to economic growth. This demonstrates the instrumental value of
investing in better water and sanitation services (Glick 2004; Morrison 2007). There is no
debate on the value of providing better water and sanitation in terms of its moral imperative
and role in overall progress in better health and education. It is still worth putting to the




The Rising Tide                                                                             21
test the truism that freeing women from water carrying would lead to their engagement in
productive work.
  Several factors at the individual, household, and community levels affect women’s ability
to enter paid employment. A woman may have little control over her time allocation, such
that her freed up time would be reallocated to other household or outside tasks. Cultural
understandings of gender roles and mobility may restrict women from entering the labor
force, even if time is not a constraint. A gamut of social, economic, and geographic factors,
such as a household’s economic situation, education, and access to childcare, influence
whether freed up time is used for productive activities. The availability of suitable jobs
would determine whether a household would allocate female labor to them.
  The extant evidence supporting the relationship between improved infrastructure and
women’s productive employment is thin. A study of a water supply program in Benin, in
which boreholes were constructed with the aim of reducing women’s workload, showed that
although time in collecting water was indeed saved, it was reallocated to work on their hus-
bands’ fields and not to their own economic activities (Saskia 2008, in Sinha, n.d.). In
Lesotho, for women whose husbands were away working in mines in South Africa, their
time in fetching water was saved following a large-scale infrastructure project. However, the
women did not take up income-generating work, for fear that their returning husbands
would retaliate against their breadwinning roles (Cairns, Workman, and Tandon 2017).
Evidence from Pakistan shows that in households with water technology, women do not
engage in more market-based work, but rather spend more time on leisure activities (Ilahi
and Grimard 2000). The prevailing assumption is that improvements in infrastructure free
up the time women spend on domestic chores and enable them to participate in off-farm
work. However, an empirical study based on rural household and community data from
national consumption surveys in nine countries found no relationship between improved
water infrastructure and women’s engagement in paid employment. The study found that,
in some countries, the reduced time women spent in collecting water led to more leisure
time for them and improvement in their children’s school attendance (Koolwal and van de
Walle 2013). These findings suggest that although infrastructure certainly saves time for
women by making it easier for them to undertake the activities that were more onerous
before the advent of such infrastructure, the time so saved may not necessarily benefit all
women, or necessarily translate into paid employment.


Not Just an Asset: Water as a Liability and Risk
If water is conceptualized as an asset, the flip side is that water can also be a risk or liability.
Extreme events related to water include droughts and floods. Bodies of water may also
constitute a liability that can have gendered implications and impacts, as this chapter
demonstrates. A large swathe of literature looks at the impacts of rainfall variability—­
scarcity or abundance—on a host of gendered outcomes. Above or below average rainfall
can cause variegated shocks at the household, community, and even national levels, espe-
cially in rainfall-dependent areas. Rainfall shocks could take the form of droughts or



22                                                                                    The Rising Tide
floods, be long term or short term, chronic or idiosyncratic. The gendered impacts are felt
inter alia through employment, wages, health, schooling, marriage, migration, violence,
and other unexpected channels. Yet, and like other aspects of the gender-water interface,
the gendered risks and impacts of water-related variability and extreme events are also
highly contextual.
  The gender differences in the pattern of mortality due to or during floods vary across coun-
tries and contexts. Zagheni, Muttarak, and Striessnig (2015) use cause-of-death data over
1995–2011 in 63 countries and territories to analyze patterns of mortality related to meteoro-
logical disasters. They find that mortality rates for men are consistently higher than those
for women across all age groups, and that the differential by sex is larger for adults than for
young children or the elderly. However, their sample does not include countries in Africa or
South Asia. Doocy et al.’s (2013) historical review of the human impact of floods indicates
that although males are more likely to die in developed countries, developing countries have
higher levels of mortality among females. This finding is borne out by a study from Nepal
conducted a month after the floods in Sarlahi district in 1993. The study shows that fatality
rates (due to floods) were 13.3 per 1,000 for girls and 9.4 per 1,000 for boys, and 6.1 per 1,000
for women and 4.1 per 1,000 for men. Lower socioeconomic status before floods and living
in homes made of thatch exacerbated the risk of mortality (Pradhan et al. 2007).
  Rainfall shocks are income shocks that trigger a range of household-level coping strategies
and policy responses. Most countries have a system of social safety nets that come into effect
when disaster strikes. Bangladesh is a successful case in point. When the country institu-
tionalized and expanded its longstanding workfare program—the Employment Generation
Program for the Poorest—in 2008–09, it also put in place quotas for female participants so
they could tide over income variability. The program created conditions for women to par-
ticipate, while also creating incentives for program administrators to meet the targets (World
Bank 2009). Similarly, the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA) in India, which succeeded a drought relief program, attracted many female par-
ticipants, partly due to an active social movement that preceded the announcement of the
Act. In a recent study, Mahajan (2017) analyzes the effects of rainfall shocks on the agricul-
tural wages of men and women in India. Overall, she finds no effect of such shocks on the
gender wage gap. Yet, in rainfed rice-growing regions in India, compared with men, women
have greater loss in wages, thus increasing the gender wage gap during low rainfall years.
This is likely because there is greater demand for women in the cultivation of crops that are
severely affected by rainfall variability.
  The relationship between rainfall shocks and gender-based violence has been put to the
empirical test. Abiona and Koppensteiner (2016) find that rainfall shocks substantially
increase the likelihood of domestic violence in Tanzanian households. Their estimates show
that the overall effects are driven by droughts rather than floods, and are more pronounced
for poorer households. They also find that a range of “female empowerment” variables
attenuate the incidence of domestic violence. The variables include female household head-
ship and female inheritance rights. A study in India finds that “dry shocks” are linked to



The Rising Tide                                                                               23
reported increase in dowry deaths as well as in domestic violence. In addition, such shocks
increase dowry payments but lower the likelihood of sexual harassment (Sekhri and
Storeygard 2014). There is additional anecdotal evidence on the risks to women and girls
after natural disasters, especially when they have been rendered homeless and are housed
in camps or other temporary dwellings while their communities have been broken up,
leaving them more vulnerable.
  The importance of a nuanced and context-specific examination of the gendered impacts of
water-related events needs to be repeatedly underscored. Take the case of marriage mar-
kets, which often operate under specific norms and informal rules. Corno, Hildebrandt, and
Voena (2016) look at the effects of rainfall variability on age at marriage in Sub-Saharan Africa
and India. They find that in Africa, drought increases the likelihood of early marriage; in
India, drought lowers that likelihood. The authors attribute the two opposing impacts to the
nature of traditional marriage payments (bride price in Africa and dowry in India), and
underscore the cultural and social mores that underpin household responses to rainfall
shocks and the economic hardship they bestow.
  Sex of the household head is often a predictor of gendered outcomes. Various analyses
focus on female headship to understand the channels through which gendered outcomes
obtain in many areas. Nevertheless, female-headed households are a highly diverse group,
sometimes richer and of high status, and at other times disadvantaged and poorer. A study
from South Africa shows that single headship of a household in general makes it more vul-
nerable in times of rainfall variability. Further, households headed by widows, never-­
married women, and women with a nonresident spouse (for example, “left-behind” migrant
households) are especially vulnerable. The results are more significant in areas that tend to
rely on rainfed agriculture (Flatø, Muttarak, and Pelser 2017).
  Not just water-related events, but also bodies of water can be harbingers of risk; here
too, gender inequality can play out in a complex manner. Drowning is a case in point.
According to WHO (2014), drowning is the third leading cause of unintentional injury
death worldwide, and accounts for 7 percent of all injury-related deaths. Figure 2.1 shows
that overall, males are at higher risk of drowning and have twice the mortality rate of
females. Males are more likely than females to be hospitalized for nonfatal drowning. This
is likely due to increased exposure to water and riskier behavior, such as swimming alone,
drinking alcohol, and participating in activities like boating. Here, gender inequality plays
out in unexpected ways. Although males are more likely to die due to drowning, it may
well be the case that females are less likely to learn to swim or, in cultures where there is
greater control on the mobility of females, women and girls may not be allowed to go out
near bodies of water.
  Being able to swim does more than mitigate against the risk of drowning. It also confers the
opportunity for recreation, some types of jobs, health and fitness, and competitive sports.
The ability to swim is also dependent to a large extent on cultural norms around females’
relationship with water. It is tied up with the segregation of females in public places and




24                                                                                 The Rising Tide
    FIGURE 2.1.                     Males Are More Likely to Die from Drowning                                                                   constraints        on      their     physical
                                                                                                                                                 mobility in general. Lack of appro-
                         12
                                     10.8                                                                                                        priate swimwear also sometimes
                                                                                                              9.8                                hinders women and girls from
                         10
Per 100,000 population




                                                                                                                                                 learning how to swim.
                          8
                                                                                                                                          7.0       In Bangladesh, drowning, not
                                                     6.4          6.6
                          6                                                                                               5.6                    infectious disease, is the leading
                               5.0                                                             5.1    5.0
                                                                                 3.8                                3.9                          cause of death among children
                          4                    3.6                                                                                  3.4
                                                                                                                                                 younger than age 17 years, with
                          2                                 1.7
                                                                           0.9           1.0                                                     children ages 1 to 4 years at highest
                          0                                                                                                                      risk (Rahman et al. 2005). A survey
                                            gi rn




                                                                               ic e
                                                            on
                               on




                                                                              gi ic
                                                                              gi ia
                                                                                                                                                 of “naturally acquired” swimming
                                                                             tr e




                                                                                                                                  ld
                                                                            er th
                                          re ste




                                                                         un om




                                                                           re acif
                                                                           re As
                                              on


                                                           gi
                               gi




                                                                                                                                or
                                                                                    s




                                                                                 on
                                                                                 on
                                                                                   s



                                                                                 a
                                                                                  f
                                                                                ie
                                                           re
                              re



                                            Ea




                                                                                                                                W
                                                                       Am n o
                                                                      co -inc




                                                                                t



                                                                              P
                                                                             as
                                                                                                                                                 ability among Bangladeshi chil-
                                                      pe
                          an




                                                                           rn
                                                                         he
                                                                           o
                                                                          h
                                            n




                                                                        gi




                                                                        te
                         ric




                                                     ro




                                                                       ig




                                                                      ut
                                          ea




                                                                    Re




                                                                     es
                                                 Eu




                                                                  H
             Af




                                                                   So
                                        an




                                                                                                                                                 dren found that males were more
                                                                   W
                                     rr
                                    ite
                                   ed




                                                                              WHO Region                                                         likely to have acquired swimming
                               M




                                                                              Female       Male                                                  ability through “natural” means,
                                                                                                                                                 such as relatives and friends, than
    Source: WHO 2014.
                                                                                                                                                 females were (Rahman et al. 2014).
                                                                                                                                                 Children ages 1 to 4 years clearly
                                                                  cannot save themselves from drowning, but parents, especially mothers, who are the pri-
                                                                  mary caregivers, can be trained to save lives. Thus, as evidenced by the example of drowning
                                                                  and swimming, gender inequality plays out in unexpected ways. Although males are more
                                                                  likely to die due to drowning, they are also more likely to be able to swim and have fewer
                                                                  restrictions on their mobility.
                                                                    This chapter underscores the importance of water as an asset, but also its flip side—water
                                                                  as a risk or liability. Water as an asset becomes productive through various channels; labor
                                                                  and infrastructure are the primary mechanisms. Hence, the importance of water in jobs can-
                                                                  not be emphasized enough. Each of these manifestations of water has differential implica-
                                                                  tions for males and females. Yet, assets are closely related to services and spaces. The next
                                                                  chapter discusses the value of water as a service and its implications for gender inequality.



                                                                  Notes
                                                                  1.	 Mwangi and Markelova (2008, 17) summarize Schlager and Ostrom’s (1992) conceptualization as rights over land and other
                                                                     resources as being a “bundle of rights.” “These bundles comprise access (the right to enter a defined physical area and enjoy
                                                                     non-subtractive benefits); withdrawal (the right to obtain resource units or products of a resource system, for example,
                                                                     catch fish, divert water); management (the right to regulate internal use patterns and transform the resource by making
                                                                     improvements); exclusion (the right to determine who will have access rights and withdrawal rights, and how those rights
                                                                     may be transferred); and alienation (the right to sell or lease management and exclusion rights). Even without complete
                                                                     ownership (that is, the right to alienate), individuals and groups may still have access to resources that make significant
                                                                     contributions to their livelihoods…..”

                                                                  2.	 This comment is from focus group discussions with male youths, conducted in Hangan, Papua New Guinea, as part of the
                                                                     World Development Report (World Bank 2012b).




                                                                  The Rising Tide                                                                                                              25
            © Dominic Chavez/World Bank




Chapter 3   Water as a Service

            Water as a service is relatively easier to comprehend. A large part of the literature on gender
            and water focuses on services. The majority of the empirical work is related to water supply
            and sanitation, with a strong body of work on irrigation as well. However, water-related ser-
            vices encompass a wide range, from water supply and sanitation for domestic and other
            uses, to irrigation, waterways, and information and technology services. This chapter lays
            out gender differentials in access to water services and shows that gender inequality may
            not always manifest in expected ways. The chapter outlines the pathways through which,
            and conditions under which, inequality shows up.



            Do Men and Women Think of Water-Related Services Differently?
            The conventional wisdom suggests that women would rate water issues as being of higher
            priority than men would (Tarfasa and Brouwer 2013; Mukherjee 2001). However, the evi-
            dence is mixed. Take the case of willingness to pay for water supply and sanitation. Some
            studies show that men have a higher willingness to pay for services (Van Minh et al. 2013;
            Twerefou et al. 2015); others show that women do (Mezgebo and Ewnetu 2015), or that there
            is no difference (Kaliba, Norman, and Chang 2003). The Afrobarometer 2016 surveyed
            respondents in 36 countries on a range of issues, including water supply. Figure 3.1 shows
            that there are significant differences in the importance of water supply as a problem in rural
            and urban areas for men and women, respectively. But there is remarkable alignment




            The Rising Tide                                                                             27
between men and women within                 FIGURE 3.1. Men’s and Women’s Views of the Top Problems Facing the Country That
                                             the Government Should Address
urban and rural areas. In the case
of rural men’s responses, water
                                                                                                          a. Men’s views
supply is fourth in the list of all
                                                       Unemployment                                                                                  47
responses, but ranks tenth in                                                                                                        31
                                                                 Health                                                    27
urban men’s responses. Only 12                                                                                                   30
                                                             Education                                                25
percent of urban men’s responses                                                                                      25
                                                            Corruption                               18
mention water supply as a prob-
                                                   Crime and Security                                17
lem. This finding is remarkably                                                       12
similar     to    urban      women’s              Poverty/destitution                              17
                                                                                                   17
responses, where water supply                     Management of the                              16
                                                            economy
also     ranks    tenth.   For      rural        Infrastructure/roads                           15
                                                                                                                 23
women, water supply ranks third.                             Electricity                 14
                                                                                       13
Thus,     the    urban-rural       differ-                                            12
                                                         Water supply
                                                                                                                  24
ences  in the importance of
                                                  Farming/agriculture                            16
water  supply and sanitation are
                                               Food shortage/famine                             15
greater than the  gender differ-
                                                                           0    10                    20                        30         40         50
ences.     Calculations     from      the
                                                                                                             Percent
Afrobarometer 2016 data show
                                                                                 Top ten priorities for urban men (N = 10,887)
that men’s and women’s percep-                                                   Top ten priorities for rural men (N = 15,517)
tions of going without clean                                                                         b. Women’s views
water for household use or the                         Unemployment                                                                             46
                                                                                                                            29
location of the water source or                                                                                             29
                                                                 Health
                                                                                                                                 31
toilets are very similar.
                                                             Education                                                26
  The      Afrobarometer         Survey                                                                          24
                                                  Poverty/destitution                                       21
also  asked respondents how                                                                                 21
                                                    Crime and Security                               17
the  government was handling                                                         11
                                                  Management of the                         15
the      water     and      sanitation
                                                          economy
­
situation. Just over two-fifths of                           Corruption                    14
the respondents are satisfied                                Electricity                    14
                                                                                          13
with  the performance of their                                                             14
                                                  Infrastructure/roads
                                                                                                           20
government        (table   3.1).    Here
                                                          Water supply                     13
too,      men’s     and      women’s                                                                                  26
                                                Food shortage/famine                                 18
responses are remarkably con-
gruent, indicating that overall                   Farming/agriculture                      14
there are no differentials in the                                          0    10                    20                    30            40         50

way they perceive the state’s per-                                                                          Percent

formance in the water sector.                                                  Top ten priorities for urban women (N = 10,992)
                                                                               Top ten priorities for rural women (N = 15,729)
However, there is variation by
country.                                     Source: Afrobarometer 2016.




28                                                                                               The Rising Tide
TABLE 3.1. Over Two-Fifths of African Respondents Say Their Government Is Handling the                                Men’s and women’s satis-
Water and Sanitation Situation Well
                                                                                                                    faction with their water secu-
 Response                                             Male (%)              Female (%)               Total (%)      rity may be congruent in the
 Very badly                                                26.1                 25.4                   25.8         aggregate in Africa, but this
 Fairly badly                                              28.2                 28.2                   28.2         congruity is rather contex-
 Fairly well                                               33.5                 33.1                   33.3         tual. Several studies indicate
 Very well                                                  8.1                  8.0                    8.1         that women and men have
 Don’t know/haven’t heard enough                            1.8                  2.9                     2.4        different ­
                                                                                                                              attitudes and priori-
 Not asked in this country                                  2.2                  2.2                     2.2        ties    about    water-related
Source: Based on Afrobarometer Survey 2016.                                                                         issues (see, for  instance,
                                                                                                                    Robinson,           Robinson,
TABLE 3.2.  Men Cite Water Quality and Women Cite Control and Convenience as Reasons for                            and  Hawkins (2005) and
Installing a Private Tube Well
(percentage of households that have installed private tube wells)
                                                                                                                    Anastasiadis et al. (2014) for
                                                                                                                    wastewater; Su  et  al. (2017)
                                                        2000                                  2002
 Resource                                                                                                           for    drought   and   climate
                                          Male (n = 876)     Female (n = 840)   Male (n = 265)   Female (n = 280)
 Safe drinking water                           61.2                 42.7               70.3              31.1
                                                                                                                    change; and França Doria

 Convenience                                   24.0                 32.0               18.0              32.3
                                                                                                                    (2010) for water quality). A

 Can control one’s own water supply            10.5                 23.8               11.5              36.7
                                                                                                                    panel survey in Bangladesh

 Other                                          4.3                  1.6                0.3               0.0       sought to track the change

Source: Caldwell et al. 2006.                                                                                       in  information about and
                                                                                                                    responses to arsenic contami-
                                          nation in water. The results show that although information about arsenic had increased among
                                          men and women, private (mostly shallow) tube wells were still the preferred water source.
                                          When asked why they had installed private tube wells, there were major differences in women’s
                                          and men’s responses. Men indicated that tube wells were a safe water source; women wanted
                                          more control over household water needs and acted in favor of convenience (Caldwell et al.
                                          2006) (table 3.2).


                                          How Water as a Service Affects Men and Women
                                          Regardless of preferences and priorities, the availability of water for household and other
                                          uses and sanitation affects males and females differentially. Table 3.3 shows ways in which
                                          water supply and sanitation services affect females across the lifecycle. Women’s reproduc-
                                          tive roles, combined with societal expectations, are often responsible for differential needs.
                                          Das Gupta (1995) argues that a woman’s place in the lifecycle can determine how much
                                          power and access she has in various domains of her life. Table 3.3 shows that females at
                                          different stages of the lifecycle have different needs and the availability of water and
                                          sanitation affects them in different ways. Clearly, females in each stage are highly
                                          heterogeneous. Class, caste, ethnicity, religion, occupational status, earnings, and other
                                          markers confer greater or lesser vulnerability or agency, within each point in the lifecycle.
                                          Not only place in the lifecycle, but also lifecycle events and transitions, such as menarche,




                                          The Rising Tide                                                                                       29
TABLE 3.3.    Water Supply and Sanitation Services: Illustrative Effects on Females across the Lifecycle

 Place in the lifecycle           Issues related to water supply and sanitation                          Implications for well-being
 Prenatal and neonatal (first   •	 Water quality and adequacy                        •	 Increased neonatal mortality in water stressed areas
 1,000 days)                    •	 Hygiene of mother and child                       •	 Decreased likelihood baby is washed, increased susceptibility to
                                                                                       diseases with implications for health over the lifetime

                                                                                     •	 In contexts of son preference and daughter neglect, scarce
                                                                                       resources like water may be diverted

 Pre-school and primary age     •	 Water quality and adequacy                        •	 Where females have higher likelihood of fetching water,

                                •	 Hygiene, sanitation, and information for the        children’s participation in school is affected, as they help with

                                  family, especially the mother                        domestic chores

                                                                                     •	 Health and nutrition of children (stunting, diarrhea, susceptibility
                                                                                       to disease, environmental enteric dysfunction)

                                                                                     •	 Safety (drowning)

 Secondary and higher           •	 Water quality and adequacy                        •	 Health (as above, plus urinary tract infections; arsenicosis,

                                •	 Menstrual hygiene                                   which has specific effects on women’s lives and other forms of
                                                                                       contamination; problems with back and neck) and nutrition
                                •	 Privacy
                                                                                     •	 Human capital accumulation

                                                                                     •	 Safety (risk of harassment and violence)

                                                                                     •	 Dignity, self-respect, and agency

 Working and childbearing age   •	 Water quality, adequacy, predictability           •	 Maternal and other health, including mortality

                                •	 Pricing and affordability                         •	 Drudgery and physical impact of water collecting, where females

                                •	 Ability/permission to access available services     are the main fetchers of water

                                •	 Hygiene of birth attendant/hospital-acquired      •	 Safety (harassment and violence)

                                  infection during childbirth                        •	 Jobs and occupational assignment to different roles

                                •	 Privacy                                           •	 Empowerment and status

                                •	 Voice and participation in decision making        •	 Dignity and self-respect

 Elderly                        •	 Water quality and adequacy                        •	 Health

                                •	 Menopausal hygiene                                •	 Dignity and self-respect

                                •	 Toileting needs of the elderly                    •	 Pressure on mostly female caregivers

                                •	 Physical access to services

Source: Authors.


marriage, pregnancy, motherhood, lactation, starting a job, and widowhood, have implica-
tions for the ability, opportunity, and dignity of females. The table lays out the channels
through which effects could obtain. It bears mention however that women in general are
highly heterogeneous and socioeconomic status, location, occupational status, and social
norms matter a great deal.
     A large body of evidence indicates that women are for the most part responsible for obtain-
ing water for domestic use. The average time spent fetching water in Sub-Saharan Africa is
greater than the global average. For example, in Niger, the average female, whether woman
or girl, spends about 13 days a year traveling to a water source and back. In rural areas, the
time spent fetching water is especially high (Rodella, Sanoh, and Maiga 2017). In the Republic
of Yemen, females comprise about 84 percent of household members who fetch water.




30                                                                                               The Rising Tide
In addition, most households that collect water from nonnetworked sources reside in rural
areas (World Bank 2017b).
  The differential needs of women and girls become pronounced when they are menstruating.
In Nigeria, about one-quarter of women seem to lack the requisite privacy for toileting
needs. But there is a high degree of variation. For example, 85 percent of women in Lagos
reported having everything they need to manage their menstruation; only 37 percent in
Kaduna State did. There are differences across urban and rural areas too. About 88 percent
of women in Nigeria have no handwashing facility on their premises; 92 percent of rural
women report this to be the case (World Bank 2017c). Similar conditions obtain for women in
many other countries across Africa and Asia. Where women need to go out in the open for
their toilet needs, they also face increased risk of harassment and assault. They may be more
prone to urinary tract and vaginal infections.
  Lack of appropriate toilet facilities can affect women’s participation in education and
employment. Lack of appropriate toilet facilities and adequate water are among the reasons
why post-pubescent girls drop out of school and women miss days from work. Further, a large
proportion of females do not have information about, or access to, sanitary pads. A recent
survey in Bangladesh found that only 23 percent of women use appropriate menstrual
materials. The survey also found a high level of misinformation about menstruation, with
      quarters of students believing that activities such as going out, cooking, and eating cer-
three-­
tain types of food are forbidden during menstruation. Moreover, only 6 percent of schools
provide education on menstrual hygiene management, and only 36 percent of women had
prior knowledge about menstruation before their first period (World Bank 2017a). A meta-­
analysis of 138 studies on the status of menstrual hygiene among adolescent girls in India
found that a quarter of the girls did not attend school during menstruation because of the lack
of adequate toilets. Only around 50 percent of the respondents considered menstruation
“normal,” and premenarche awareness varied by region (Van Eijk et al. 2016).
  The existence of a separate toilet is not enough to ensure usage by women and girls.
Privacy, cleanliness, safety, and availability of water matter. A survey of 62 primary
schools in rural western Kenya found that 84 percent of the schools had separate latrines
for girls, but 77 percent of these did not have a lock and only 13 percent had water in or
near the latrine. Furthermore, only 10 percent of schools reported always providing sani-
tary pads to girls. Disposal arrangements for used sanitary pads were not adequate in
most schools (Alexander et al. 2014). These findings underscore the importance of toilets
as “package deals” to ensure usage, especially by female students, employees, and even
women in public places. Women and girls with disabilities face additional challenges due
to limitations in mobility. Even where there are water and sanitation facilities for females,
they may not be accessible for females with disabilities, thus intensifying the context of
their disadvantage.
  Although females are disproportionately affected by lack of appropriate and adequate
toilet facilities, gender inequality does not always play out in expected ways. Nigeria and




The Rising Tide                                                                              31
India present two cases in point. In Nigeria, among households where at least one member
reported not using the toilet, adult women were three times less likely to use the house-
hold’s latrine than were adult men. Fear of contracting disease was the main reason women
refrained from using the toilet (World Bank 2017c). India presents a different picture.
A Sanitation Quality Use Access and Trends survey in villages in five states in northern India
(Haryana, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Bihar) showed that owning a toi-
let does not automatically lead to the elimination of open defecation. Among all the house-
holds in the sample, 40 percent that had access to a toilet reported that at least one member
of the household still defecated in the open. The proportion was highest in the state of
Rajasthan, where over 57 percent of households reported at least one person defecating in
the open, although they owned a toilet. In all the states, over 25 percent of the men with
access to a latrine reported defecating in the open, compared with 16 percent of the women
(Coffey et al. 2014).
     Prima facie, based on table 3.4, it may appear that males bear the disproportionate burden
of inadequate toilet facilities. When asked why they defecate in the open despite having a
toilet in the home, a majority (74 percent) of men said they preferred to do so. Further,
households are likely to prefer that women—especially women in their reproductive years—
use available toilets in the home, and have less need or chance to go outside the home. These
findings are related to the fact that in some cultures, including many parts of India, house-
holds tend to keep strict control over female mobility for various reasons, including to main-
tain control over female sexuality, enhance the family’s social status, and protect women
from potential harassment and assault.
     Policy and research on the gender implications of water supply focus primarily on water
for domestic use, with scant attention to the needs of small and micro business owners.
Women are overrepresented as owners of small and micro businesses in the urban informal
economy, and their businesses often rely on water supply. Adequate, predictable, and afford-
able water for these entrepreneurs, especially in the informal economy, is critical to
their  survival and growth.
The       Informal    Economy      TABLE 3.4.     Male Family Members Are More Likely to Defecate in the Open in Northern India
Monitoring Study, coordi-          (percentage of those who have a toilet in the home)

nated by Women in Informal                                                                                                              Households with at
                                                                   Men who defecate in             Women who defecate in
Employment           Globalizing    State                                                                                            least one member who
                                                                         the open                          the open
                                                                                                                                      defecates in the open
and Organizing (WIEGO),
                                    Uttar Pradesh                           24.8                              13.9                              38.5
assessed the working condi-
                                    Bihar                                   26.4                              18.1                              43.8
tions of informal workers in
                                    Haryana                                 19.1                              12.0                              34.9
10 cities in Asia, Africa, and
                                    Madhya Pradesh                          30.1                              20.8                              41.9
Latin America. The study
                                    Rajasthan                               33.6                              27.1                               57.4
                 owned
shows that women-­
                                    Full Sample                             25.1                              16.6                              40.1
micro businesses rely on
                                   Source: World Bank 2016a, based on Sanitation Quality Use Access and Trends survey by the Research Institute for
water for multiple purposes.       Compassionate Economics.




32                                                                                                   The Rising Tide
Female street vendors use water to prepare and cook the food that they sell; market vendors
need water to wash their products, such as fruit, vegetables, or flowers. Water is also an
important input for services in the informal sector, such as laundry services and hair cutting
and styling. Owners of small businesses need water to clean their workplaces, which could be
their homes or stalls. Waste pickers need water to clean reclaimed waste products, such as
plastic or glass, before bundling or processing them (Chen 2014; Roever 2014; Dias and
Samson 2016). Another study of female micro businesses in rural Gujarat, India, shows that
when an improved water supply source does not work, entrepreneurs tend to suffer greater
economic loss than non-entrepreneurs (Sijbesma et al. 2009). Thus, there are important
implications of unpredictable, irregular, and inadequate water supply for female-owned
small and micro businesses, in turn having an impact on poverty and possibly the local
economy.


We cannot operate properly without water because we need water to wash our hands and our products.

I have to pay people to go and buy water and transport it for me to my site. This costs me a lot of money.

                                                                    —Street Vendors, Durban, South Africa

                                                                                           (in Roever 2014)


  Water quality can be compromised in several ways, and affects males and females
differently. First, the most obvious form of inequality arises when children get sick with
water borne diseases and the caregiving burden of the mother increases commensurately.
Second, women are more likely to be responsible for water purification at the household
level. In some cases, women’s groups are assigned the responsibility for the treatment of
communal water sources.1 Third, contaminated water has differential health impacts on
males and females. Women are more likely to handle water in the domestic realm and are
hence susceptible to disease; men who work in water-related jobs are also prone to disease.
It is difficult to point to the exact gender differentials in disease exposure, although pregnant
and lactating women are more susceptible, and pass diseases to their children.2
  Some forms of water contamination can have indirect, gendered effects on human capital
accumulation. Take the case of salinity in water in the Sundarbans along the eastern coast-
line of India. Komatsu and Joseph (2016) look at the increased burden of water collection on
schooling, using data from household surveys in the Sundarbans in West Bengal, India, and
Bangladesh. They find that young girls in households affected by greater salinity in the water
in rivers and ponds are 11.8 percent less likely to attend school even if they are not in charge
of collecting water. If salinity in the water goes up, the girls are 5.3 percentage points more
likely to be responsible for water collection and skip school. As girls grow older, the negative
effects of salinity and poor quality drinking water seem to increase. By age 16, saline water
and lack of access to improved water sources increase the chances of girls dropping out of
school and becoming responsible for water collection by 33.7 percent, versus 15.9 percent if
the water is not saline and improved water sources are available. In contrast, for boys, there
is little difference among the households with different water quality and water sources.




The Rising Tide                                                                                              33
     Information and technology as services are intrinsic to better outcomes. We distinguish
between assets that are based on new technology, such as motorized boats for fishing, and
information about technology as a service. Access to technology and its adoption are often
deeply gendered, and depend to a large extent on whether and how males and females are
targeted in their adoption. Technology can be an enabler and, therefore, an instrument of
social inclusion and gender equality. But technology can also be a disabler, in that it is often
restricted to a few. Women and small landowners may be excluded from information about
new technologies and products. This is especially true of services related to farming and
irrigation. Female farmers tend not to report themselves as working and/or are overrepre-
sented as smallholders. A study from Malawi reports that although a significant proportion
of women were engaged in full-time farming, most had small holdings, which may have
impacted their access to new technologies and resources. Only 25 percent of the female
farmers were heads of their household, and it is likely that extension agents offered trials of
new technology based on the size of the holding, thus excluding female farmers (Gilbert,
Sakala, and Benson 2013).
     Yet, the evidence shows that women are not always left behind. A study from rural West
Nepal conducted focus group discussions with female drip irrigation users and non-users.
Women were the primary cultivators of vegetables. The study found that drip technology
could save on average 58 percent of the time spent on farming vegetables (Upadhyay 2004).
Van Koppen, Hope, and Colenbrander (2013) surveyed 2,429 households in Ghana and
Zambia, to gauge the adoption of small-scale private irrigation technologies, by household
headship, labor availability, and ownership of sub-units of plots by gender. They found that
households headed by women adopted the technology at two-thirds the rate of households
headed by men. This rate was higher when female-headed households were also landown-
ers. In Zambia, married women were more often decision makers on irrigated plots than on
rainfed plots, even if the land belonged to their husband. According to the authors, the find-
ings show that women are not always marginalized from small-scale irrigation, and female-
headed households are increasingly adopting mechanized technologies.
     Exclusion from information is one of the ways in which gender inequality is perpetuated
and water-related information is no exception. Mustafa et al. (2015), in an analysis of the
early warning system set up after floods in Pakistan in 2010, show ways in which the system
excludes women and transgender people (hijras). For instance, the early warning system
uses a language and medium that women and other excluded groups cannot access, such as
technical Urdu and television announcements. Women, especially in poor households,
often do not have access to televisions or time to watch. And poor women are less likely to
comprehend information that is disseminated in overly technical terms. Minority linguistic
groups cannot access information in the language of the majority. Yet there is evidence that
women responded to the post-flood situation in ways that would be considered contrary to
norms and practices, by taking on additional (sometimes male) roles in reconstruction
(Drolet et al. 2015).




34                                                                                The Rising Tide
  Men and women with disabilities face communication and mobility challenges, as
Ndesamburo, Flynn, and French (2012) show. Women often lack the legal knowledge they
need to assert their rights over property, as well as resources that could help them. In addi-
tion, women may not have the networks that could enable them to access the benefits of
policy and programs. And large infrastructure construction projects, such as hydropower
projects or reservoirs, carry significant social risks, such as the exclusion of women and sex-
ual minorities from information and benefits. There is a strong body of resource material to
help project teams ensure that the groups most at risk of being excluded are consulted,
informed, and have the ability to assert their rights to receive the benefits.
  Finally, water is an important means of transport for populations living near bodies of
water. Unfortunately, the literature on waterways and their gendered implications is thin,
although waterways are often the only form of transport connecting people to trade, jobs,
schooling, and health care. The case of the World Bank Rural Infrastructure Inland Waterway
Project in Vietnam (Ngoc Uyen 2003) is instructive in the situational analysis and the ways in
which gender issues can be integrated into a waterways project. More research on the effects
of waterways on women’s and men’s lives would help to provide a better understanding of
this sector, which is considered largely gender neutral.
  This chapter shows that even when men’s and women’s perceptions about the importance
of water supply and sanitation are congruent, men and women have differential needs and
levels of access. Blanket statements about the poor access of females as a whole do not hold
and context matters greatly. Policy, research, and advocacy would do well to keep this
nuance in mind while designing policies and programs.


Notes
1.	 For instance, in rural India, where most drinking water needs to be treated, the Anganwadi (rural mother and childcare
   center) worker, accredited social health activist, or women’s self-help groups are assigned responsibility for treating drink-
   ing water sources, like ponds, tanks, or lakes, by the district administration, despite the fact that this is not part of the terms
   of reference for their jobs.

2.	 Diseases that arise from contaminated water may have gendered effects. The case of arsenicosis deserves special mention.
   The skin legions caused by the disease can have serious implications for the marriageability of women and girls.




The Rising Tide                                                                                                                    35
            © Kiattisak Lamchan/Shutterstock.com




Chapter 4   Water as a Space

            The idea of water as a space brings out its physical and esoteric dimensions. It is evident that
            water occupies physical space, but water is also a marker of social, political, and religious
            spaces. Perhaps more than any other natural resource that interfaces with human beings,
            water has a complex ritual and spiritual significance in most cultures. Water is used in ritual
            ablutions in practically every religion. World Bank (2013, 12) points out that, “physical spaces
            have a social, political and cultural character that solidifies systems and processes of
            exclusion.” Thus, the practices and rituals surrounding water often serve to keep hierarchies
            and norms in place. Water is therefore often also an instrument for solidifying and reinforc-
            ing gender inequalities through norms, practices, taboos, and stigmas. In short, water is a
            critical space for the play of social and gender relations. We could go as far as to say that
            water is often the space for the play of gender politics.
              Why is the noneconomic, religious, social, and political value of water important for the
            design and implementation of policies and programs? It is because development programs
            and projects are often designed in the expectation that they would create incentives for behav-
            ior change and, by implication, lead to progress. This is true, for instance, in the case of open
            defecation. Various approaches have focused on the importance of behavior change. However,
            behaviors are often underpinned by belief systems. Governments and project personnel may
            well consider some behaviors inexplicable, self-destructive, or irrational, but the behaviors




            The Rising Tide                                                                               37
may well be perfectly in keeping with local beliefs and norms. Some communities attach an
emotional value to a natural resource, even when there may be no overt spiritual value.
 Some rules and norms related to water and sanitation serve to assert status and power and
reinforce established hierarchies. In Mali, for instance, only men, sometimes only the village
headmen, are allowed to sink wells for drinking water and watering livestock. Violation of
this norm is interpreted as an attempt to stake a claim on the land, hence challenging the
headman’s authority (Toulmin 1992, cited in Benda-Beckmann 1997). Menstruating women
are considered impure in many cultures, thus serving to keep them from participating fully
in education and employment. Another illustration is the caste system in many parts of
South Asia, where those lowest in the hierarchy, mainly Dalits, are saddled with the most
menial and unclean tasks. Women among the Dalits have the least power to resist their ritual
status, although they exercise their agency in many ways. Lest this sound path-dependent,
we want to clarify that behaviors and norms change over time, sometimes quite dramati-
cally, with the right diagnostics, the right incentives, and prior consultation with the groups
that hold such beliefs.
 Local populations sometimes confer spiritual or even legal attributes to physical bodies of
water. Rivers are considered embodiments of goddesses in Hindu mythology, and are almost
always female. Such deification of rivers is also common in many parts of Africa. Akpabio
and Takara (2014) cite Finneran (2009) to point out that the “Bambara”1 peoples regard the
Niger River as having the body of their deity Faro, and the waters, in addition to having heal-
ing powers, are supposed to confer fertility. The Yoruba of Nigeria believe that the deity
Yemoja gave birth to all rivers and is explicitly associated with fertility. The water goddess
Nne Mmiri fulfills a similar function in Igbo cosmology in Nigeria. New Zealand and an
Indian High Court recently awarded to rivers the status of living entities, but the High Court
judgment in the latter case was struck down by the Supreme Court of India. The political
struggle around the status of rivers therefore continues.
 Toilets have historically been physical and social spaces through which gender relations
have played out. If water is an instrument for reinforcing gender inequality, toilets can be
seen as sites for the movement toward equality. Take the case of the United States, where the
movement against separate toilets has become emblematic of the struggle over toilets as
a gendered space. The debate is founded on the fact that it is not sex at birth but gender
identity that should determine the choice of toilets. The movement for unisex toilets has
played out in the legal and social arenas, to the extent that laws have been passed for
and against segregated toilets. The placement or geography of toilets has much to do with
their acceptability. The origin of sex segregated public toilets itself was a deeply gendered
development, which may well have outlived its utility in many contexts and become the
source of exclusion of several groups of individuals:

     Despite common intuitions, the historical and social justifications for the ubiquitous practice of
     separating public restrooms by sex were based not on a gender-neutral policy related to simple
     anatomical differences between men and women. Rather its origins were deeply bound up with




38                                                                                         The Rising Tide
   early nineteenth century moral ideology concerning the appropriate role and place for women
   in society….. this architectural practice causes both physical challenges and emotional harms to
   significant groups of people: transsexuals facing workplace discrimination based on an employer’s
   refusal to allow them to use the restroom designated for the sex with which they identify; persons
   with disabilities needing assistance from an opposite sex partner who is not allowed into the
   opposite-sex’s restroom; parents with opposite sex children facing hostile stares when they bring
   their child into a public restroom; women at public events inevitably waiting in long restroom
   lines during intermission, well after the men’s restroom has cleared; intersexual persons facing
   the emotional challenges in choosing which restroom to use.

                                                                                    Kogan (2007, 56)


  The toilet as a unisex space can be juxtaposed against cultures where segregation is strictly
practiced. Separate public toilets for women in developing countries are essential to
their ability to access other spaces, such as schools, markets, health centers, and transport
facilities. Toilets are often considered impure, with complex rules surrounding their loca-
tion and use. Therefore, separate toilets for females in developing countries are also a means
to segregate their impurity. Lawrence et al. (2016) find that taboos against using the same
toilets as in-laws, members of the opposite sex, or different generations within a family are
a barrier to toilet use in many communities in Zambia. In many parts of South Asia, toilet
cleaning is restricted to those who were previously considered as belonging to “impure
castes.” Men and women from certain castes suffer unspeakable indignity while cleaning
toilets, and the chances are that gender inequality makes women more vulnerable. In sum,
toilets are the realm for the assertion of purity and pollution that affect males and females
differentially.
  If rivers and streams are often embodiments of purity, human waste has a ritually polluting
status in most cultures. The taboos around menstruation transcend religion and culture.
Every major religion has a set of superstitions around menstruation, with menstruating
women being set aside from daily life in various ways and degrees (Guterman, Mehta, and
Gibbs 2007). The exclusion of menstruating women, whether socially required or self-­
imposed, is an onslaught on their dignity and self-respect, as well as keeps them from normal
activity, like going to school or work. Rituals of purification after the completion of menstrua-
tion are similarly onerous in terms of time and water needs, and hence have monetary
implications; they place an additional burden on women and girls.


   “…certain streams are regarded as unfriendly to women in their menstrual periods: ‘In our land,
   tradition forbids a woman in her menstrual period from going to stream or river to have her bath.’
   This attitude is tied to the cultural belief linking menstruation to evil spirits and curses.”
   (Akpabio 2011, cited in Akpabio and Takara 2014)


  Women are not just passive recipients of unfair norms; they often resist unfair treatment
through a set of practices. In the realm of the informal, and often the domestic, women can
secure land and water rights, as well as a place in decision making, indirectly and often by




The Rising Tide                                                                                         39
stealth. They use techniques of overt and covert bargaining, negotiation, and coalition build-
ing, among others, to achieve their goals. These “everyday forms of resistance”2 do not show
up as large-scale social change until they become normative. In some contexts, there are
informal rules of resistance and of claiming space. In Nigeria, for instance, hygiene is often
linked with female beauty. Conversely, “calling a woman ‘dirty’ or ‘stinky’ is generally
perceived as degrading to the dignity of womanhood.” Women may respond by mobilizing
in  a “nude protest,” with fines and punishments imposed on the accuser (Akpabio and
Takara 2014). Such protest certainly shows the power of women to organize against insults
connected to hygiene, indicating that beliefs and norms are complex and fulfill a multitude
of social and economic objectives.
     Informal channels of influence can often be successful in securing rights and influence for
women. Sometimes, limited participation in formal groups frees women from the con-
straints of complying with rules and the time burden of participating in meetings. In an irri-
gation scheme in Nepal, for instance, women are able to take more water than they are
entitled to and contribute only minimally to maintenance work because they are not formal
members in the water user groups (Zwarteveen and Neupane 1996). Some studies suggest
that informal institutions are more effective at representing the needs of women, because
such institutions take into consideration preexisting social networks and practices
(Cleaver 1998; Sokile and van Koppen 2004). However, although informal institutions open
spaces for women to make their claims, such spaces are often less secure and do not neces-
sarily improve the bargaining power of women in their households and communities
(Meinzen-Dick and Zwarteveen 1998).
     Women have had a strong role in the history of resistance against the appropriation of their
rights over natural resources. Every continent has its own set of such movements and recount-
ing those is not within the scope of this paper. Box 4.1 highlights the role of Sioux women in
one of the most recent cases of such resistance, the Dakota Access Pipeline. The box discusses
the political activism of women, as well as the value that the river holds for them.
     Despite their strategies to claim social and political spaces, women’s representation in for-
mal water management institutions is limited. Even when women have a strong role in
informal systems, they do not have a formal role, and so their strategies are really attempts
to subvert an unjust system. Often, women and men work toward a common goal, but
women are not able to circumvent practices like underrepresentation in water committees.
A study in Ethiopia shows that men and women have a shared interest in “drinking pure
water.” Women do the lighter work while men do the heavy lifting, but men also make deci-
sions and deal with conflicts in the management of water points. Further, “management of
rehabilitated/extended irrigation scheme was carried out by male committee members
despite that there were several women plot holders. Irrigation with multi-purpose facilities…
(was) managed by two separate committees; water committee and irrigation committee.
The former committee had a fair representation of men and women within the committee
while the latter was composed by only men….” (Ebato and van Koppen 2005, 13). A study of




40                                                                                  The Rising Tide
      BOX 4.1.    Sioux Women Have Resisted the Dakota Access Pipeline


      “Water is the ‘first medicine’; it sustains us in our mother’s womb […] It’s used in ceremonies
      to heal people. […] Water can clean a spirit when it’s bleeding. It can calm a person and
      restore balance.”

                                     Faith Spotted Eagle, Native American activist and politician from
                                                                        the Sioux Nation (in Ravitz 2016)


      By emphasizing the spiritual value of water, Spotted Eagle’s assertions resonate with the
      motto of the Dakota Access Pipeline protests: Mni Wicani (Water Is Life).

      Women have played an important role in the protests against the Dakota Access Pipeline that
      began in early 2016 and intensified throughout the year. Not only did women appear in great
      numbers among the thousands of protestors that converged around the climax of the protests,
      many media outlets portrayed women as the driving force behind the resistance (Treuer 2016;
      Levin 2016). Some sources explained the salience of women in the protests as reflective of
      their important position in Native American society. “Women are the backbone of every tribe
      and every indigenous community,” is how a young woman from the Chemehuevi tribe was
      quoted as putting it (Levin 2016).

      The Dakota Access Pipeline protests began as a resistance to the construction of an oil
      pipeline near the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation. For members of the Standing Rock Sioux
      tribe, the pipeline represents a major environmental and cultural threat. The pipeline
      transports crude oil under the Missouri River, which is the primary source of drinking water
      of the Sioux tribe and the surrounding communities. Possible leakages from the pipeline
      could lead to devastating contamination of the water. The pipeline also damages sacred
      tribal sites. Regulations require federal agencies to consult with Native American tribes
      when public land is concerned; however, members of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe claimed
      that consultations were not adequately carried out on the construction of the Dakota
      Access Pipeline, and that in the process, sacred burial grounds were destroyed
      (McKibben 2016; Meyer 2016).




drought in Yunnan, China, finds that men and women have different coping strategies
and perceptions about drought. Women take a more proactive stance in changing their agri-
cultural strategy, and this is important given their salience in farming. But women do not
find place in formal decision-making structures (Su et al. 2017).
  Women’s representation in user groups is often cited in policy circles as a panacea for poor
management of natural resources and service delivery. This is a simplistic framing of
the more complex discussions that take place in the policy realm. However, it is also true
that many projects push the idea of user groups (such as water user associations or citizens’




The Rising Tide                                                                                             41
groups for sanitation) in the somewhat naïve belief that they will, just by their existence,
help the project meet its objectives. A large part of the project-based literature that considers
female participation in user associations that are set up at the instigation of project or
program authorities bemoans the low levels of women’s representation and participation
(see, for instance, Mahapatra 2006, in the case of Pani Panchayats in Odisha, India). Others
argue that pressuring women to participate in user groups adds to women’s burden or work
(Sun, Mwangi, and Meinzen-Dick 2011). Such insights serve to emphasize that directives for
setting up user groups do not succeed unless they are built on a strong foundation of social
capital and preexisting groups in which women see value.
  Merely having women as members of a solidarity group does not necessarily lead to
good outcomes across the board. In one of the few studies on irrigation management in
Pakistan that also considers the role of female-headed households, Nagrah, Chaudhry,
and  Giordano (2016) assess the role of tertiary-level farmer organizations, called
Khal Panchayats (KP). The KPs were expected to improve the efficiency of irrigation sys-
tems by maintaining watercourses, collecting seasonal water charges from within the
watercourse community, and facilitating dispute resolution. The KPs also have a vote in
higher-level irrigation management organizations. However, the study reveals that none
of the KPs had female members. Other results are more surprising. On the one hand,
a higher share of female-headed households in the community lowered the percentage of
contributions in watercourse maintenance. On the other hand, communities that had a
larger share of female-headed households were more engaged in collecting water charges
and voting in local elections. These findings suggest that headship alone does not empower
female farmers in participating in management forums.
  In sum, water is the theater for the play of gender relations in many ways. Water clearly
occupies physical space, but also carries cultural, social, political, and religious significance.
Therefore, the idea of space is at once real and symbolic. It highlights the intangible aspects
of water, that it has spiritual and ritual significance. Within the many spaces that water occu-
pies, the roles of women and men differ greatly, despite a strong history of strategies that
they have devised to be able to claim and retain space.


Notes
1.	 This term is used by Akpabio and Takara, citing Finneran (2009).

2.	 Term adapted from Scott (1985).




42                                                                                  The Rising Tide
            © Danielle C/Shutterstock.com




Chapter 5   A Tide That Lifts More Boats: Moving Toward
            Greater Gender Equality

            Just as many facets of “water writ large” reinforce gender inequality, it follows that water is a
            potent instrument to advance gender equality. The tide of progress has lifted many boats. How
            can we ensure that it lifts many more? How do we help policy and practice in thinking about
            what could work? World Bank (2013) emphasizes the importance of raising the ability, opportu-
            nity, and dignity of the individuals and groups most likely to be left out. This chapter reflects
            on ways in which change toward greater gender equality can take place. As we emphasize the
            role of water in making a dent in gender inequality more broadly, project personnel may ask
            the following. “We are extending coverage to an entire area. Should that not lead to benefits
            across the board? Why emphasize gender inequality here?” Or, “our program deals with
            water supply. What does gender or social exclusion have to do with it?” These are important
            questions to address.
              It deserves simultaneously underscoring that an area-based approach or indeed a
            household-based approach does not ensure that all members can or do participate. First,
            there are  significant inequalities in intra-community and intra-household dynamics that
            often impede the ability, opportunity, and dignity of those who may need the intervention
            the most. Second, interventions that focus on just one domain, such as better delivery of
            water supply, without attention to power relations and inequality, may not reach historically




            The Rising Tide                                                                               43
excluded groups, of which women may be one. This is because deficits in power and status
arising from lack of assets in the form of land or boats or tractors may also make those groups
less likely to assert their rights on the new water supply project. In short, not just the design
but the delivery of policies and programs matters for gender equality.
  A final introductory point in this chapter is that interventions that enhance gender
equality in water-related domains need to go beyond water-related “sectors” or ministries.
Since water impinges on every aspect of life, policies and programs will perforce have to be
grounded in many and not just a few sectors or areas. To take the example of the World
Bank Group, not just the Water GP, but other groups and practices, such as Energy,
Agriculture, Social, Urban and Rural Development, Health, Education, Social Protection,
Transport, Environment, and Poverty, as well as Gender, Jobs, Climate Change, and Disaster
Risk Management would need to take independent and coordinated action. Table 5.1 maps
some of the channels through which interventions can take place, mostly drawing from the
examples in the paper.


Who Drives Change?
World Bank (2013) notes that several actors can take steps to enhance social inclusion and
this can be applied to water and gender equality. The actors include the state, excluded
groups, private sector, champions in the community, and facilitating groups like nongovern-
mental organizations, community-based organizations, lobbyists, and lawyers. The role
of  the state in propelling social inclusion or, in this case, moving toward greater gender
equality, deserves special mention.

     The preeminent role of the state as the driver and propeller of change towards inclusion is well
     recognized. It can intervene for social inclusion through three conduits. The first is to create an
     enabling environment for social inclusion, such that citizens have the freedom to exercise their
     choice and to innovate for better outcomes and processes. The second is to design legislation,
     policy and programs that directly or indirectly affect social inclusion. The third is to ensure imple-
     mentation and enforcement of the legal and policy framework. All these roles are underpinned by
     the nature of the state, the degree of openness of the polity and the vision that the state and citi-
     zens share. The strength of both formal and informal institutions is critical for the success
     of state-led actions.

                                                                                  World Bank (2013, 200)

  Women and minorities are agents of change. They influence change at multiple levels—the
household, community, subnational, and national. Broad-based social movements that lead
to empowerment can enable them to assert their rights with respect to water. In Rajasthan,
for instance, initiatives such as the Women’s Development Program and later the Right to
Information movement found that once women have been inducted into a process of public
participation and group formation, they are also better able to demand and secure rights
with respect to drinking water. New empirical evidence draws the same conclusions, for
instance, through the study of MGNREGA (Girard 2014). Thus, collective action for water,




44                                                                                             The Rising Tide
where women’s actions are salient, is often preceded by a deeper process of social capital
formation. Such capital is formed for instance through groups such as burial societies in
Ethiopia (Dercon et al. 2008), self-help groups in India, or church, temple, or lineage groups
in China (Tsai 2007).
  The role of women’s groups and their leadership become especially important in fragile
and conflict settings. In such settings, there is a breakdown of service delivery and commu-
nities come under incredible stress. A set of three case studies from the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Afghanistan, and Liberia shows the pressures that communities face and the vul-
nerability of women to gender-based violence and exclusion. The case studies show that
women can play an important role in their communities, in reconstruction after conflict and
in water management during and after conflict (Burt and Keiru 2011). ADB (2013) reports that
a water supply and sanitation project in the Dang district of Nepal was constructed by a
women’s group that worked during a period of militancy. Overall, there is considerable
anecdotal evidence of the role of women in rural infrastructure during the conflict. This is
partly because the conflict in Nepal was accompanied by large-scale out-migration of men.
In the Democratic Republic of Congo, women’s involvement in infrastructure projects
increased significantly. Over time, and with the help of development partners and the gov-
ernment, women received contracts for construction and procurement of material and were
employed in infrastructure.
  Networks, partnerships, and coalitions provide sustained support to actions for change.
Men and boys are often the most powerful allies in the road to gender equality. Women’s
groups have of course been written about extensively, but moving toward greater equality
also needs champions from across the social spectrum, and not least from men. In many
cases, men are the main allies of women seeking assets, services, or spaces. These allies
could be in the form of elites in the community or elders (or even young schoolboys) in the
household. Benda-Beckmann et al. (1997) give the example of a project in Southwest
Burkina Faso that offered titles to rice plots to local men on improved land. In this case,
the men redirected the project team to women by pointing out that rice cultivation was
women’s domain. An initiative in North India run by WaterAid and Vatsalya involved men
and boys in supporting menstrual hygiene management. The actions included setting up
separate groups for men and boys, and using games, films, and meetings, oriented to gen-
der issues. Male masons and male members of school management committees were also
trained. This reduced the stigma around menstruation, and men and boys were more sup-
portive of the menstrual needs of women and girls in their community (Mahon, Tripathy,
and Singh 2015). Finally, coalitions across state and civil society, across civil society, or
with the private sector can have positive consequences. In the area of urban sanitation,
the Indian Alliance pooled the strategies and networks of the Indian National Slum
Dwellers’ Federation, along with Mahila Milan, a women’s network initiated by the Society
for the Promotion of Resource Centers, to push for more and better toilets (McGranahan
and Mitlin 2016).1




The Rising Tide                                                                            45
  The private sector has a strong role to play as well. Given that it has an important role in
financing water initiatives, the private sector can use its influence toward greater gender
equality. It can do this, among other ways, through the labor market, education, and in find-
ing better solutions to enable women and minorities to participate through scientific research.
There are several examples of bottled water companies, soft drink companies, and others
funding water-related initiatives as part of their corporate social responsibility. In the case of
large infrastructure, the private sector has a key role in ensuring that construction, design,
and monitoring consider the needs of those least likely to be able to agitate. Innovations in
the design of infrastructure, for instance, can enable persons with disabilities to participate
in public spaces. Women and girls with disabilities face formidable barriers when they are
menstruating. Accessible toilets can make a huge difference in their ability to participate in
school and the labor market. Finally, the media can raise awareness, check facts, and report
responsibly to ensure that the important issues surface when solutions are being sought.


What Kinds of Policies and Programs Can Help in Lifting More Boats
toward Gender and Social Inclusion?
Policies and programs that change the terms and conditions on which women and men at
risk of being left behind participate are the foundation for lasting change. What policies do
is as important as how they do it. The best opportunities can come to naught unless they are
cognizant of the cultural and social preferences of their clients, or indeed implemented
with sensitivity, enhancing the dignity of those for whom they are designed. For example,
some types of employment are notoriously exploitative and workers feel undervalued or
harassed and if they can afford to, would rather not participate. De Silva and Yamao (2006)
studied the effects of “organizational fairness” and “supervisor evaluation perceptions” on
the dedication of female employees in the Sri Lankan seafood processing industry. The
industry prefers to hire single young women, since they are more likely to work longer
hours in greater discomfort. The study found that perceptions of fairness are an important
determinant of employee performance and dedication to the organization. The same is true
of women’s participation in water user groups or when they are consulted as part of a new
program. Unless they feel that their views are valued, that they are making a difference,
they would be unlikely to take the time to participate. Terms and conditions could improve,
for instance, by holding supervisors, facilitators, and project personnel accountable for
their behavior, and seeking regular feedback from women and minorities on their satisfac-
tion with a service provider, supervisor, or any person/group in authority. Several citizen
feedback tools are available. The challenge is to adapt them for a purpose and put them into
effective action.
  Various policy and programmatic interventions, through infrastructure or services, can
help women enter and stay in the labor market. In the case of water utilities, human resource
policies can create incentives to hire and retain women. They can do this, among other ways,
by enforcing wage equality and fairness and facilitating on-the-job training and overall




46                                                                                  The Rising Tide
                                           career progression. Zero tolerance of sexual harassment, facilities or support for childcare,
                                           paid leave, flexible working hours, and other policies can create conditions that will attract
                                           women into the utilities. Other policies and programs, ranging from implicit and explicit
                                           affirmative action to those that cultivate leadership among women and girls, can also help.
                                           Countries that do not have enough engineering graduates would benefit from greater push
                                           for females in STEM programs. They can also learn from countries like the Arab Republic of
                                           Egypt and Iraq, which have a more balanced representation of women in water utilities. For
                                           instance, 30 percent of the technical employees in the water utility in Baghdad are women.
                                           Table 5.1 lays out steps that water utilities can take to hire and retain women.
                                               Programs that boost the skills of women and minority groups have benefits that go well
                                           beyond employment or individual empowerment. Consider the high risk of drowning,



TABLE 5.1.   What Can Utilities, the Private Sector, and the State Do to Attract and Retain Female Professionals?

                                                                    Attracting and retaining
 STEM education                                                                                                                    Legal architecture
                                                                  women in water companies
 ◆◆ Encourage girls to enter STEM through            ◆◆ Encourage women working in the sector to form           ◆◆ Establish legal measures to increase the number
   scholarships in secondary and tertiary              formal and informal peer networks.                            of women in the water industry.
   education.                                        	 Women scientists, engineers, managers, and policy        ◆◆ Introduce mandatory training on gender
 	 In Lao PDR, an Asian Development Bank               makers in Central Asia created a network for                  equality for all utility employees.
   project gives scholarships to female high           women in water to collaborate in the region.             	 A USAID program builds the capacity of Kenyan
   school graduates to train in the field of         ◆◆ Offer training on gender equality to all employees.          utilities to mainstream gender in service delivery
   engineering.                                                                                                      and institutional operations.
                                                     	 The International Water Association develops
 ◆◆ Conduct STEM outreach programs to                  action plans for water service providers in Sub-         ◆◆ Introduce policies that mandate equal gender
   attract girls.                                      Saharan African countries to implement gender                 representation in the sector.
 	 The Working to Advance African Women                equality in their companies.                             ◆◆ Establish equal pay laws.
   Foundation trains university students             ◆◆ Identify women leaders to showcase the role of          	 Some member countries of the Pacific Water and
   to provide STEM tutoring to girls in                women in the sector.                                          Waste Association pay their female staff more
   secondary schools.                                                                                                than men. In American Samoa, the total salary of
                                                     ◆◆ Offer awards to women who excel in the field.
 ◆◆ Provide practical experience to young            	 The government of South Africa offers awards to               women is 135 percent of the total salary of men;
   graduates through internships in utilities.         women who contribute to the water sector.                     77 percent of these women staff are engineers.

 ◆◆ Match girls to women leaders in the field                                                                   ◆◆ Implement family-friendly policies, such as
                                                     ◆◆ Build leadership and managerial capacity of
   through mentorship programs.                                                                                      childcare facilities, paid leave, and flex work.
                                                       women at all levels.
 	 The Million Women Mentors initiative in                                                                      ◆◆ Enforce strict sexual harassment regulations
                                                     ◆◆ Offer mentorship programs to female staff.
   the United States offers mentoring to girls                                                                       and anti-discrimination policies.
                                                     	 A mentoring program by the Association of
   to support them to pursue careers in STEM.
                                                       Women in Water, Energy and Environment
 ◆◆ Introduce curricula reform to attract girls        brings professional women together to share
   in science and math.                                experiences and knowledge.
 ◆◆ Offer training to teachers to retain girls in
                                                     ◆◆ Encourage management to motivate junior
   STEM programs.
                                                       female staff.
 ◆◆ Build bridges between universities/
                                                     ◆◆ Develop communication mechanisms to
   vocational education and utility companies.
                                                       incorporate women’s feedback.
                                                     ◆◆ Establish human resource policies that incentivize
                                                       hiring and retaining women.

Sources: Authors compilation based on ADB 2014; AWWEE n.d.; IWA n.d.; Million Women Mentors n.d.; PWWA 2016; Republic of South Africa Department of Water and
Sanitation n.d.; Thompson et al. 2017; USAID 2014; WAAW Foundation n.d.; Women for Water n.d.
Note: STEM = science, technology, engineering, and mathematics; USAID = U.S. Agency for International Development.




                                           The Rising Tide                                                                                                              47
where the issue of women’s swimming ability and opportunity is called into question.
Swimming ability, or lack thereof, is sometimes linked to norms of seclusion, in that females
in some communities do not swim with males or in their presence. Some programs have
tried to address this issue. For instance, SwimSafe (n.d.) in Bangladesh works to ensure gen-
der balance in training volunteer instructors and children ages 4 to 10 years. Moore et al.
(2010) document the case of Somali immigrants in Seattle, Washington, who are almost all
Muslim, and have strict norms of seclusion. A project worked with the immigrant commu-
nity to design a culturally appropriate swimming program. In the process, the project gave
many females the opportunity to learn to swim and improve their fitness levels. A program
in Zanzibar provides young women and girls appropriate swimwear, and gives them swim-
ming and aquatic safety lessons (National Geographic n.d.). The private sector has also
responded with a range of appropriate swimwear for women and girls who are prevented
from learning to swim due to cultural restrictions.
 Several programs have focused on sharpening women’s skills in the technical aspects of
water supply systems. A program in Gujarat, India, trains rural women who have low human
capital to repair village handpumps. Participation in the training program significantly
increases the women’s likelihood of being employed outside household farms. There are
other voice and empowerment benefits as well (Jie Chen and Chindarkar 2017). In Nepal,
a  rural water supply project trained women as village maintenance workers, local latrine
builders, and rainwater harvesting jar masons (Rautanen and Baaniya 2008). Although there
has been no robust evaluation of impact, anecdotal evidence suggests that such training
empowers women to have a greater say within the household and in the community. Other
insights suggest that such empowerment can also place women at risk of backlash from male
members. This underscores the need for a better understanding of what works in innova-
tions that empower women and close gender gaps, what the unintended consequences
could be, and how such innovations can be sustained.
 Sometimes, broad area development or women’s empowerment programs have large
impacts on the ability of women and minority groups to access water-related services or
assets. In India, an entire generation of “watershed development” programs focused on
multiple problems, but used the watershed as the binding frame. In a recent study from
Rajasthan, India, Desai and Joshi (2014) analyze the impact of an “integrated rural liveli-
hoods” program in Dungarpur, Rajasthan, that was piloted by the Self-Employed Women’s
Association (SEWA). They assigned villages randomly to treatment or control groups. Their
results confirm the widely held idea that overall empowerment through group strengthen-
ing programs, such as self-help groups, has a salutary effect on a range of areas in women’s’
lives. In this case, the study finds that in villages with SEWA programs or among women who
are members of SEWA at the village level, there is greater participation in group programs,
increased control over domestic decision making, and greater awareness of where to express
grievances about public services. The results are particularly salient in the case of drinking
water. Box 5.1 illustrates how a project intended to protect local populations from floods can




48                                                                              The Rising Tide
      BOX 5.1. Brazil: A Municipal Governance Project Provides More Than
      Protection against Floods


      In Teresina, Brazil, a project titled “Enhancing Municipal Governance and Quality of Life”
      was intended to modernize and improve the capacity of the municipal government to
      protect poor residents in the Lagoas do Norte region from perennial flooding. This
      involved resettlement to safer areas and expanded access to sanitation and water services
      for the resettled families. In a second phase, the project received additional financing and
      introduced new components. For example, a dedicated component was introduced on
      enhancing social and economic development of the Lagoas do Norte region targeted to
      the low-income population. The project area has a higher proportion of female residents,
      compared with the city in the aggregate. The second phase focused on strengthening
      community associations to improve access to basic services and crèches, and on activities
      for crime and violence prevention that were targeted to the most vulnerable groups, such
      as Afro-descendant youth and women. As part of the violence prevention activities, the
      project focused on good diagnostics, job training, public awareness campaigns, and
      support services for survivors of violence. In all these activities, there has been a focus
      on both men and women.




also build in components for crime and violence prevention intended to protect the most
excluded groups of males and females.
  The way a project or program reaches out to its clients can have a bearing on its sustain-
ability and even its short-term performance. This once again emphasizes that not just the
design of the policies and programs, but also the manner they implicitly and explicitly treat
clients and citizens is important. Some approaches use cultural beliefs and taboos or forms
of psychological pressure to achieve sanitation goals. Akpabio and Takara (2014) cite Scott
et al. (2007), pointing out that a national handwashing program in Ghana used disgust to
motivate handwashing, leading to an increase in self-reported handwashing prior to eating
by 41 percent and after defecation by 13 percent. Programs in Burkina Faso also used disgust
to motivate behavior change. The Community Led Total Sanitation approach uses the idea
of shaming to put pressure on households to give up open defecation. Activities known as
“triggering” are used to elicit reactions of shame and disgust, which put pressure on house-
holds to build and use latrines and handwashing stations. These strategies have come under
criticism for humiliating especially the most disempowered groups (Bartram et al. 2012).
Other approaches include subsidies to citizens to encourage them to build and use toilets.
Still others build on existing programs, to “mainstream” messages related to water.
  With the spread of microfinance experiments across most of the developing world, women
have built successful platforms through which they can engage in a broad range of activities.
Of these, water and sanitation are two areas where microfinance groups can provide small




The Rising Tide                                                                                      49
loans to individuals and groups to build or maintain their water-related infrastructure.
The  Katosi Women Development Trust, a nongovernmental organization in Uganda,
combines loans with capacity building. The strong group connections, knowledge about
financial gains to be made, and awareness of the importance of water quality on health
ensure that women have the skills and resources to pay back loans. Furthermore, the Katosi
Women Development Trust helps women to sell the excess water harvested during the rainy
season to people without water tanks (Waldorf 2013). In India, the self-help group move-
ment is also experimenting with loans for toilet construction, as part of the Swachh Bharat
(Clean India) mission. The social capital accumulated in microfinance groups is often of
great value in deciding on the right investments for individual members and the group.
 In the current milieu of rapid change, technology can be an agent of inclusion or exclusion.
Irrigation technology is a case in point. Because women have a lower likelihood of having
titles to land and a higher likelihood of being smallholders, they can be excluded from new
technologies. But this need not be the case if active efforts are made to reach them with
information and training. A study of treadle pumps in Malawi shows that women had a
higher chance of adopting the new technology due to the intensive information and training
programs that were targeted to them. This is despite that women were less likely to own
assets than men were (Kamwamba-Mtethiwa et al. 2012). In another example from Malawi,
Wood, Foster, and Kols (2012) find that the successful adoption of a chlorine water treatment
product, WaterGuard, depended on continuous and positive contact of women with health
care workers, especially during home visits, and an extended free trial of the product to
cover the initial cost. Social support from family and the community also helped. The study
underscores the importance of interpersonal communication in ensuring consistent use of
the chlorine water treatment. Finally, technology provides the opportunity for citizens to
engage with the state and service providers. However, the chances are that women’s access
to such platforms is more limited than men’s, a risk that special efforts can mitigate.
 It is important to ensure that the voices of disadvantaged women are heard and their
interests protected during the construction of large water infrastructure. As World Bank
(2013, 237) notes: “Consultations segregated by gender and other groups can…help project
teams understand why group characteristics matter and how they can be addressed for good
results.” But consultations are only a first step toward good design and implementation.
The large hydropower project Trung Son in Vietnam put in place systems that seek positive
results toward gender equality in several areas: access to compensation under the resettle-
ment plan; strengthening the overall monitoring system of livelihood improvement
activities, including by enhancing the capacities of project staff on data collection and
reporting; increasing women’s participation in livelihood activities; better training curricula
and methods, including coaching the district Women’s Union in their use; and developing
and successfully piloting cost-effective, appropriate, and innovative solutions to reach out
to the most vulnerable ethnic Hmong populations, including informing them about project
impacts and compensation in their own language (World Bank 2017d).




50                                                                               The Rising Tide
  Reforms related to natural resources or infrastructure that appear gender neutral
may have unexpected outcomes. These could be positive or negative. Feminist critiques of
policy changes in the field of environment, land tenure, and other areas related to water
often point out that women’s customary rights can be infringed unless these are consid-
ered upfront (for instance, Zwarteveen 1998). Carney (1993) analyzes policy changes to the
Gambian wetlands through irrigated rice farming and horticulture and finds that these
were accompanied by year-round cultivation instead of one-crop activity, agricultural
diversification, surplus cereal production, and new avenues of income generation among
rural households. Many of these opportunities meant additional demands on female labor,
without the commensurate benefits of ownership and control of resources. Harris (2006)
studies the spread of irrigation to Southwest Anatolia, which, while leading to overall pros-
perity, also intensified inequalities between landowners and the landless. Harris highlights
how the attendant large-scale cotton cultivation placed additional demands on female and
child labor, which in turn skewed the marriage market, as men looked for additional wives.
  Yet, all unforeseen outcomes need not be negative. In the evaluation of a short-term
impact of a pilot land regularization program in Rwanda, Ali, Deininger, and Goldstein (2014)
find that households in the treatment group whose land rights had been regularized had a
higher probability of starting or continuing soil conservation investments such as in bunds,
terraces, and check dams. This was twice the change in the incidence of investment in the
control group. Female-headed households in the treatment group had an almost threefold
increase in the likelihood of investing in or continuing soil conservation, compared with the
control group, and thus had greater welfare impacts.


Shaping the Tide to Lift More Boats
This chapter has thus far highlighted ways in which change can take place toward greater
gender equality in water-related domains. It has also emphasized that water-related inter-
ventions can have implications for gender equality much more broadly. Thus, the rising tide
can be influenced to lift many more boats. What can we do to propel this change? The first
step toward change is to identify the problem. Unless we know what we are up against, we
are likely to design policies and programs that do not have the outcomes we would have
expected. Box 5.2 highlights the first step toward lasting change—good ex ante diagnostics
that address four key questions: who is likely to be left out, from what and how, why this
would be the case, and what can be done. The final part of this chapter maps initiatives that
can move the needle toward greater gender equality in water.
  In concluding this chapter, table 5.2 maps actions along the three domains of water—
asset, service, and space—to show examples of initiatives that can further gender quality.
The table draws mostly from examples used in the paper to highlight and summarize how
they can help in moving the needle toward more effective policies, programs, and projects.
The list is illustrative and provides a snapshot of the types of interventions that have been
used by others.




The Rising Tide                                                                           51
TABLE 5.2.    Influencing Gender Equality in Water: Snapshot of Actions

 Channel for
                    Illustrative actions targeting those most likely to be left behind          Illustrative examples of policies, programs, and projects
 intervention
 Assets
 Natural           •	 Securing property rights—ownership, control, usufruct, de facto,       In the Andes, women participate in the construction of irrigation
 resources           and de jure                                                             systems and thereby establish their rights to irrigation water.
                   •	 Ensuring that smallholders are not excluded from credit,
                     information, and technology
                   •	 Implementing broad area development, for example, watershed
                     development programs, with a gender differentiated approach
                   •	 Considering the unintended gender outcomes of reforms related
                      to natural resources
 Infrastructure    •	 Participation in decisions about location                              The Trung Son hydropower project in Vietnam included benefit-
                   •	 Benefit sharing—compensation, employment, skills, and so forth         sharing measures, including increasing women’s participation in
                     related to the construction and operation of infrastructure             livelihood activities.
                   •	 Corporate social responsibility of the private sector
 Jobs              •	 Better terms and conditions of work—wage equality, sexual              A program implemented by SEWA in Gujarat, India, trained
                     harassment, childcare, safety, and flexible working hours               rural women to repair village handpumps, resulting in increased
                   •	 Enforcement of anti-discrimination laws                                employment outside household farms for women.
                   •	 Representation of women in water utilities                             A rural water supply and sanitation project in Nepal trained
                   •	 Investing in mechanisms to ensure hiring and retention of women        women as village maintenance workers, local latrine builders, and
                     in water utilities                                                      rainwater harvesting jar masons.
                   •	 Providing mentoring and coaching to encourage women to pursue          A mentoring program by the Association of Women in Water,
                     engineering jobs                                                        Energy and Environment brings professional women together to
                   •	 Being cognizant of occupational sex segregation in water-related       share experiences and knowledge.
                     jobs and designing ways to transcend it                                 A USAID program builds the capacity of Kenyan utilities to
                   •	 Facilitating on-the-job training and overall career progression for    mainstream gender in service delivery and institutional operations.
                     women in water utilities                                                In water utilities in the American Samoa, women have higher
                   •	 Focusing on job quality, so that women who are freed from              wages than do men and 77 percent of female staff are engineers.
                     the responsibility of domestic water management can enter
                      and stay in the labor market, if they have a choice
 Risk mitigation   •	 Safety nets                                                            Bangladesh’s social safety net program—the Employment
 and adaptation    •	 Employment in projects to smooth income variability                    Generation Program for the Poorest—put in place quotas for
                   •	 Better information and awareness of opportunities                      female participants to tide over income variability during the lean
                   •	 Focus on violence prevention and wellbeing of                          season or during disasters.
                     minorities and women                                                    A program in Brazil intended to improve the capacity of the
                                                                                             municipal government to protect poor residents in the Lagoas do
                                                                                             Norte region from perennial flooding, introduced new components.
                                                                                             These included crime and violence prevention and were targeted to
                                                                                             the most vulnerable groups, such as minority youth and women and
                                                                                             also provided support services for survivors of violence.
 Services
 Water supply      •	 Paying attention to distance, predictability, and affordability        The Katosi Women Development Trust in Uganda provided loans
                     when designing projects                                                 and capacity building to women’s groups to access improved
                   •	 Understanding norms around who manages water and how it may            water sources.
                     impact their productive and reproductive roles
                   •	 Leveraging microfinance, especially when it empowers credit and
                      thrift groups
 Sanitation        •	 Ensuring that toilets are “package deals”—clean, safe, predictable,    A national handwashing program in Ghana used disgust of
                     secure, private, with water supply, and accessible                      contamination, disease and interest in children’s wellbeing to
                   •	 Understanding the intangible, social, religious, and cultural values   motivate handwashing.
                     of water when programming for behavior change
                                                                                                                                       table continues next page




52                                                                                                     The Rising Tide
TABLE 5.2.     continued

 Channel for
                      Illustrative actions targeting those most likely to be left behind            Illustrative examples of policies, programs, and projects
 intervention
                    •	 Using conditional cash transfers efficiently with attention to
                       cultural norms and practices
                    •	 Building coalitions across the state, civil society, and/or private sector
 Irrigation         •	 Targeting small farmers and women                                          The Malawi government targeted training in treadle pump use to
                    •	 Improving women farmers’ access to extension services                    women, resulting in a higher likelihood of women adopting the
                                                                                                new technology.
 Information,       •	 Ensuring that ICT takes a gender differentiated approach, realizing      The Ministry of Health in Malawi encouraged women to adopt
 communication,        that access to enablers such as mobile phones and the Internet is        a chlorine water treatment product by relying on interpersonal
 technology            gendered and can leave out those who most need it                        communication and extending a free trial of the product.
                    •	 Investing in research for new solutions in design, accessibility, and
                       monitoring
 Waterways          •	 Ensuring that women can access ferries and other waterways               The Inland Waterway Project in Vietnam mainstreamed gender in the
                    •	 Providing safety, affordability, and predictability                      transport authority and in the design and operation of the project.
 Spaces
 Skills that break •	 Training in nontraditional skills, investing in STEM skills for           The Working to Advance African Women Foundation trained
 stereotypes           females, and following through with preference in STEM jobs              university students to provide STEM tutoring and training to girls
 and enable the        related to water                                                         in secondary schools.
 exercise of voice •	 Teaching girls and women to swim, in a culturally sensitive manner An ADB project in Lao PDR gives scholarships to female high school
 and agency         •	 Building women’s capacity in negotiation, leadership, and                graduates to train in the field of engineering.
                       mentorship and following it through in the medium or long term           SwimSafe in Bangladesh teaches children to swim and ensures
                                                                                                gender balance in training volunteer instructors.
 Accountability     •	 Strengthening the demand side as well as the supply side                 Citizen Report Cards in Kenya captured women’s complaints that
 of the state and •	 Ensuring that grievance redress systems take into account                  they were heckled while accessing water from kiosks, the long
 providers           the likelihood of exclusion of some members of the community in            queues they had to endure, and the inconvenience and loss of
                       their design and accessibility                                           time in their efforts to obtain water.

                    •	 Enabling citizen feedback tools to report on satisfaction
                       with service providers
                    •	 Ensuring the cultural competence of providers and project personnel
                    •	 Establishing well-rounded monitoring systems
 Incentives to      •	 Realizing that norms are mutable and the right polices can change        WaterAid and Vatsalya in North India involved boys and men in
 change norms          retrograde norms that reproduce inequality                               supporting MHM, resulting in reduced stigma around menstruation.
                    •	 Focusing on men and boys as agents of change toward                      Training women in nontraditional skills, such as hand pump
                       gender equality                                                          mechanics, as in projects in Gujarat, India, and Nepal, breaks
                                                                                                stereotypes about male and female occupations in water.
 Social capital     •	 Ensuring that new forums build on existing social capital, but also      SEWA’s integrated livelihood program in Rajasthan, India, worked with
                       being cognizant that traditional groups can be exclusionary of           self-help groups and generated positive results for women (including
                       women and other minorities                                               increased control over domestic decision making and greater
                                                                                                awareness of where to express grievances about public services).
 Formal roles in    •	 Recognizing that informal institutions can be more representative        Institutionalizing formal participation of women through quotas
 decision making       of the needs of women, but that they can also be less secure             under MGNREGA in India led to their increased participation.
 and ensuring       •	 Building-in formal roles for women in decision-making structures (such
 participation         as quotas in local government or user associations) and accompanying
                       this with training and oversight to ensure active participation
                    •	 Conducting meaningful consultations with women and men and
                       ensuring that the needs of the whole community are heard,
                       especially of those most likely to be left behind
Source: Authors.
Note: ADB = Asian Development Bank; ICT = information and communications technology; MGNREGA = Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act;
MHM = Menstrual Hygiene Management; SEWA = Self-Employed Women’s Association; STEM = science, technology, engineering, and mathematics; USAID = U.S. Agency
for International Development.




                                           The Rising Tide                                                                                                            53
     BOX 5.2. Step 1 toward Greater Gender Equality in Water: Asking the
     Right Questions


     Framing the problem accurately is the first step in the direction of achieving greater gender
     equality in water. This paper shows that we lack evidence in several areas and that the
     conventional wisdom is not always borne out in practice. Further, gender inequality often
     plays out in unexpected ways. Hence, we need a clear understanding of who is excluded, from
     which domains, through which processes, and what should be done next. Without such a
     framing, we are likely to design imperfect policies and programs.

     Das (2016) summarizes this in a “four-question” methodology, based on the tenets of
     World Bank (2013).

     The “who” question. Clearly, gender is not women and not all women are disadvantaged.
     Neither are all men equally privileged. The intersection of multiple identities compounds
     disadvantage, as does place in the lifecycle or specific lifecycle events. The initial diagnostic
     identifies who is excluded.

     The “how” question. What are the domains from which and the processes through which
     exclusion occurs? Inequality and exclusion often manifest through formal and informal
     rules and practices. Many of these practices are embedded in social norms and even
     religious rituals. Norms and rituals often reinforce inequality and established hierarchies.
     Designing policies that necessitate significant behavioral change therefore needs a
     careful understanding of the origins of the behaviors and norms that underpin them.
     The “how question” will identify the gendered nature of exclusion, the domains from
     which exclusion takes place (assets, services, and spaces), and the practices through
     which exclusion is enforced.

     The “why” question. Why is gender inequality so pervasive? Why are some men and
     women disadvantaged? Are there historical and institutional reasons for the
     inequality or exclusion? What are the underlying power relations that maintain the
     status quo? The “why question” will analyze the underlying power structures that abet
     the exclusion of some women and men, at the household, community, subnational,
     national, and transnational levels. It will look at the political economy constraints
     to moving forward.

     The “what next” question. How do we move forward toward greater gender equality in
     water-related domains? The analysis of the who, how, and why will provide pointers to what
     needs to be done and how. This initial step toward designing policy and actions will provide
     invaluable input to policy makers and development practitioners.

     Overall, the four questions are “step 1” in the design of effective policies and programs.




54                                                                                                The Rising Tide
Note
1.	 Mahila Milan (“Women Together”) is a federation of women’s collectives that provides credit to pavement dwellers in
  Mumbai and other cities across India. Its credit scheme aims to promote regular savings by women and thereby increase
  their decision-making power. Microfinancing by Mahila Milan financed the water and supply initiatives promoted by the
  Society for the Promotion of Resource Centers (World Bank 1999).




The Rising Tide                                                                                                     55
Chapter 6    Conclusion

                                            …With the certainty of tides, Just like hopes springing high, Still I’ll rise

                                                                                           “Still I Rise,” Maya Angelou


            In mapping the relationship between water—visualized in all its breadth—and gender, this
            paper is possibly the most comprehensive, to our knowledge. It points out that water and
            gender are intimately connected and that water can be seen as a canvas for the play of social
            and gender relations. Based on a review of a vast, multidisciplinary literature, the paper
            presents a “thinking device” to enable academics and practitioners to envision water and
            impute its relationship with gender more clearly. Water is presented as an asset, a service,
            and a space. The idea of space is at once the paper’s most original contribution and perhaps
            the most complex element to comprehend. The idea brings out the physical and esoteric
            dimensions of water, which carries cultural, social, political, and religious significance, in
            addition to occupying physical space. The paper also highlights change in behavior, which is
            often at the heart of reforms related to water, and often depends on cognizance of the
            nonmonetary, noneconomic, esoteric values of water. Further, norms and practices in
            the  domains related to water are often instruments of solidifying gender inequality and
                                                                                                reaching
            hierarchies at large, but these are mutable and interventions in water can have far-­
            consequences for equality and inclusion more generally. In sum, this paper is a contribution
            to two sets of discourses—one on the understanding of water more broadly, and the other on
            advancing gender equality.
              Although the paper contributes to the world of ideas, it is also a reflection on the path to
            action. Using the metaphor of a rising tide that may leave some boats behind, the paper is
            forward looking and asks: how can the tide lift more boats? It asks practitioners to start with
            the right diagnostic of the problem they intend to solve, and emphasizes that what policies
            do is as important as how they do it. Finally, it points out that interventions that enhance
            gender equality in water-related domains need to go beyond water-related “sectors” or
            ministries. Since water affects every aspect of life, the policies and programs need to be
            grounded in many and not just a few sectors or areas.
              The following are the main messages of this study:

            1.	 Water can be thought of as an asset, a service, and a space. It has distinct economic, as well
              as noneconomic and nonmonetary values. The latter are often spiritual or social and the
              underlying norms and practices that play out are often deeply gendered.

            2.	Water is an arena where gender relations play out in ways that often mirror inequalities
              between the sexes. For instance, women’s lower access to land is mirrored in their lower
              access to water-related natural resource assets.

            3.	Gender inequality in water, as elsewhere, reflects complexities that are not easily
              predicted. For example, not all women are disadvantaged, nor all men privileged.




            The Rising Tide                                                                                           57
     People have multiple identities based, among other things, on ethnicity, race, caste, reli-
     gion, socioeconomic status, location, disability status, and sexual orientation. The inter-
     section of identities creates unique situations—and requires specific solutions.

4.	Norms and practices related to water often exacerbate ingrained gender and other
     hierarchies. Informal institutions, taboos, rituals, and norms all play a part in cementing
     the status quo. Therefore, water often reflects, and even reinforces, gender inequality.

5.	The nonmonetary, noneconomic values of water are important for policy and practice.
     That is because they influence the behavior of individuals and groups, particularly their
     response to water-related reforms or interventions.

6.	Interventions that balance gender relations in water-related domains can have a strong
     influence in furthering gender equality more broadly.

7.	Policies and programs can influence change. They are particularly effective when they
     give voice and provide opportunity to those likely to be left out.




58                                                                                 The Rising Tide
Appendix A     Steps for Review for the Study


              1.	 Established criteria for selection: peer-reviewed journals, book chapters, and selected working papers from
                reputable scientific research organizations, after 1990.

              2.	Conducted Google scholar keyword search based on the business lines and thematic codes for water in the
                World Bank Group. (Keywords: water carrying, hygiene and sanitation, natural disasters, water management,
                irrigation, fisheries, water insecurity, hydropower, and dams)

              3.	Expanded keyword search to more than 50 keywords. Search terms combined with “gender” and “women.”

              4.	Selected articles and authors of relevance and significance and their bibliographies to identify further articles.

              5.	All selected articles read and summarized in an annotated bibliography.

              6.	Articles catalogued and tabulated according to selected criteria.

              7.	 Targeted search to find additional supporting evidence for the report.

              8.	Review of relevant knowledge products that did not meet the annotated bibliography criteria.




             The Rising Tide                                                                                                          59
 References
Abiona, O., and M. Koppensteiner. 2016. “The Impact of Household Shocks on Domestic Violence: Evidence from Tanzania.”
Working Paper No. 16/14. University of Leicester, United Kingdom.

ADB (Asia Development Bank). 2013. The Role of Women in Peacebuilding in Nepal. Publication Stock No. ARM135756-2.
Manila, Philippines: ADB.

———. 2014. Women, Water, and Leadership. ADB Briefs No. 24. Manila, Philippines: ADB.

Akpabio, E., and K. Takara. 2014. “Understanding and Confronting Cultural Complexities Characterizing Water, Sanitation and
Hygiene in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Water International 39 (7): 921–32.

Alexander, K., C. Oduor, E. Nyothach, K. Laserson, N. Amek, A. Eleveld, and M. Ombok. 2014. “Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Conditions in Kenyan Rural Schools: Are Schools Meeting the Needs of Menstruating Girls?” Water 6 (5): 1453–66.

Ali, D. A., K. Deininger, and M. Goldstein. 2014. “Environmental and Gender Impacts of Land Tenure Regularization in Africa:
Pilot Evidence from Rwanda.” Journal of Development Economics 110: 262–75.

Anastasiadis, F., F. Archontakis, G. Banias, and C. Achillas. 2014. “Consumers’ Perception of Wastewater Usage in Agriculture:
Evidence from Greece.” In Agricultural Cooperative Management and Policy: New Robust, Reliable and Coherent Modelling
Tools, edited by C. Zopounidis, N. Kalogeras, K. Mattas, G. van Dijk, and G. Baourakis, 137–50. Cooperative Management Series.
New York: Springer.

AWWEE (Association of Women in Water, Energy and Environment). n.d. 2017 AWWEE Mentoring Program. AWWEE,
Sacramento, CA (accessed August 1, 2017), https://awwee.org/mentoring-program/.

Bartram J., K. Charles, B. Evans, L. O’Hanlon, and S. Pedley. 2012. “Commentary on Community-Led Total Sanitation and
Human Rights: Should the Right to Community-Wide Health Be Won at the Cost of Individual Rights?” Journal of Water
Health 10: 499–503.

Benda-Beckmann, K., M. de Bruijn, H. van Dijk, G. Hesseling, B. van Koppen, and L. Res. 1997. “Rights of Women to the Natural
Resources Land and Water.” Working Paper No. 2. Women and Development, Development Assistance, Development
Cooperation Information Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Hague, the Netherlands.

Burt, M., and B. J. Keiru. 2011. “Strengthening Post-Conflict Peacebuilding through Community Water-Resource Management:
Case Studies from Democratic Republic of Congo, Afghanistan and Liberia.” Water International 36 (2): 232–41.

Cairns, M., C. Workman, and I. Tandon. 2017. “Gender Mainstreaming and Water Development Projects: Analyzing
Unexpected Enviro-Social Impacts in Bolivia, India, and Lesotho.” Gender, Place and Culture 24 (3): 325–42.

Caldwell, B. K., W. T. Smith, K. Lokuge, G. Ranmuthugala, K. Dear, A. H. Milton, M. R. Sim, J. C. Ng, and S. N. Mitra. 2006.
“Access to Drinking-Water and Arsenicosis in Bangladesh.” Journal of Health, Population, and Nutrition 24 (3): 336–45.

Carney, J. 1993. “Converting the Wetlands, Engendering the Environment: The Intersection of Gender with Agrarian Change in
the Gambia.” Economic Geography 69 (4): 329–48.

Chen, M. 2014. Informal Economy Monitoring Study Sector Report: Home-Based Workers. Cambridge, MA: WIEGO.

Cleaver, F. 1998. “Incentives and Informal Institutions: Gender and the Management of Water.” Agriculture and Human Values
15 (4): 347–60.

Coffey, D., A. Gupta, P. Hathi, N. Khurana, D. Spears, N. Srivastav, and S. Vyas. 2014. “Revealed Preference for Open Defecation
Evidence from a New Survey in Rural North India.” Economic and Political Weekly 49 (38): 43–55.

Corno, L., N. Hildebrandt, and A. Voena. 2016. “Weather Shocks, Age of Marriage and the Direction of Marriage Payments.”
DISCE Working Paper No. 40. Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan, Italy.

Council of Canadian Academies. 2015. Some Assembly Required: STEM Skills and Canada’s Economic Productivity—The Expert
Panel on STEM Skills for the Future. Ottowa: Council of Canadian Academies.

Das Gupta, M. 1995. “Life Course Perspectives on Women’s Autonomy and Health Outcomes.” American Anthropologist 97 (3):
481–91.




The Rising Tide                                                                                                              61
Das, M. 2016. Social Inclusion in Macro-Level Diagnostics: Reflecting on the World Bank Group’s Early Systematic Country
Diagnostics. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.

Deininger, K., A. Goyal, and H. Nagarajan. 2010. “Inheritance Law Reform and Women’s Access to Capital: Evidence from
India’s Hindu Succession Act.” Policy Research Working Paper 5338, World Bank, Washington, DC.

De Silva, D., and M. Yamao. 2006. “The Involvement of Female Labor in Seafood Processing in Sri Lanka: Impact of
Organizational Fairness and Supervisor Evaluation on Employee Commitment.” In Global Symposium on Gender and Fisheries:
Seventh Asian Fisheries Forum, edited by P. Choo, S. Hall, and M. Williams. Penang: World Fish Publishers.

Dercon, S., J. Hoddinott, P. Krishnan, and T. Woldehannna. 2008. “Collective Action and Vulnerability: Burial Societies in Rural
Ethiopia.” CAPRi Working Paper 83. CGIAR, Washington, DC.

Desai, J., and S. Joshi. 2014. “Collective Action and Community Development: Evidence from Self-Help Groups in Rural India.”
The World Bank Economic Review 28 (3): 492–524.

Dias, S., and M. Samson. 2016. Informal Economy Monitoring Study Sector Report: Waste Pickers. Cambridge, MA: WIEGO.

Doocy, S., A. Daniels, S. Murray, and T. D. Kirsch. 2013. “The Human Impact of Floods: A Historical Review of Events 1980-2009
and Systematic Literature Review.” PLOS Currents Disasters 16 (1).

Drolet, J., L. Dominelli, M. Alston, R. Ersing, G. Mathbor, and H. Wu. 2015. “Women Rebuilding Lives Post-Disaster: Innovative
Community Practices for Building Resilience and Promoting Sustainable Development.” Gender & Development 23 (3):
433–48.

Ebato, M., and B. van Koppen. 2005. “Gender Relations and Management of Multiple Water Use System in Adidaero Watershed,
Tigray Region in Northern Ethiopia.” Paper prepared for International Research Workshop on “Gender and Collective Action,”
Chiang Mai, Thailand.

Flatø, M., R. Muttarak, and A. Pelser. 2017. “Women, Weather, and Woes: The Triangular Dynamics of Female-Headed
Households, Economic Vulnerability, and Climate Variability in South Africa.” World Development 90: 41–62.

França Doria, M. de. 2010. “Factors Influencing Public Perception of Drinking Water Quality.” Water Policy 12 (1): 1 –19.

Gammage, S., K. Swanberg, M. Khandkar, Z. Hassan, M. Zobair, and A. Muzareba. 2006. Pro Poor Analysis of the Shrimp Sector
in Bangladesh. Arlington: U.S. Agency for International Development.

Gilbert, R., W. Sakala, and T. Benson. 2013. “Gender Analysis of a Nationwide Cropping System Trial Survey in Malawi.” African
Studies Quarterly 6 (1): 223–43.

Girard, A. 2014. “Stepping into Formal Politics: Women’s Engagement in Formal Political Processes in Irrigation in Rural India.”
World Development 57: 1–18.

Glick, P. R. 2004. “Integrating Gender into Benefit Incidence and Demand Analysis.” Cornell Food and Nutrition Policy Program
Working Paper No. 167. Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.

Guterman, M., P. Mehta, and M. Gibbs. 2007. “Menstrual Taboos among Major Religions.” The Internet Journal of World Health
and Societal Politics 5 (2).

Harris, L. 2006. “Irrigation, Gender, and Social Geographies of the Changing Waterscapes of Southeastern Anatolia.” Environment
and Planning D: Society and Space 24 (2): 187–213.

Hodgson, S. 2004. Land and Water: The Rights Interface. FAO Legislative Study 84. Food and Agriculture
Organization, Rome.

Ilahi, N., and F. Grimard. 2000. “Public Infrastructure and Private Costs: Water Supply and Time Allocation of Women in Rural
Pakistan.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 49 (1): 45–75.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2016. Women at Work: Trends. Geneva: ILO Office.

IWA (International Water Association). 2014. An Avoidable Crisis: WASH Human Resource Capacity Gaps in 15 Developing
Economies. Seacourt: International Water Association.

                                                                                  .iwa-network.org/projects/women​
———. n.d. Women Professionals in Urban Water (accessed August 1, 2017), http://www​
-professionals-in-urban-water/.




62                                                                                                             The Rising Tide
Jie Chen, Y., and N. Chindarkar. 2017. “The Value of Skills: Raising the Socioeconomic Status of Rural Women in India.”
Development Policy Review 35 (2): 229–61.

Kaliba, A., D. Norman, and Y. Chang. 2003. “Willingness to Pay to Improve Domestic Water Supply in Rural Areas of Central
Tanzania: Implications for Policy.” International Journal of Sustainable Development and World Ecology 10: 119–32.

Kamwamba-Mtethiwa, J., R. Namara, C. De Fraiture, J. Mangisoni, and E. Owusu. 2012. “Treadle Pump Irrigation in Malawi:
Adoption, Gender and Benefits.” Irrigation and Drainage 61 (5): 583–95.

Kogan, T. S. 2007. “Sex-Separation in Public Restrooms: Law, Architecture, and Gender.” Michigan Journal of Gender and Law
14 (1): 1–58.

Komatsu, H., and G. Joseph. 2016. “Drinking Water Salinity, Burden of Water Collection and School Attendance of Girls:
Evidence from Bangladesh and West Bengal.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Koolwal, G., and D. van de Walle. 2013. “Access to Water, Women’s Work and Child Outcomes.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 61 (2): 369–405.

Lawrence, J., K. Yeboah-Antwi, G. Biemba, P. K. Ram, N. Osbert, L. L. Sabin, and D. H. Hamer. 2016. “Beliefs, Behaviors, and
Perceptions of Community-Led Total Sanitation and Their Relation to Improved Sanitation in Rural Zambia.” American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 94 (3): 553–62.

Levin, S. 2016. “At Standing Rock, Women Lead Fight in Face of Mace, Arrests and Strip Searches.” The Guardian. November 4
(accessed June 7, 2017), https://www.theguardian.com/us.

Mahajan, K. 2017. “Rainfall Shocks and the Gender Wage Gap: Evidence from Indian Agriculture.” World Development
91: 156–72.

Mahapatra, S. 2006. “Functioning of Water Users Associations or Pani Panchayat in Orissa: Principle, Procedure, Performance
and Prospects.” Paper prepared for the workshop “Water, Law and the Commons,” Delhi, India.

Mahon, T., A. Tripathy, and N. Singh. 2015. “Putting the Men into Menstruation: The Role of Men and Boys in Community
Menstrual Hygiene Management.” Waterlines 34 (1): 7–14.

Meinzen-Dick, R., and M. Zwarteveen. 1998. “Gendered Participation in Water Management: Issues and Illustrations from
Water Users’ Associations in South Asia.” Agriculture and Human Values 15 (4): 337–45.

Meyer, R. 2016. “The Legal Case for Blocking the Dakota Access Pipeline.” The Atlantic. September 9 (accessed July 6, 2017),
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/09/dapl-dakota-sitting-rock-sioux/499178/.

Mezgebo, G. K., and Z. Ewnetu. 2015. “Households Willingness to Pay for Improved Water Services in Urban Areas: A Case
Study from Nebelet Town, Ethiopia.” Journal of Development and Agricultural Economics 7 (1): 12–19.

McGranahan, G., and D. Mitlin. 2016. “Learning from Sustained Success: How Community-Driven Initiatives to Improve Urban
Sanitation Can Meet the Challenges.” World Development 87: 307–17.

McKibben, B. 2016. “A Pipeline Fight and America’s Dark Past.” The New Yorker. September 6 (accessed July 6, 2017), http://
www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/a-pipeline-fight-and-americas-dark-past.

Million Women Mentors Initiative. n.d. (accessed August 1, 2017), https://www.millionwomenmentors.com/.

Moore, E., M. Ali, E. Graham, and L. Quan. 2010. “Responding to a Request: Gender-Exclusive Swims in a Somali Community.”
Public Health Reports 125 (1): 137–40.

Morrison, A. D. 2007. “Gender Equality, Poverty, and Economic Growth.” Policy Research Working Paper 4349, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

Mukherjee, N. 2001. Achieving Sustained Sanitation for the Poor: Policy and Strategy Lessons from Participatory Assessments in
Cambodia, Indonesia, Vietnam. Washington, D.C.: Water and Sanitation Program, World Bank.

Mustafa, D., G. Gioli, S. Qazi, R. Waraich, A. Rehman, and R. Zahoor. 2015. “Gendering Flood Early Warning Systems: The Case
of Pakistan.” Environmental Hazards 14 (4): 312–28.

Mwangi, E., and H. Markelova. 2008. “Collective Action and Property Rights for Poverty Reduction: A Review of Methods and
Approaches.” CAPRi Working Paper No. 82. CGIAR, Washington, DC.




The Rising Tide                                                                                                            63
Nagrah, A., A. Chaudhry, and M. Giordano. 2016. “Collective Action in Decentralized Irrigation Systems: Evidence from
Pakistan.” World Development 84: 282–98.

National Geographic. n.d. “On ‘Burkini Island’ Muslim Girls Can Finally Learn to Swim.” National Geographic (accessed July 6,
2017), http://www.nationalgeographic.com/photography/proof/2017/06/burkini-swimming-zanzibar-girls-boyiazis/.

Ndesamburo, J., E. Flynn, and S. French. 2012. “Looking through an Equity and Inclusion Lens in Tanzania: The Experience of
WaterAid.” Gender & Development 20 (3): 453–65.

Ngoc Uyen, V. 2003. Integrating Gender into World Bank Financed Transport Programs—Case Study: Vietnam Rural Infrastructure
Inland Waterway Project. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Pradhan, E., K. West, J. Katz, S. LeClerq, S. Khatry, and S. Shrestha. 2007. “Risk of Flood-Related Mortality in Nepal.” Disasters
31 (1): 57–70.

PWWA (Pacific Water and Wastewater Association). 2016. Benchmarking Report: Five Years of Performance Assessment
(2011–2015). Apia, Samoa: PWWA.

Rahman, A., A. Fazlur Rahman, S. Shafinaz, and M. Linnan. 2005. Bangladesh Health and Injury Survey: Report on Children.
Dhaka: Directorate General of Health Services, Government of Bangladesh.

Rahman, A., M. Linnan, S. Rahman Mashreky, M. J. Hossain, and F. Rahman. 2014. “The Prevalence of Naturally Acquired
Swimming Ability among Children in Bangladesh: A Cross Sectional Survey.” BMC Public Health 14.

Rautanen, S. L., and U. Baaniya. 2008. “Technical Work of Women in Nepal’s Rural Water Supply and Sanitation.”
Water International 33 (2): 202–13.

Ravitz, J. 2016. “The Sacred Land at the Center of the Dakota Pipeline Dispute.” CNN. November 1 (accessed July 6, 2017),
http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/01/us/standing-rock-sioux-sacred-land-dakota-pipeline/index.html.

Republic of South Africa Department of Water and Sanitation. n.d. “Women in Water Awards 2011” (accessed August 1, 2017),
http://www.dwa.gov.za/events/WWA2011/default.aspx.

Robinson, K., C. Robinson, and S. Hawkins. 2005. “Assessment of Public Perception Regarding Wastewater Reuse.” Water
Science and Technology: Water Supply 5 (1): 59–65.

Rodella, A. S., A. Sanoh, and T. Maiga. 2017. Of Rivers, Rains and Drops: A Diagnostic of Water, Hygiene, Sanitation and Poverty
in Niger. Washington D.C.: WASH Poverty Diagnostic Series, World Bank.

Roever, S. 2014. Informal Economy Monitoring Study Sector Report: Street Vendors. Cambridge, MA: WIEGO.

Scott, J. 1985. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Scott, J., and G. Marshall. 2009. A Dictionary of Sociology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sekhri, S., and A. Storeygard. 2014. “Dowry Deaths: Response to Weather Variability in India.” Journal of Development
Economics 111: 212–23.

Sijbesma, C., J. Verhagen, R. Nanavaty, and A. J. James. 2009. “Impacts of Domestic Water Supply on Gender and Income:
Results from a Participatory Study in a Drought-Prone Region in Gujarat, India.” Water Policy 11 (1): 95–105.

Sinha, N. n.d. “Infrastructure, Gender Differences, and Impacts: The Evidence.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Sokile, C., and B. van Koppen. 2004. “Local Water Rights and Local Water User Entities: The Unsung Heroines of Water
Resource Management in Tanzania.” Physics and Chemistry of the Earth 29 (15-18): 1349–56.

Su, Y., S. Bisht, A. Wilkes, N. Shrestha Pradhan, Y. Zou, S. Liu, and K. Hyde. 2017. “Gendered Responses to Drought in Yunnan
Province, China.” Mountain Research and Development 37 (1): 24–34.

Sun, Y., E. Mwangi, and R. Meinzen-Dick. 2011. “Is Gender an Important Factor Influencing User Groups’ Property Rights
and Forestry Governance? Empirical Analysis from East Africa and Latin America.” International Forestry Review 13 (2):
205–19.

SwimSafe Bangladesh. n.d. “Preventing Child Drowning” (accessed August 1, 2017), http://swimsafe.org/swimsafe-projects​
/­bangladesh/.




64                                                                                                              The Rising Tide
Tarfasa, S., and R. Brouwer. 2013. “Estimation of the Public Benefits of Urban Water Supply Improvements in Ethiopia:
A Choice Experiment.” Applied Economics 45 (9): 1099–1108.

Thompson, K., K. O’Dell, S. Syed, and H. Kemp. 2017. “Thirsty for Change: The Untapped Potential of Women in Urban Water
Management.” Deloitte Review 20 (accessed May 6, 2017), https://dupress.deloitte.com/dup-us-en/deloitte-review/issue-20​
/­women-in-water-management.html.

Treuer, D. 2016. “An Indian Protest for Everyone.” The New York Times. November 26 (accessed July 6, 2017), https://www​
.nytimes.com/2016/11/26/opinion/sunday/an-indian-protest-for-everyone.html.

Tsai, L. 2007. “Solidary Groups, Informal Accountability, and Local Public Goods Provision in Rural China.” The American
Political Science Review 101 (2): 355–72.

Twerefou, D. K., K. A. Tutu, E. Botchway, and S. Darkwah. 2015. “Willingness-to-Pay for Potable Water in the Accra-Tema
Metropolitan Area of Ghana.” Modern Economy 6: 1285–96.

Udas, P., and M. Zwarteveen. 2010. “Can Water Professionals Meet Gender Goals? A Case Study of the Department of Irrigation
in Nepal.” Gender and Development 18 (1): 87–97.

UN (United Nations). 2015. The World’s Women 2015: Trends and Statistics. New York: United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, Statistics Division.

UN Statistics Division. 2008. International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC). New York:
United Nations.

Upadhyay, B. 2004. “Gender Aspects of Smallholder Irrigation Technology: Insights from Nepal.”  Journal of Applied
Irrigation Science 39 (2): 315–27.

USAID (U.S. Agency for International Development). 2014. A Tool for Mainstreaming Gender in Water Supply and Sanitation
Services (accessed August 1, 2017), http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/pbaab435.pdf.

Van Eijk, A., M. Sivakami, M. Thakkar, A. Bauman, K. Laserson, S. Coates, and P. Phillips-Howard. 2016. “Menstrual Hygiene
Management among Adolescent Girls in India: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” BMJ Open 6 (3).

Van Koppen, B., L. Hope, and W. Colenbrander. 2013. “Gender Aspects of Small-Scale Private Irrigation in Africa.” Working
Paper No. 153. International Water Management Institute, Colombo, Sri Lanka.

Van Minh, H., H. Nguyen-Viet, N. H. Thanh, and J. C. Yang. 2013. “Assessing Willingness to Pay for Improved Sanitation in Rural
Vietnam.” Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine 18 (4): 275–84.

WAAW (Working to Advance STEM Education for African Women) Foundation. n.d. “Stem Outreach and Mentoring Program”
(accessed August 1, 2017), http://waawfoundation.org/.

Waldorf, A. 2013. “Assessing the Role of Women in Microfinance for Water Supply and Sanitation Services.” wH2O: The Journal
of Gender and Water 2 (1): 28–30.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2014. Global Report on Drowning: Preventing a Leading Killer. Geneva: WHO.

Women’s Engineering Society. 2014. Diversity in Engineering. London: Women’s Engineering Society (accessed May 20, 2017),
http://www.wes.org.uk/sites/default/files/u82/Diversity%20in%20Engineering%20Data%20Report%20FINAL.pdf.

Women for Water. n.d. “Central Asia Creates Women for Water Network” (accessed August 1, 2017), http://www.womenforwa​
ter.org/ca200616.html.

Wood, S., J. Foster, and A. Kols. 2012. “Understanding Why Women Adopt and Sustain Home Water Treatment: Insights from
the Malawi Antenatal Care Program.” Social Science and Medicine 75 (4): 634–42.

World Bank. 1999. Credit Connections: Mahila Milan. Washington, DC: Water and Sanitation Program Field Note, South Asia,
World Bank.

———. 2009. Bangladesh: Employment Generation Program Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2012a. Hidden Harvest: The Global Contribution of Capture Fisheries. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2012b. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. 




The Rising Tide                                                                                                             65
———.2013. Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. New Frontiers of Social Policy. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

———. 2015. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2016a. India Poverty Diagnostics for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2016b. Water and Sanitation Services: Achieving Sustainable Outcomes with Indigenous Peoples in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2017a. Bangladesh WASH Poverty Diagnostic Key Findings and Recommendations: Bad Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene—
Putting a Brake on Development in Bangladesh. Washington, DC: WASH Poverty Diagnostic Series, World Bank.

———. 2017b. Dire Straits: The Crisis Surrounding Poverty, Conflict, and Water in the Republic of Yemen. Washington, DC: WASH
Poverty Diagnostic Series, World Bank.

———. 2017c. Nigeria WASH Poverty Diagnostic. Washington, DC: WASH Poverty Diagnostic Series, World Bank.

———. 2017d. Results of Collaboration for Social Inclusion in the Trung Son Hydro Power Project, Vietnam. Washington, DC:
World Bank Group.

Zagheni, E., R. Muttarak, and E. Striessnig. 2015. “Differential Mortality Patterns from Hydro-Meteorological Disasters:
Evidence from Cause-of-Death Data by Age and Sex.” Vienna Yearbook of Population Research 13: 47–70.

Zwarteveen, M., and N. Neupane. 1996. Free-Riders or Victims: Women’s Nonparticipation in Irrigation Management in Nepal’s
Chattis Mauja Irrigation Scheme. Research Report 7. Colombo: International Water Management Institute.

Zwarteveen, M. 1998. “Identifying Gender Aspects of New Irrigation Management Policies.” Agriculture and Human Values
15: 301–12.




66                                                                                                        The Rising Tide
W17068
