    Expert Group Meeting: Using Administrative Data to
               Monitor SDG land Indicator


                                    Proceedings1




                          University Pompeu Fabra (UPF)

                                        Barcelona


                                   July 6 and 7, 2017



1
 The EGM was organized by the World Bank, UN Habitat, IPRA-CINDER, the University Pompeu
Fabra (UPF) and the Global Land Indicators Initiative (GLII)/ Global land Tool Network (GLTN).
We wish to thank IPRA CINDER, UPF, Nicolas Nogueroles, Carlos Gomez, María García-Saúco
and Marian Gili for their generous hospitality and tremendous efforts in making this EGM
productive and successful.
                                                                                             1
Executive Summary

The United Nations acknowledged the importance of tenure security for achieving the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals by adopting indicator 1.4.2: “Proportion of total adult population with secure tenure
rights to land, with legally recognized documentation and who perceive their rights to land as secure, by
sex and by type of tenure. These proceedings present the recommendations made by international land
experts and representatives of national land agencies on (1) the measurement of the part of the
indicator pertaining to legally recognized documentation of rights and (2) ways for institutionalizing
reporting at country level.
The EGM concluded that the administrative data required for measuring SDG indicator 1.4.2 can be
reported in a routine way where coordinated electronic land information systems are in place (at least
100 countries2). Other countries with partial electronic systems may require technical and IT support for
setting up routine reporting systems. Paper based systems dominate in 77 countries, but most of these
countries are rapidly moving towards digitizing their systems, facilitating reporting on indicator 1.4.2. It
was observed that administrative data have advantages for annual reporting on the SDGs, as costs for
routine reporting are low, data frequency is high and can be disaggregated by gender, include individual
and group rights, and are official.
The EGM identified that the following categories of formal documentation: (i) Valid and up to date formal
documents addressing tenure rights, registered with a public institution; (ii) Incomplete or outdated
formal document (e.g. not all steps of the process have been completed; expired, right holder has passed
away etc.); (iii) Unrelated: Official document of which the primarily purpose is not to address land related
rights (e.g. utility bills or tax receipts) or involving private parties only (e.g. sales receipts, will). The EGM
advised to only count category 1 for the SDG (a legally recognized document of rights), but to collect data
in the survey on all type of documents that land holders report as evidence of rights. The EGM
recommended preparation of country specific meta data listing all legally recognized documentation and
the procedures used for computing and reporting. The EGM supported gender disaggregated
administrative data and observed that without inclusion in formal documents of tenure, women may not
be protected in case of divorce or death of their husband.
Finally, the EGM observed that the establishment of routine reporting systems and country commitment
to regularly report on progress, will incentivize implementation programs to deliver, help identify
challenges and set priorities for equitable access to land.




2
    Doing Business, 2016, World Bank.

                                                                                                                2
Contents
1      Background ........................................................................................................................................... 4
2      Methodology to monitor legally documented rights using administrative data .................................... 4
    SDG indicator process: ............................................................................................................................. 5
    Defining legally recognized documentation: ............................................................................................ 5
    Federal systems and decentralized land agencies ..................................................................................... 6
    Deeds versus titles systems: ...................................................................................................................... 6
    Discrepancies between registry records and cadastral maps: ................................................................... 7
    Condominium or strata rights: .................................................................................................................. 7
    Indigenous people’s rights – group or collective rights for customary and communal lands ................... 7
    Disaggregation by gender ......................................................................................................................... 8
3      Country-specific metadata: ................................................................................................................... 8
4      Data availability and ways of institutionalizing reporting .................................................................... 9
5 Options for building on administrative data to advocate for and measure progress with sustainability
of land policy reform .................................................................................................................................... 9
    Unlocking administrative data and capacity building ............................................................................. 10
    Gender disaggregated monitoring capacity and VGGT:......................................................................... 10
    Policy monitoring and analysis ............................................................................................................... 11
    Some policy implications of SDG indicator ........................................................................................... 11
6      Follow up and next steps for establishing a country level and global SDG reporting mechanism ..... 12
Annex 1: ...................................................................................................................................................... 13
Annex 2: Program ....................................................................................................................................... 14




                                                                                                                                                                3
             Expert Group Meeting: Using Administrative Data to Monitor SDG land Indicator
                                            July 6-7, 2017

                                                  Proceedings


1 Background
The United Nations acknowledged the importance of tenure for achieving the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals by including the indicator 1.4.2: Proportion of total adult population with secure
tenure rights to land, with legally recognized documentation and who perceive their rights to land as
secure, by sex and by type of tenure. This indicator is under Goal 1 (“End poverty in all its forms
everywhere”), contributing to Target 1.4: by 2030 ensure that all men and women, particularly the poor
and the vulnerable, have equal rights to economic resources, as well as access to basic services,
ownership, and control over land and other forms of property, inheritance, natural resources, appropriate
new technology, and financial services including microfinance.

An international Expert Group Meeting (EGM) was organized on the use of administrative data produced
by land agencies for the measurement of 1.4.2, as input into the reclassification of this SDG indicator.3.
The EGM objectives are: (1) Agree on a methodology to monitor the part of SDG indicator 1.4.2 pertaining
to legally documented rights using administrative data; (2) Assess availability of existing data and explore
ways of institutionalizing reporting at country and regional level; and (3) Explore options for building on
administrative data to advocate for and measure progress with sustainability of land policy reform (see
program in Annex I).

The EGM was organized by the indicator custodians (UN Habitat and World Bank) together with IPRA-
CINDER, the University Pompeu Fabra (UPF) and The Global Land Indicators Initiative (GLII)/ Global land
Tool Network (GLTN). The EGM was attended by land agencies from 10 countries, representatives of
regional land agency networks, as well as statisticians, academics, land experts from civil society, private
sector, and representatives of FAO, FIG, UN-GGIM, UN Habitat and World Bank (see annex I for list
participants).

In his welcome, Carlos Gomez from University Pompeu Fabra (UPF) emphasized the importance of this
EGM for the university’s research on the economic and organization analysis of property rights and
political institutions. Nicolas Nogueroles (IPRA-CINDER) reminded participants that public land registries
emerged to help the poor protecting their property. Oumar Sylla (GLTN/GLII/UN-Habitat) mentioned the
importance for the New Urban Agenda and provided an insight on the work ahead citing the case of
Cameroon with only 150,000 registered land documents for a country of 23 million people . Klaus
Deininger (World Bank) showed how land indicators and performance monitoring capacity, can help
mobilize support for strengthening land governance, by demonstrating its contribution to socio-
economic development and gender empowerment.

2    Methodology to monitor legally documented rights using administrative data



3
 Household survey data will be the other sources of data for measuring this indicator and were discussed in a
previous EGM. The international Expert Group Meeting to define the essential “land” questions required for
household survey programs for monitoring indicator 1.4.2 data collection mechanisms, and harmonization with
other SDG indicator (5.1.a) was held on May 25th and 26th 2017, in Washington DC.

                                                                                                                4
SDG indicator process:
Robert Ndugwa (UN-Habitat) introduced SDG monitoring principles (universality, actionability, and
reporting through country systems), process for reclassification and the International Advisory and Expert
Group on the SDGs (IAEG-SDG). Composed of representatives from member states’ statistical agencies,
this body decides whether a reporting methodology is robust. IAEG-SDG has set up a tier system, requiring
that each indicator is classified as tier I by 2020 at the latest (approved measurement methodology, data
collected for at least 5% of all countries). Indicator 1.4.2. is classified as tier III. The aim is to reclassify to
tier II in November 2017 (methodology approved) and tier I in 20184. The formulation of an indicator
cannot be changed, but measurement methodology can be adjusted over time.
Responding to Ward Anseeuw (ILC), Mr. Ndugwa confirmed that reporting on SDG indicators is voluntary
even for tier I indicators, a decision taken by National Statistical Organizations (NSO). Why reporting on
this indicator is important requires awareness raising at the country level, which can be supported by
networks like ILC and GLII, as well as awareness raising and capacity building through NSO networks, like
for example an Africa Center for Statistics. Reporting on the administrative data requires that land
agencies connect to NSO at the country level.
Defining legally recognized documentation:
The EGM concluded that three types of documentation issued by official agencies may be kept by land
holders as evidence of occupancy and rights:
           (i)      valid and up to date legally recognized (formal) documents addressing rights of groups
                    and/ or individuals, registered with a public institution, either ultimate (title) or
                    intermediate that provide the same range of rights (certificate of ownership, leaseholds)
           (ii)     formal documents that are either incomplete because some elements are missing (e.g.
                    not all steps of the process have been completed so that textual records have been
                    processed but a required survey has not been undertaken or the final document has not
                    been obtained because required fees have not been paid) or because the document is
                    outdated (e.g. in the name of the land user’s parents, possibly with a subdivision having
                    occurred);
           (iii)    Official documents of which the primarily purpose is not to address land related rights
                    and refer indirectly to occupancy and land use, like utility use, tax receipts or only involve
                    a private party (e.g. sales receipts, will of inheritance);
           (iv)     no documents.
The EGM advised that only the first category will be measured as legally recognized documentation of
right to land for SDG indicator 1.4.2, as the target is “access to ownership and control over land” requiring
to narrow the gap between possession/customary rights that are not recognized by law (also referred to
as legitimate rights) and legally recognized rights, and promote legal recognition for the “continuum of
rights”. This includes the legal recognition of customary rights, their registration by a public entity of
location and textual data, but without changing the control over the right and land use.
Data collection through household surveys, DHS and census, will cover all documentation, including
“incomplete/outdated land documents” and “non- land rights related official” documentation reported
by land holders and users as evidence of rights. Data on the full range of documents used by land holders
as evidence of rights will be important for policy design and provides more detailed information on the
nature of gap between legal and possession/customary rights (also referred to as legitimate rights).



4
    PowerPoints presented at the EGM are available on request.

                                                                                                                  5
Given that land tenure regimes and legally recognized documentation are country specific, the EGM
recommended to list all these documents in the country specific meta data, with pictures for each form.
These will be used by enumerators and which will improve the quality of data collection. Collective and
communal rights for which official documentation was issued, for example to a representative of the
“group”, is included. This indicator should not be interpreted as aiming for individualization of land or only
titling, as all official documentation providing evidence of rights is measured through surveys.
Federal systems and decentralized land agencies
In federal states, central reporting may pose challenges if land administration policies are devolved or
deconcentrated, without using data standards nor central reporting. Examples are for example Australia5,
Brazil, Canada, Germany, India, Mexico, Nigeria, Switzerland, United States.
Ivan do Lago Jacopetti presented the example of Brazil, which has a Federal Law on land registration, but
with each of the 26 states has developed its own management system; requirements for transfer of
property varies across states. Since 2009, electronic systems are introduced, with each State developing
its own data structure and data hosting arrangement, varying from public registrars to local courts. Cost
for software licenses are high, economies of scale are not seized and overall statistics on coverage of land
administration and tenure security are not available. The Federal Government is now introducing a
national registration system (ONR), digitization of records, use of standardized data systems and licenses,
data protection strategy, which will enable reporting on SDG 1.4.2.
For Mexico, Maria Elena Garcia Flores explained that the 22 states are only in charge of private land, which
covers 49% of the area, while the records for social property (ejidos) covering 51% of the land, are kept
at the federal level. Each State developed its own land information system and most are now electronic.
Currently, there is no reporting system at the State level nor reporting to the central level. Mexico has the
data to report on the SDG in an electronic format, but will need support for setting up a routine reporting
system, which would be highly policy relevant for the country. Currently, the country can report for
Mexico City and all ejido land. For Nigeria, only a few states have developed electronic land administration
systems, like Kadunaas presented by P. Richie.
The EGM decided that reporting in federal states will start with selected states/ subnational units to show
the viability of reporting.
Deeds versus titles systems:
Land registries are established by governments to protect citizen’s fundamental rights to land and
property and provide legal certainty for transactions. Land registries are legal institutions, holding data on
rights. Judge Cuccaro presented on the differences between deed systems and title system in set up and
functioning. In the deeds system a copy of the transfer document is deposited in a deeds registry. In case
of dispute, priority is given on the basis of date of recording of transfer, motivating parties to record
transactions. Computerization of deeds registries has enhanced the efficiency and reliability of deeds
systems. In a title system, each land parcel is identified on a map and the rights associated with it are
recorded in the register along with the name of the owner. Some countries operate a dual system to
enhance efficiency and reliability of tranfsers. Jan Moerkerke of ELRA showed that both deeds and title
systems can report on the SDG, since the introduction of IT systems like in Belgium. Examples of
improvement in deeds systems are digitization of records, standardization of contracts and information
recorded, systematic use of unique description of asset and person (unique asset number and personal
identification); and data integration between registry, cadaster and other agencies.



5
    For Australia, for example, each state reported on the SDGs.

                                                                                                            6
The EGM concluded that the country specific meta data need to specify the registration system in place
(deeds, title or hybrid), constitutive or declaratory, and degree of computerization, as this will affect the
practice of documentation and where land records and maps are held.
Discrepancies between registry records and cadastral maps:
Pedro Fandos Pons explained the process used in Spain to resolve inconsistencies for registries that have
been developed without having cadastral maps in place, in an incremental way. A step-by-step procedure
for data coordination (between Cadastre and Land Registry) is developed and regularly adjusted to
incorporate lessons from application, and which will speed up the process for the remaining cases. This
procedure is useful for the Land Registries that had been set up without cadastral maps as it happens in
many countries. The "Colegio de Registradores" (Spanish Association of Land Registrars) has developed
an electronic tool to make it possible. This tool uses mainly cadastral maps but if there are deficiencies or
the cadastral map is not accurate other maps (prepared by licensed surveyors or other technicians) can
be used. The decision about the coordination is entrusted to the Land registry but the maps need to be
approved by the cadaster. The coordination (the use of cadastral/or alternative maps) is compulsory when
a parcel is modified (division, segregation or aggregation) or in a first registration. It in not compulsory
when transferring rights. On the other hand, a different procedure is the exchange of information
between Cadastre and Land Registry that takes place on line reporting not only the physical alterations of
the parcels but also the new owners in order to have the data bases updated.
Another example of discrepancies was presented by J. Mesa Guerra for Colombia. The country is in the
process of rebuilding its land records, as part of the peace process, and includes integration of the land
registry and cadastral system. This process also includes a review of all land transactions since 1990s for
legality as well as legitimacy, because much land was “grabbed” during the conflict and subsequently
titled, both individual and land assigned to indigenous peoples and Afro-Colombian communities.
For SDG reporting it was decided to use textual data for reporting if most land can be identified on maps
and disputes are minimal and a process for reconciling discrepancies exists.
Condominium or strata rights:
Condominium rights relate to apartment blocks. M. Taus showed the approach used in in Rumania with
registration in three “books”: (1) the land on which the apartment is constructed; (2) the individual
property (apartment); (3) the collective title for the premise. In Belgium, associations are established to
which the condominium rights are assigned. Judge Cucarro mentioned that in Italy strata rights can
produce detailed contracts and cadastral maps, even identifying kitchens and parking spaces. Generally,
exclusive rights are assigned for the apartment itself and shared rights for the land on which the building
is constructed and all other parts of the premises used collectively. ELRA has developed a data base with
a typology of condominium law for its member states
For SDG reporting it was concluded that the meta data will explain how strata title are recorded and the
computing procedure used.
Indigenous people’s rights – group or collective rights for customary and communal lands
Luca Miggiano from Oxfam laid out the importance of this issue with an estimated 2 billion people
depending on collective lands, but only 20% have their ownership or user rights legally recognized
(although not always backed up by a legally recognized document).
Many countries in Latin American have procedures in place enabling indigenous peoples and communities
to acquire legally recognized documentation for their lands as a ‘group”. J. Mesa Guerra mentioned that
for Colombia, 33% of the area has collective tenure rights and is assigned to indigenous and afro-
Colombian communities. As indicated above, 51% of the land in Mexico is under social tenure (ejido) for
which the land and members are centrally registered. Subsequently, Ejido members agree on bye laws on

                                                                                                           7
organizational structures and internal decision making, access and rights to land and land use. Ejido rights
may differ between members (and non-members living in these communities), can be bequeathed but
not sold. Although it is possible to convert “social” ejido rights into private property, it requires an
agreement of the ejido members. A national data base of ejido rights exists, disaggregated by gender
(22% women), making SDG reporting possible for this tenure type (see ppt presented by Maria Elena
Garcia Flores. Miguel Sanjines explained that for Uganda common or customary land can now be
registered ( Communal land Association) although none have been issued yet). The advantage of using
associations is that updating the names of rights holders does not require changes in the land registry.
Tony Burns explained how Australia quickly enacted the Native Title Act in 1993 in response to the 1992
High Court decision on the Mabo case which recognized native title. A native tribunal and systems for
claiming rights are now in place. In July 2011 the 160 determinations of native title covered 1.23 million
km2 or about 16% of the Australian land mass. Native title can be granted exclusively but can also be
recognized to co-exist on Crown land held by farmers under pastoral leases. The current debate is how
best to use the assigned land for development and sustainable livelihoods of indigenous communities.
For SDG reporting, reporting of area covered by group rights (indigenous peoples, collective, communal
rights) can easily be included. The procedure to measure number of members needs to be added to the
meta data.
Disaggregation by gender
EGM participants emphasized the importance of gender disaggregated reporting, which will show
whether there is a gap between de jure and de facto rights. Women whose name is not included in formal
documents may not be protected in case of divorce or death of their husband. There is also the issue of
stock versus flow, making the adding of a gender field is important for both newly registered land and
transfers. Rwanda is an example of the policy importance, as data show that more land is transferred to
men.
Diana Fletschner of LANDESA also emphasized the importance of harmonization around gender for the
SDG indicators, particularly between 1.4.2 and 5.a.1 (custodians: FAO and UN Women).
Not all registries record the gender of the right holder6. In practice, the land agencies were confident that
gender disaggregated reporting is feasible, but the procedure must be country specific to be in line with
legal requirements (social security number (e.g. Republic of Korea), other fields that are proxies for gender
(Netherlands), etc.).



3      Country-specific metadata:
The EGM recommended to prepare country-specific meta data, in consultation with land agencies, NSO
and land experts, which will guide data compilation, computing and reporting, thus ensuring global
comparability. Meta data include:
           (1) List of all valid legally recognized documentation of tenure, and pictures for each document
           (2) List of other official documents used by land holders as evidence of rights, like “land
               documents that is incomplete or outdated; or other type of official document; picture for
               each document
           (3) Structure of land information system; variables, geo-referencing, total number of parcels,
               area registered and mapped by tenure type; transactions recorded


6
    sometime even for reason of “non-discrimination” (like Netherlands and Brazil)

                                                                                                           8
           (4) Procedure for data aggregation across jurisdictional levels (where relevant); computing strata
               data; computing population on communal and collective tenure; computing gender
               disaggregation
           (5) Procedure for data quality checks

4      Data availability and ways of institutionalizing reporting

Ability to report:
The EGM concluded that the administrative data required for measuring SDG indicator 1.4.2 can be
reported in a routine way where electronic land information systems are in place, which is the case for
at least 100 countries7. Administrative data are already being reported for 65 countries to the
custodians. Countries with partial and decentralized electronic land data bases may require technical
and IT support for setting up routine reporting systems. Technical assistance and capacity building is
required for developing the scripts for routine reporting systems, which is expected to have major
benefits also for the country.
Paper based systems dominate in 77 countries, but land experts observed that even countries still
running paper-based systems are rapidly moving towards digitizing their systems, facilitating reporting
on indicator 1.4.2. In the meantime, census and surveys will be the main source of information for
reporting on indicator 1.4.2. Finally, a few countries are in the process of rebuilding land
administration/ land information systems for example because of a prolonged conflict (Colombia); or
still in conflict; reporting will not be possible or relevant as integrity of registries and cadasters is not
guaranteed, records may also have been destroyed.

The EGM concluded that a wealth of information is available for constructing the SDG indicator and that
its measurement is feasible for most countries. The EGM confirmed that using administrative data has
many advantages for monitoring the SDGs (regular availability, cost-effectiveness, official nature). The
EGM also suggested to work with regional organizations of cadastral agencies or registrars. AFRIGIST,
ELRA, Fédération des Géométres Francophones, IPRA-CINDER and RCMRD, for example, can play a role in
helping to institutionalize reporting and capacity building. This EGM was organized already with IPRA-
CINDER, while ELRA was represented by Jan Moerkerke, AFRIGIST by Adewale Akingbade and the
Féderation des Géométres Francophones by Claire Galpin at the EGM. The Dubai land department will
organize a regional workshop for Arab countries in 2018, and also UNECA and UNGGIM offered their
support..

5      Options for building on administrative data to advocate for and measure progress with
       sustainability of land policy reform

The EGM concluded that development of routine reporting systems for the SDGs will have high positive
spillover effects at the country level. Digitizing paper records, “unlocking” of administrative data and
developing dashboards will make the information in land records easier available to land agencies and
policy makers, but will need support. Developing the monitoring system will support data exchange
procedures between registries and cadasters. The dashboard facilitates data interoperability with other
agencies, like for planning or property tax collection, and also with courts and the financial sector for
mortgages. Up-to-date and complete administrative data can help resolve land disputes faster and at
lower costs. Both Sultan Alkaraf from Dubai and Kees de Zeeuw from the Netherlands stressed in their
presentations that reliable and current land records, generate trust in the system. Carmen Miguel showed

7
    Doing Business, 2016, World Bank.

                                                                                                                9
how these data are being used in Spain to track mortgages and prices, and can be used to identify the risk
of overheated land markets.
The monitoring system developed for SDG reporting, can be expanded into management information
systems, for more expansive progress monitoring, which will introduce more rigor and discipline on
implementation programs to deliver. The reports can provide an input for multistakeholder policy
dialogue. The system will also allow for the monitoring of land markets and house prices, and provide a
basis for impact evaluation.
The EGM explored ways for building on the effort of SDG reporting, as the aim is not the produce
“international reports for dusty shelfs”. The development of reporting systems has to be linked to a
longer-term program to build capacity, based on interest and demonstrated progress, as part of moving
this indicator to tier I
Unlocking administrative data and capacity building
The EGM recommended that if countries and development partners use internationally agreed data
standards when designing (electronic) land information services. It will enable data interoperability
between agencies (land use and development regulations, tax, courts and banks etc) and facilitate
reporting on the SDGs. Much scope exists for sharing of experience.

Beckhee Cho (LX) Korea shared her country’s experience with integrating land agencies and land data,
horizontally and vertically across a multitude of entities (e.g. 290 cities hold land data) into a single,
integrated system that is used and updated by all government agencies on a continuous basis, and has a
one-stop-shop for service delivery. This change became possible when new technology became
available, accompanied by required policy and legal adjustment. The new integrated system holds 920
million pieces of land information. Capacity building was needed also in the private sector to ensure
efficient use of the new platform and systems. LX is now sharing its experience on integrating data
system and associated organizational change with other countries (like for example Jamaica and
Uruguay) for which they developed a capacity assessment tool to identify appropriate training program.

Aster Denekew Yilma from the African Centre for Statistics, at the United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa (UN-ECA) gave an overview of use of geospatial data sets and earth observation for SDG
monitoring, and the collaboration with UNGGIM. She also showed how geospatial technology can support
land administration. UN ECA coordinates the contribution of its different division to the SDGs and works
with the African Statistical Systems to strengthen capacity for reporting on the SDGs, including use of
geospatial data.
Kees de Zeeuw showed how UNGGIM supports the SDG policy agenda. UNGGIM is looking forward to
having more and better data on the land area and parcels that are registered and mapped, and go beyond
the “zombie statistics”. To support SDG reporting, UNGGIM is promoting the use of standards in land
information systems, working with industry through the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC). UNGGIM
also promotes the “fit-for–purpose land administration approach” and help land agencies increase access
to cheap, good, and fast land registration services, delivered at scale.


Gender disaggregated monitoring capacity and VGGT:
Javier Molina, FAO, reflected on the opportunities of enhanced reporting capacity for the SDGs. Land
agencies’ establishment of a SDG reporting system provides a launch pad for expanding monitoring
capacity to help set priorities, guide policy reform and monitor progress, which is essential also for the
implementation of the Voluntary Guidelines for responsible Governance of Tenure (VGGT). Connecting

                                                                                                        10
land agencies to national statistical organizations, and bringing in use of spatial data will further
strengthen country capacity to monitor performance. VGGTs were approved in 2012 and progress sis
made on awareness raising, methodology development and capacity building and providing guidance for
policy reform in Colombia, Guatemala, Madagascar and Sierra Leone.
A good example of the power of monitoring is work around gender in the Balkans. When gender
disaggregated, data showed that 3% of women had documented rights and 40% perceived their rights as
secure, (mainly related to inheritance rights), this triggered a policy response. To encourage more joint-
ownership of land, the land agency reviewed and improved its forms, tools and procedures, and
undertook awareness raising and capacity building to address these issues, while using its gender
disaggregated administrative data to track performance.
Policy monitoring and analysis
Denys Nizalov presented the experience of the Ukraine with putting in place a land governnace monitoring
system, disaggregated by subnational level and (vulnerable) groups. The monitoring system makes it
possible to identify land use violations, discrepancies between textual records and cadastral data and
contributes to accountability. Stakeholders use the reports for advocacy, like farmers requesting more
equity in land access and transparent procedures. The monitoring systems has become important for
policy analysis and now provides up-to-date information on performance of land markets and service
delivery. The monitoring system will also be used to track results of an upcoming mayor policy reform,
and help identify challenges that may emerge, like for vulnerable groups. The Ukraine experience shows
how administrative data, combined with spatial imagery and survey data, supports an analytical agenda
around land policy development and regulatory change. These data also allow for testing and comparing
interventions between sub-national units and land tenure types, for identifying good practice, and
undertake impact evaluation of land governance reform on socio-economic development, poverty
eradication and empowerment. Legislation is now in place to ensure that routine progress reporting on
administrative data take s place and made available to individuals, private sector and banks (facilitate
access to finance).
Some policy implications of SDG indicator
The EGM stressed that indicator 1.4.2 should not be interpreted as aiming for individualization of land or
just promoting land administration interventions. More effective policy interventions may include, for
example, expanding definition of legality and protection of such rights, even when not documented;
prioritize registration for primary rights and group rights first, while presenting pathways to land holders
for transferring from one system to another; streamlining registration processes and enhancing cost
effectiveness, review fees and survey standards. New data and spatial technologies provide tremendous
opportunities for land agencies to expand access to legally recognized documentation and strengthening
of communal and customary rights.
Benito Arrunada stressed the importance of careful target setting, in a way that provide incentives for
embarking on substantive policy change, while preventing gaming of the systems. Since countries depart
from different level, target setting need to take this into account (ranking may not be the most
appropriate way of comparing countries). He also demonstrated that in a context of low economic land
values, limited land market activity and limited contestation of rights, the costs of land registration or
titling may not be justified from an economic perspective (but these operations offer opportunities for
rent seeking). In such cases, enforcement of rights and legal changes maybe more critical and efficient
than expensive registration and mapping of rights. The returns to investing in registration and titling
increase where land pressure and land values rise, ahead of infrastructure investments, for women
empowerment, and to reduce conflict and facilitate dispute resolution, prevent land grab/human right
abuses. Reducing the unit costs for registration will also improve feasibility. Ex-ante cost-benefit

                                                                                                         11
assessment is always needed, as well as a comparison of different modalities and tenure instruments in
order not to waste scarce resources on projects with limited benefits or sustainability.

6    Follow up and next steps for establishing a country level and global SDG reporting mechanism
Reclassification tier III to II (July – November 2017)
    -   Methodology data collection administrative data, including for country specific meta data
    -   Prepare list of documentation (valid, incomplete/outdated, other documentation) for countries
        planning surveys end 2017/ early 2018, like for UEOMA survey (Benin, Cote d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso,
        Guinee Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Togo) to be used for enumerator training, and survey
        question coding
    -   Continue collecting data for remaining countries with centralized electronic records
Reclassification to tier I – reporting capacity and data collection expansion (at least 50% of all countries)
    -   Information and capacity building workshops with land agencies; discuss results \:
            o Organize session in meetings, side events or pre- post/meetings in the context of regular
                 or already programmed workshops, annual meetings and conferences of land agencies
                 (AFRIGIST (ex-RECTAS), Arab region conference, ELRA, IPRA-CINDER, OAS – cadaster
                 network, RCMRD, WLPA/UNECE, RCMRD etc.)
            o Country level engagement on need for collecting land data (Land agencies, NSO and Land
                 experts/ stakeholder community); use of data for analysis and policy dialogue
    -   Prepare country specific meta data on documentation and procedures used for administrative
        data compilation
    -   At the request of land agencies and NSOs and depending on resource availability, support
        missions for help establishing reporting system (land expert/IT specialist); assess data base
        structure and develop scripts for routine reporting based on existing electronic data, and capacity
        building
    -   Develop reporting mechanisms between land agencies and NSO
    -   Discuss relevant statistics at special sessions organized by the custodians in context of land and
        poverty conference with country representatives land agencies.




                                                                                                           12
Annex 1: Participants Expert Meeting: Using Administrative Data to Monitor the SDG Land Indicator 1.4.2
First      Last Name       Organization                                                 City         Country
Name
Adewale.    Akingbade      African Regional Institute for Geospatial Information        Ife-Ife      Nigeria
O.                         Science and Technology (AFRIGIST)
Jairo      Mesa            Superintendente Delegado Para La Protección,                 Bogota       Colombia
Alonso     Guerra          Restitución Y Formalización De Tierras
Javier     Molina          FAO                                                          Rome         Italy
Sultan     Alakraf         Dubai Land Department                                        Dubai        United Arab
                                                                                                     Emirates
Ward       Anseeuw         ILC                                                          Rome         Italy
Benito     Arrunada        UPF                                                          Barcelona    Spain
Tony       Burns           Land Equity                                                  Wollongong   Australia
Beckhee    Cho             LX                                                           Seoul        South Korea
Michele    Cuccaro         Judge Court of Rovereto; University of Trento                Rovereto     Italy
Kees       De Zeeuw        Kadaster/UNGGIM                                              Apeldoorn    Netherlands
Klaus      Deininger       World Bank                                                   Washington   USA
Aster      Denekew         Africa Center for Statistics/UNECA                           Addis        Ethiopia
                                                                                        Abeba
Ivan       Jacopetti do    IRIB - Instituto dos Registradores Imobiliários do Brasil)   Brasilia     Brazil
           Lago
Nigel      Edmead          Thomson Reuters                                              London       United
                                                                                                     Kingdom
Pedro      Fandos Pons     Registradores de Espana                                      Madrid       Spain
Diana      Fletschner      Landesa                                                      Seattle      USA
Claire     Galpin          Fédération Géomètres Francophone                             Paris        France
Maria      Garcia Flores   Secretaría De Desarrollo Agrario, Territorial Y Urbano                    Mexico
Elena
Carlos     Gomez           UPF                                                          Barcelona    Spain
Thea       Hilhorst        World Bank                                                   Washington   USA
Eduardo    Martinez        IPRA-CINDER                                                  Barcelona    Spain
Fernando   Mendez          Colegio De Registradores De España                           Madrid       Spain
Luca       Miggiano        Oxfam                                                        The Hague    Netherlands
Carmen     Miquel          IPRA-CINDER                                                  Barcelona    Spain
Jan        Moerkerke       European Land Registry Association                           Brussels     Belgium
Robert     Ndugwa          UN Habitat                                                   Nairobi      Kenya
Denys      Nizalov         KEI -KSE                                                     Kiev         Ukraine
Nicolas    Nogueroles      IPRA-CINDER                                                  Barcelona    Spain
Peter      Richie          GIS/Transport                                                Kaduna       Nigeria
Miguel     Sanjines        Independent expert                                           Kampala      Uganda
Oumar      Sylla           GLTN/UN Habitat                                              Nairobi      Kenya
Mihai      Taus            Romanian Land Registrars                                     Bucharest    Rumania




                                                                                                     13
Annex 2: Program

Meeting objective:
       (1) Agree on a methodology to monitor the part of SDG indicator 1.4.2 pertaining to legally
           documented rights using administrative data
       (2) Assess availability of existing data and explore ways of institutionalizing reporting at country
           and regional level
       (3) Explore options for building on administrative data to advocate for and measure progress
           with sustainability of land policy reform



                                                 Agenda
Day 1: Thursday July 6, 2017

8.30 – 9.00       Welcome, Introduction and workshop objectives
        •     UPF
        •     CINDER
        •     UN-Habitat/GLTN/GLII
        •     World Bank

9.00 -10.00    Land indicators in the broader SDG framework: Process and methodology
        Chair: Carlos Gomez, UPF
        • SDG Process, indicator, data sources and envisaged next steps (R. Ndugwa)
        • Administrative indicator and link to other reporting areas & global initiatives (K. Deininger)
        • Discussion

10.00 - 10.30    Coffee break




                                                                                                        14
10.30- 12.00 Parallel session I: Methodological challenges & insights for reporting on legally
documented rights
        Chair: M. Cucarro
        • Spain: C. Miguel
        • Mexico: M.E. Garcia
        • Brazil: I. do Lago Jacopetti
        • Dubai: S. Alkaraf
        • Netherlands: K. de Zeeuw
        • Colombia: J. Mesa Guerra

10.30- 12.00 Parallel session II: Methodological challenges & insights for reporting on legally
documented rights
        Chair: C. Gomez
        • Korea: B. Cho
        • Romania: M. Taus
        • Belgium: J. Moerkerke
        • Nigeria: P. Richie
        • Uganda: M. Sanjines
        • Algeria: C. Galpin
        • Ukraine: D. Nizalov

12.00- 13.30 Methodological challenges (plenary)
        Chair: Nicolas Nogueroles
Short interventions on
        • Linking textual and spatial data: Pedro Fandos
        • Strata titles and condominiums: M. Taus & M. Cucarro
        • Dealing with paper records: J. Moerkerke
        • Managing and reporting on land data in a federal system: M. Jacopetti & M.E. Garcia Flores
        • Documenting indigenous rights & native title: L. Miggiano, M.E. Garcia Flores, T. Burns
        • Addressing gender aspects: M.E. Garcia Florese
        • Types of registry systems: M. Cucarro

13.30 - 15.00   Lunch

15.00 - 16.30 Working groups: Reporting & expanding data availability by region
        • Latin America & Caribbean
        • Middle East & Africa
        • Europe & OECD
        • Asia

16.30 - 17.30 Working group reports
        • Appropriateness of indicator
        • Points of contract & Data collection/validation strategy
        • ‘Pilot’ countries to go in depth & show impact of improvement
        • Issues for more detailed follow up


                                                                                                   15
Day 2 Friday July 7

8.30- 10.00    Strategies for compiling administrative data as an input in the SDGs
        Chair: K. Deininger
        • Summary report & discussion of next steps

10.00 - 10.30   Coffee break

10.00 - 11.00: Making administrative data actionable
        Chair: A. Akingbade
        • Gender disaggregation in land information systems: D. Fletschner
        • Capacity building on land information systems- B. Cho
        • Performance and transparency: Aggregating over sub-national units in Ukraine– D. Nizalov

11.00 - 12.30: Institutional linkages for monitoring and strengthening land governance
        Chair: O. Sylla
        • VGGT: J. Molina
        • UNGGIM: K de Zeeuw
        • Statistical offices & commissions: A. Denekew

12.30 -13.30    Workshop conclusions and next steps

13.30 - 15.00   Lunch

15.00- 17.00    Concluding panel: How registry data enhance welfare: Private sector decision-making
                and public policy

Chair:          J. Sandiumenge
Keynote:        Benito Arrunada, UPF

Regional perspectives:
       • Europe: B Moerkerke, ELRA
       • Latin America: C. Miguel & M.E. Garcia
       • Asia: B. Cho, LX
       • Middle East & N Africa: S. Alakraf, Dubai Land Department
       • Global standards and the role of international institutions: K. Deininger, World Bank




                                                                                                  16
