     Improving the
     Performance of
  Ethiopian Universities
in Science and Technology


      A Policy Note




                             Jamil Salmi
                            Andrée Sursock
                             Anna Olefir



                                2017
                           Disclaimer

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the information included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on
any map in this work do not imply any judgement on the part of the
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



Table of Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms ........................................................................................................................ 5
Acknowledgements....................................................................................................................................... 6
About the authors ......................................................................................................................................... 7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................... 8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ 16
1.1. Background .......................................................................................................................................... 16
1.2. Objectives and Conceptual Framework ............................................................................................... 18
CHAPTER 2. SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND DEVELOPMENT .................................................... 21
2.1. National Priorities and Demand for Skills ............................................................................................ 21
2.2. Science, Technology, and Innovation Performance............................................................................. 29
CHAPTER 3. ADVANCES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY HIGHER EDUCATION ........................ 35
3.1. Recent Developments .......................................................................................................................... 35
3.2. Academic Staff ..................................................................................................................................... 42
3.3. Internal and External Quality Assurance.............................................................................................. 52
3.5. Role of Cooperation and Partnerships ................................................................................................. 57
3.6. Benchmarking for University Performance Improvement .................................................................. 58
3.7. Student Support Services and Career Counselling............................................................................... 61
CHAPTER 4. DETERMINANTS OF THE PRESENT RESEARCH PERFORMANCE ............................ 69
4.1. Talent Development ............................................................................................................................ 69
4.2. Research Funding ................................................................................................................................. 72
4.3. Governance Dimensions ...................................................................................................................... 73
4.4. Policy Options for Building Research Capacity .................................................................................... 75
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS............................................. 92
5.1 Adequately Preparing and Deploying Academic Staff .......................................................................... 92
5.2. Strengthening the Relevance and Quality of Higher Education .......................................................... 92
5.3. Building Up Research Capacities .......................................................................................................... 93
REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................ 95
ANNEX 1: MEETINGS AND FIELD VISITS ................................................................................ 99
ANNEX 2: SHARE OF LABOR FORCE AND UNEMPLOYED WITH TERTIARY LEVEL OF
EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT ............................................................................................. 100
ANNEX 3: GOOD PRACTICE IN STUDENT EVALUATION ........................................................ 101
ANNEX 4: IMPROVING STUDENT RETENTION: AN INSTITUTIONAL CHECKLIST FOR SELF-
REFLECTION....................................................................................................................... 104
ANNEX 5: A NEW RESEARCH AGENDA IN AUSTRALIA ......................................................... 106
ANNEX 6: LESSONS FROM SINGAPORE’S EXPERIENCE IN BUILDING A STRONG RESEARCH BASE
......................................................................................................................................... 108
ANNEX 7: INNOVATION VOUCHERS FOR SMES ................................................................... 109




                                                                   3
ANNEX 8: MATRIX OF KNOWLEDGE- AND TECHNOLOGY-TRANSFER MECHANISMS............. 110
ANNEX 9: INTELLECTUAL CAPITAL STATEMENTS IN AUSTRIA .............................................. 112
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



                                   Abbreviations and Acronyms
 ACE Africa       Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project
 ACEWM            Africa Higher Education Center of Excellence for Water Management
 CTE              College of Teacher Education
 EQA              External Quality Assurance
 ESDP V           Education Sector Development Program V
 GDP              Gross Domestic Product
 GII              Global Innovation Index
 GIZ              Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
 GoE              Government of Ethiopia
 GTP II           Growth and Transformation Plan II
 HEIs             Higher Education Institutions
 HEMIS            Higher Education Management Information System
 HEP              Higher Education Project
 HERQA            Higher Education Relevance and Quality Agency
 HR               Human Resources
 IBE              Institute for Scholarship
 ICS              Intellectual Capital Statements
 ICT              Information and Communication Technology
 IDF              Institutional Development Fund
 IQA              Internal Quality Assurance
 LFS              Labor Force Survey
 MIS              Management Information System
 MSI              Millennium Science Initiative
 MOUs             Memoranda of Understanding
 NGOs             Nongovernmental Organizations
 NMMU             Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University
 NRF              National Research Fund
 PASET            Partnership for Skills in Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology
 QA               Quality Assurance
 QIF              Quality Enhancement and Innovation Fund
 R&D              Research and Development
 RSIF             Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund
 S&T              Science and Technology
 SDGs             Sustainable Development Goals
 SIDA             Swedish International Development and Cooperation Agency
 SMEs             Small and Medium Enterprises
 STI              National Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy
 TVET             Technical and Vocational Education and Training
 UNESCO           United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
 WIPO             World Intellectual Property Organization




                                               5
                                     Acknowledgements
This policy note was prepared by a team comprising Jamil Salmi, Andrée Sursock and Anna Olefir.

Numerous World Bank colleagues supported the team in this study. Hiroshi Saeki initiated this
analytical task; he co-led the work and provided a clear roadmap to the team. The team received
general guidance and support from Tobias Linden, Anne Margreth Bakilana, Qaiser Khan, Nicole
Klingen, Sajitha Bashir and Carolyn Turk. The team is grateful for the excellent advice provided
by the peer reviewers: Francisco Marmolejo, Roberta Malee Bassett and Igor Kheyfets. Girma
Woldetsadik is gratefully acknowledged for his support and practical advice throughout the
development of this study. The authors would like to also acknowledge contributions of Kevin
Macdonald and the analysis of Ethiopia labor force data. The team also thanks Tersit Berhane
Ghiday, Biftu Wordofa and Rosario Aristorenas for excellent administrative support, and Laura
Zakaras, Shalmraj Ramraj and Priya Susan Thomas for formatting and editorial support.

The team is grateful to the government of Ethiopia and representatives of the universities for
sharing their views at an early stage of the study. In particular, the team would like to thank the
leadership and teams of the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Science and Technology of
Ethiopia.
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



                                          About the authors
Jamil Salmi, a Moroccan education economist, is a global tertiary education expert who served as
coordinator of the World Bank's tertiary education program between 2006 and 2012. He wrote the
first World Bank policy paper on higher education reform in 1994 and was the principal author of
the Bank’s 2002 Tertiary Education Strategy entitled “Constructing Knowledge Societies: New
Challenges for Tertiary Education”. Mr. Salmi is the co-editor of "The Road to Academic
Excellence: the Making of World-Class Research Universities” (2011) and more recently authored
“The Tertiary Education Imperative: Knowledge, Skills and Values for Development” (2017).
Over the past twenty-five years, he has provided policy advice on tertiary education reform to the
governments of over 90 countries around the world. Mr. Salmi has also guided the strategic
planning efforts of several public and private universities in Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin
America.

Andrée Sursock, PhD, is Senior Adviser at the European University Association (EUA). She is
involved in a range of projects on the topic of quality assurance in higher education. She serves on
a number of boards of universities and quality assurance agencies and advises governments on
quality assurance procedures. As Deputy Secretary General at EUA (2001 and 2009), she was
responsible for developing EUA’s quality assurance policy positions and activities. She holds a
first degree in philosophy from the University Panthéon Sorbonne (France) and a PhD in social-
cultural anthropology from the University of California, Berkeley (USA). Before joining EUA,
she was Director of Development at the Centre for Higher Education Research and Information of
the Open University, (UK), taught at a variety of institutions in the USA, and held an
administrative post at Stanford University.

Anna Olefir, a Ukrainian national, is an Education Specialist in the World Bank’s Education
Global Practice. Since she first joined the World Bank in 2009, she has worked primarily on
education, skills and labor market issues in Europe and Central Asia. She was one of the principal
authors of the Moldova Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) Workforce
Development Country Report (2013), and more recently co-authored “Skills Gaps and the Path to
Successful Skills Development: Emerging Findings from Skills Measurement Surveys in Armenia,
Georgia, FYR Macedonia and Ukraine” (2015) and “Skills for a Modern Ukraine” (2016). Prior
to joining the Bank, Anna worked for the Canadian International Development Agency as the
Coordinator of the Canada Fund in Ukraine, and also served as the Lead Economist at the Ministry
of Economy of Ukraine. She holds a Masters and a Ph.D. in International Economics from the
Kyiv National Economic University and an MRes in Educational and Social Research from the
University of London.




                                               7
                                     Executive Summary
Introduction and Objective
The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) has demonstrated commitment to expand higher education
science and technology (S&T) programs to spur and support its growth and transformation agenda.
Ethiopia has made a tremendous advance in access to higher education over the past decade. This
rapid expansion, however, has raised concerns about quality. Many students are entering
universities with a low level of academic preparation and a weak mastery of English. Qualified
faculty are in short supply, especially in science and technology. The Higher Education Relevance
and Quality Agency (HERQA) was established in 2003 to implement a quality assurance system
for higher education, but it lacks the resources to carry out its mission.

The purpose of this report is to identify the main challenges facing the sector and propose a policy
agenda to address them. Our analysis is based on information from the Ministries of Education
and of Science and Technology of Ethiopia, a review of relevant literature from Ethiopia and
elsewhere, and an analysis of data and information collected from stakeholders at public and
private universities through semi-structured interviews.

The report contains five chapters. Chapter 1 presents background information and the study’s
methodology. Chapter 2 provides broader analysis of demand for skills, graduate employability,
feedback from employers on skill supply and the relationship with the economy at large. The next
Chapter analyzes the recent developments in S&T higher education. Chapter 4 assesses the
research performance of Ethiopian universities. Concluding Chapter 5 summarizes the key reform
options and policy measures to improve the performance of the higher education S&T system.

Context
Ethiopia has achieved strong and inclusive economic growth. It has been one of the world’s fastest
growing economies, with gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaging 10.9 percent per year
since 2004. In recent years, the country has also demonstrated an impressive track record of
poverty reduction. Since 2000, when Ethiopia had one of the highest poverty rates in the world of
55 percent, extreme poverty fell to 33 percent in 2011. The medium-term growth outlook remains
overall positive.

The GoE’s aspiration is that the country would achieve middle-income status by 2025. This
requires, in turn, a significant increase in productivity in agriculture; the gradual transformation of
the Ethiopian economy from agriculture to industry and services; and heavy investment in
backbone infrastructures such as roads, railways, energy, and telecommunications. The
Government also aims to build a climate-resilient green economy, develop renewable energy
projects and leapfrog to energy-efficient technologies in transport, industry, and construction, as
identified in the Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTP II). The mining, chemical, petro-
chemical, and pharmaceutical, construction, transport, information and communication
technology (ICT), and agro-processing industries are all to be developed. Development of the
national quality infrastructure is another important endeavor, including for standardization
practice, conformity assessment services, metrology, and accreditation, to support expansion of
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


products and services into the new export markets. The Government is building new industrial
parks and is increasing capacity in power generation along with the completion of transmission
lines to neighboring countries (Sudan and Kenya) which is expected to improve export
performance and stimulate growth in the short to medium term.

Increasing urbanization and huge infrastructure deficits catalyze the demand for engineering,
technology and applied science solutions to areas such as water and sanitation, power generation
and supply, environmental management, transportation and communications. There is also
increasing demand for middle- and high-skilled occupations and education system needs to
produce relevant skills for changing demands. These developments call for effective contribution
of higher education, through high-quality graduates, especially in S&T, relevant research, and
close links between the universities and the productive sectors.

The GTP II underlines the importance of “enhancing the national research and technology capacity
of the country.” The five-year plan recognizes the crucial role of higher education as a driver of
competitiveness and growth and envisages special support for S&T programs and the
establishment of several Centers of Excellence. The Government has also approved the Education
Sector Development Program V for 2015/16–2019/20 (ESDP V) and the National Science,
Technology, and Innovation (STI) Policy, strengthening regulatory framework for the sector. The
policy documents set ambitious targets for the expansion and promotion of equity in the subsector.

Advances and Challenges in Science and Technology Higher Education
The Government has significantly expanded access. In 2004/05–2014/15, the number of public
higher education institutions (HEIs) increased from 8 to 36. The number of private HEIs has also
increased, reaching over 100 institutions. Overall enrollment multiplied fivefold since 2005, and
now stands at 762,000, with more than 85 percent of students in public HEIs. Ethiopia has reached
the Sub-Saharan African average with a gross enrollment ratio of about 10 percent; though further
progress will be needed to reach the ESDP V target of 15 percent by 2019/20. Ethiopia has
implemented a 70:30 technology and science to social sciences and humanities student admission
ratio, which, despite dropouts, was close to that goal for undergraduates in 2014 (63:37 overall).

In light of the rapid expansion, the system is under pressure on multiple fronts and must employ
more staff, increase the number of PhD holders and focus on their career development, provide
more books, build more laboratories and so on. The main challenges in the higher education system
concern the qualifications of academic staff, the quality and relevance of science and technology
programs, and the research capacity of universities.

Faculty Qualifications and Training

The rapid expansion of higher education in Ethiopia has increased the demand for qualified
academic staff. Between 2010 and 2015, the number of academics increased by 58 percent to more
than 27,000 members, of which about 1,000 are expatriates. The Government has moved to address
staffing needs by (a) expanding master’s and PhD programs in the first-generation universities,
(b) training Ethiopian students abroad, (c) attracting qualified expatriates (by providing better
remuneration packages compared to their Ethiopian colleagues), and (d) covering staff gaps
through the contracting of academic staff on a part-time basis in other HEIs, in addition to their



                                               9
work in the primary employing institution. In the last decade, the Government has accelerated the
production of postgraduate degree holders, who are the natural candidates for faculty recruitment.
Enrolment in PhD programs has increased from a low base of only 258 in 2007/08 to around 800
in 2010/11 and over 3,150 since 2012/13.

Still, many faculty members are underqualified. Currently, 29 percent of faculty members have
only an undergraduate degree. The situation is of particular concern in the engineering and
technology fields, with 56 percent of faculty holding a bachelor’s degree. Also, only about 15
percent of staff hold PhDs. The statistics clearly shows that Ethiopia needs to ramp up the
production of graduates with a doctoral degree. Ghana and Vietnam presently produce 5 times
more PhDs per million inhabitants than Ethiopia every year and Senegal 22 times.

Existing performance assessment systems do not work well in practice. Regular high-quality
performance assessments can motivate staff to continue improving. But current performance
assessment falls short of this goal. This is partly because the assessments are similar for all
academic staff, regardless of their discipline, but also because they are often not shared with
faculty. Universities also do not have flexibility in determining performance-based remuneration
packages.

Few universities offer professional development programs for young staff or established faculty.
There is also no evaluation of delivered programs to improve their quality and relevance. Each
university should have staff development units with experts capable of organizing and delivering
professional staff development programs. Inter-university cooperation is also vital for this purpose,
particularly for countries like Ethiopia, which have great need for strong professional development
but little experience in the field. The Africa Centers of Excellence Project II is a good example of
such cooperation designed to address critical human resource gaps in higher education.

Women are also poorly represented on university faculties. Women currently comprise just 10
percent of academic staff. Only 33 percent of undergraduate students are women, with much lower
numbers in science and technology programs. The Government, recognizing that it needs to make
progress in harnessing the full human capital of its people, has plans to increase the undergraduate
enrollment of women to 45 percent and raise their share in PhD programs to 20 percent.

Links Between Science and Technology Programs and Industry

Most current and planned industrial parks are built near the top ten public universities which train
63 percent of all undergraduate students in public engineering and technology programs. These
top ten HEIs, together with the recently established Addis Ababa Science and Technology
University (2011), could help Ethiopia overcome the disadvantages of being a latecomer in
technological catching-up and support the national industrialization and growth agenda.

However, universities are not sufficiently engaged with industry, including in designing their
science and technology programs. Although skills gaps are not the most pressing constraint firms
face at the moment, skills concerns are on the rise. An increasing number of firms in dynamic and
growing industries report that skills gaps limit their productivity and ability to grow. These are
manufacturing firms (in particular textile, garments and food producers), export businesses, and
large firms with foreign ownership. Collaboration with employers would promote innovations in
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


the curriculum and pedagogical practices to target the skills needed in the workplace. Further,
universities do not have good information about what happens to their students when they enter
the job market or what employers think about the skill base of the students they hire. The lack of
modern management and information systems means that Ethiopian universities do not have the
information they need to make improvements in their programs and operations.

Career counselling, with input from industry, is in short supply. Universities recognize that they
need to do more to offer students opportunities for work placements and paid internships, as well
as opportunities to hear alumni and guest speakers. Graduate tracer studies and employers’ surveys
are needed to get better information about the distribution of skills among new hires, as well as the
demands for those skills from different economic sectors.

Another challenge is the high degree of similarity and duplication in program offerings and
disciplines across the sector. Despite the stated objectives of differentiation and excellence, the
higher education system is expanding without much differentiation in academic program offerings,
leading to duplication of resources and lower quality.

Quality assurance systems are limited. The HERQA was established in 2003 and is responsible for
promoting external quality assurance processes. In 2011 it has put a number of private institutions
on probation, and closed 5 private HEIs for quality reasons. However, this study exposed
widespread concerns about the agency's efficacy, which are linked to its limited resources: its small
staff, difficulty in attracting accomplished experts and a focus on private institutions. Also, because
it lacks independence from the ministry, there are potential conflicts of interest.

Research Output

There is a serious lack of research capacity in Ethiopian universities. The bulk of the research
output in Ethiopia is produced by academics at the major universities, including Addis Ababa
University, Haramaya University, Jimma University, and Mekelle University, and several research
institutes which contribute to the overall scientific production in agriculture, medical and health
research. At the same time, engineering research between 2005 and 2009 was still at the nascent
state, with only 2 percent research output of the total. Although Ethiopia has recently made
considerable progress in research output relative to the country’s population, it is starting from a
much lower base than most other countries. The output and impact of the research produced by
Ethiopian universities are still very low.

Research funding is targeted to a handful of universities. Ethiopia's total research funding (0.6
percent of GDP) is on a par with leading African countries, but universities receive very little of
that funding, and what they do receive is heavily concentrated in just a few institutions. Out of
Ethiopia’s 34 public universities, three of them (Addis Ababa University, Mekelle University and
Addis Ababa Science and Technology University) capture the lion's share of the competitive
research funding provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology.

The Government should consider innovative funding mechanisms for research, develop a clear
science and technology development strategy, and establish a more flexible governance framework
for research-intensive universities. Universities should be encouraged to forge partnerships with
leading institutions in other countries for capacity building and joint research purposes and to



                                              11
develop close linkages with the productive sectors, particularly in the key priority areas of
economic growth identified in the Government’s strategy.

Scientific infrastructure necessary to conduct research is often lacking. Very few universities have
sufficient number of researchers and the scientific infrastructure necessary to conduct research in
a meaningful manner, even among the nine oldest universities in the country. Despite significant
efforts to invest in new laboratory facilities, many departments lack the up-to-date scientific
equipment needed for advanced research, even in the two new Science and Technology
Universities. Access to broadband is also unequal across the universities.

The lack of information on research funding and activities is a paramount problem at both national
and institutional levels. Neither the Ministry of Education nor the Ministry of Science and
Technology have the overall picture of research expenditures and research output in Ethiopia. This
is the direct result of the universities’ lack of capacity to track the publications and other research
products of their academic staff.

Because of the rapid growth in enrollments, academic staff have heavy teaching loads and cannot
make much time for research. In addition, the low salaries drive many of them to also teach in
private universities or take on consulting assignments to make ends meet. This is an important
impediment to the development of the research capacity of Ethiopian universities.

Recommendations
Overall, the ongoing expansion of S&T higher education as well as research production should be
managed carefully and should be driven by country’s economic and social needs and priorities.

Priority Area 1. Strengthen the quality of academic staff

       1.    Create incentives for current faculty members to pursue advanced degree programs.

       2.    Support institutional and system-wide faculty development including through
             twinning with S&T HEIs and regional initiatives such Partnership for Skills in
             Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (PASET) and Africa Higher
             Education Centers of Excellence Project (ACE).

       3.    Ensure the availability of accurate and reliable data for staff management in S&T
             programs (staff qualifications, research outputs, disciplinary orientation, inbreeding
             and so on; benchmarking within the PASET initiative, specialized studies on
             motivation and job satisfaction of faculty members, and so on).

Priority Area 2. Improve quality of S&T higher education programs and their relevance to
growth and transformation goals

       1.    Strengthen the external quality assurance (EQA) system and its capacity to implement
             its mandate (through implementation of the HERQA's 2016 review recommendations)

       2.    Improve the internal quality assurance (IQA) system within each university, with
             close involvement of academic staff and students
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


        3.    Promote innovations in curricular and pedagogical practices to improve the relevance
              of S&T programs through their redesign and implementation in collaboration with
              employers

        4.    Ensure regular tracer studies to determine the employability of students and the
              relevance of programs to support their alignment with the needs of the economy

        5.    Create a system for collection, analysis, and dissemination of information on labor
              market outcomes of university graduates, vacancies and skills needs of employers

        6.    Develop student support services in S&T programs, including career counseling

Priority Area 3. Build up the capacity of universities to produce research and technology
products responsive to economic needs and priorities

        1.    Provide competitive capacity- building grants to support those universities aspiring to
              become research- intensive institutions (master’s and PhD training, labs, and
              equipment for advanced scientific infrastructure).

        2.    Provide competitive research grants in S&T domains aligned with the country’s
              competitiveness priorities (funding for specific research projects, partnerships with
              industry, and partnerships with foreign universities).

        3.    Establish an appropriate governance and funding framework for the development of
              applied S&T university research.




                                              13
                                                             Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Table 1. Key Policy Measures Suggested in the Study

    Policy
                         Issue                                   Recommendations                                            Expected impact
  Objective
 Enhanced       • Underdeveloped          • Provide support to HERQA to fully implement its mandate;           • Conditions established for enhancing the
 quality          quality enhancement     • Strengthen the EQA system (through implementation of                 quality and relevance of S&T programs,
                  mechanism                 HERQA's 2016 review recommendations);                                consonant with the social, economic,
                                          • Improve, on a continuous basis, the IQA system within each           and employment priorities of the country
                                            university, with close involvement of academic staff and             (GTP II goals)
                                            students;
                                          • Develop student support services in S&T programs, including
                                            career counseling.
                • Shortage of qualified   • Create incentives for current faculty members to pursue            • Better quality academic staff to ensure
                  academic staff in the     advanced degree programs;                                            quality instruction in S&T programs
                  system                  • Support institutional and system-wide faculty development          • Improved quality of education programs
                                            (including through twinning with S&T HEIs and regional
                                            initiatives such as PASET and ACE)
                                          • Ensure the availability of accurate and reliable data for staff-
                                            related decision-making in S&T programs (staff qualifications,
                                            research outputs, disciplinary orientation, inbreeding, and so
                                            on; benchmarking within the PASET initiative, specialized
                                            studies on motivation and job satisfaction of faculty members,
                                            and so on).
 Improved       • Weak links with the     • Ensure regular tracer studies in S&T programs to determine         • Improved relevance of education
 relevance        industries                the employability of students and the relevance of programs to       programs to economic needs and
                • Rising skills             support their alignment with the needs of the economy;               priorities
                  concerns                • Create a system for collection, analysis and dissemination of      • Evidence-based decision making
                • Lack of information       information on labor market outcomes of university graduates       • Improved accountability through
                  about system and          and vacancies and skills needs of employers                          provision of relevant information on the
                  universities’           • Promote innovations in curricular and pedagogical practices to       quality and relevance of S&T HEIs
                  performance               ensure the relevance of S&T programs through their redesign          programs (graduation rates and salaries
                                            and implementation in collaboration with employers                   by occupations and sector of
                                                                                                                 employment, job satisfaction). This
                                                                                                                 would serve to make universities more
                                                                                                                 transparent and accountable for
                                                                                                                 government investments, while also
                                                                                                                 leading to better career and educational
                                                                                                                 choices among the population




                                                                            14
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


    Policy
                         Issue                                   Recommendations                                             Expected impact
  Objective
 Research       •   Limited research      •   Provide competitive capacity-building grants to support those     •   Improved quantity and quality of
 output             and innovation            universities aspiring to become research intensive institutions       research output
                •   Lack of adequate          (Master’s and PhD training, labs and equipment for advanced       •   Research output responsive to the
                    laboratory                scientific infrastructure)                                            national growth and transformation
                    equipment and         •   Provide competitive research grants in S&T domains aligned            agenda and local agenda
                    connectivity              with the country’s competitiveness priorities (funding for
                                              specific research projects, partnerships with industry, and
                                              partnerships with foreign universities)
                                          •   Establish an appropriate governance and funding framework
                                              for the development of applied S&T university research




                                                                            15
                                      Chapter 1. Introduction
1.1. Background
The innovative application of knowledge has become a fundamental driver of social progress and
economic development. Advanced knowledge and modern technologies are also influencing the
pace of competition and transforming the nature of labor market needs through substantial shifts
in the configuration and content of jobs. In this context, higher education systems play a critical
role in supporting knowledge-driven economic growth strategies and the construction of
democratic, socially cohesive societies (World Bank 2002). Higher education is indispensable for
the effective and efficient creation, dissemination, and application of knowledge and for building
institutional, professional, and technological capacity.

Furthermore, a strong higher education system is essential for any developing country—notably
low-income nations—keen on achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Besides the specific goals for the education sector (SDG 4), evidence from Asia points to
the essential contribution that higher education can make to the goals of sustainable economic
growth (SDG 8) and poverty reduction (SDG 1) (World Bank 2012b). Moreover, advances on all
the other dimensions, from developing a vibrant agricultural sector through higher productivity
and innovation to building up a resilient infrastructure to mitigating the devastating effects of
climate change and preserving the environment cannot happen without the participation of
scientists, technicians, and well-trained professionals and the application of leading-edge research
for finding appropriate solutions to the big challenges faced by mankind. Achieving the SDGs also
requires strong institutions for policy design and implementation and well-prepared citizens who
care about inclusion and sustainability (Salmi 2016).

To illustrate the importance of higher education development in relation to economic growth,
figure 1 compares the paths of Vietnam and Ethiopia, which share two significant experiences in
their recent history. Both countries made the transition from socialism to market economy, and
both nations suffered a costly war. There is clear correlation between economic growth and higher
education expansion in both countries.1 Countries with a more highly skilled workforce have seen
faster economic growth2 (figure 2).

Worldwide, the higher education ecosystem is evolving at an increasingly rapid pace, influenced
by elements of uncertainty, complexity, and disruption such as changing demographics, global
competition, political volatility, diminished public funding, greater private involvement, growing
accountability demands, alternative delivery modes, and game-changing technologies (Salmi
2016). In this challenging context, developing countries can either become economically
marginalized, incapable of using advanced technology and unable to compete on the global stage
because their higher education systems are insufficiently developed and underperforming, or they



1
  The rapid expansion of higher education in Vietnam was made possible, in part, by increased cost sharing: today
the Vietnamese public universities receive more than 30 percent of their resources from private sources (fees,
contracts, and research grants).
2
  World Bank. 2012a..
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


can strengthen their capacity to create and apply knowledge through well-trained graduates and
relevant research produced by a diversified and increasingly international higher education system.

Figure 1. Economic Growth and Higher Education Expansion in Ethiopia and Vietnam (1980–2014)



                                                                    1800                                                                                            3500




                                                                                                                                                                           Number of tertiary students per 100,000
        GDP per capita (constant 2008 USD)




                                                                    1600                          Ethiopia GDP p.c.
                                                                                                  Vietnam GDP p.c.                                                  3000
                                                                    1400                          Ethiopia tertiary enrl. / 100,000 pop.
                                                                                                                                                                    2500
                                                                    1200                          Vietnam tertiary enrl. / 100,000 pop.




                                                                                                                                                                                         population
                                                                    1000                                                                                            2000

                                                                               800                                                                                  1500
                                                                               600
                                                                                                                                                                    1000
                                                                               400
                                                                                                                                                                    500
                                                                               200
                                                                                 0                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                           Year
Source: K. Macdonald for this report based on World Bank and United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) databases.
Figure 2. Tertiary Enrollments and Per Capita GDP, 2014

                                                                               100
                                         Gross enrolment ratio, tertiary (%)




                                                                                90                                                           Finland           United States
                                                                                80
                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                           France
                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                            United Kingdom
                                                                                50                           Thailand

                                                                                40                        China
                                                                                30              Vietnam                    Malaysia
                                                                                20
                                                                                     Ethiopia
                                                                                10           Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                            Chad
                                                                                 0
                                                                                      0          10000        20000        30000         40000         50000         60000
                                                                                                 GDP per capita, PPP (constant 2011 international $)
Source: World Bank data.
Note: PPP = Purchasing power parity; GDP = Gross Domestic Product.

Over the past decade, Ethiopia has achieved substantial progress in economic, social, and human
development. The GoE’s aspiration is that the country would achieve middle-income status by
2025. This requires, in turn, a significant increase in productivity in agriculture; structural
transformation of the economy with bigger weight of industry and services; and heavy investment
in backbone infrastructures such as roads, railways, energy, and telecommunications. This requires



                                                                                                                            17
                  Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


effective contribution of high-quality graduates, especially in science and technology (S&T),
relevant research, and close links between the universities and the productive sector.

1.2. Objectives and Conceptual Framework
Against this background, this Policy Note aims at providing objective elements of diagnosis and a
range of policy options based on international experience to guide the GoE in defining the road
map for the development and transformation of the higher education system with a focus on the
S&T capacities that are critical for the country’s development. The report is focused on the three
priority areas of the university sector as identified by the Government:

        •     Strengthening the quality of academic staff, with a focus on S&T faculty

        •     Improving the quality and relevance of S&T academic programs delivered in
              Ethiopian universities

        •     Building up the research capacity of the universities

The Policy Note is based on the analysis of World Bank reports and other available documents, as
well as on field visits by a World Bank team that was in Addis Ababa over a two-week span in
February 2017. The team met with senior leadership in ministries, agencies, and universities.
Interviews with academic staff and students were also conducted. The schedule of the field visits
is in appendix 1.

After this contextual introduction, Chapter 2 discusses demand for skills, graduate employability,
feedback from employers on skill supply and the relationship with the economy at large. Chapter
3 analyzes the recent developments in S&T higher education. Chapter 4 assesses the determinants
of present research performance of Ethiopian universities. The last chapter summarizes the main
reform options and policy measures outlined in the previous chapters.

The theory of change and capacity development that guides the organization of this report rests on
the premise that, in complex higher education environments, better quality research and teaching
outcomes cannot be obtained without the proper alignment of all the key factors contributing to
these outcomes. It is not sufficient to focus on one aspect, for example, just injecting large amounts
of additional financial resources or financing scholarships to train professors while neglecting the
other drivers of performance of HEIs.3

Theories of change in basic education point to many factors affecting educational outcomes, such
as the quality of teaching, time spent on tasks, the quality of educational facilities, the curriculum,
or language of instruction. The complexity is likely to be even greater in the case of HEIs,
considering their multiple missions of teaching, research, and service to the community and the
local economy.



3
 This theory of change was developed by Jamil Salmi in the context of a recent evaluation of Norwegian
Programme for Capacity Development in Higher Education and Research for Development (NORHED), the
Norwegian Government’s program in support of partnerships with developing countries universities (DPMG 2014).



                                                     18
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Unlike what happens at the lower levels of education, the interaction between research and
teaching adds a dimension of complication to the measurement of results in tertiary education.
Besides inculcating appropriate values and attitudes in young people, the main purpose of primary
and secondary education is to transmit existing knowledge. By contrast, a core mission of
universities is to create new knowledge, in addition to teaching existing knowledge. The synergy
between the production and dissemination of knowledge is one of the characteristics and strengths
of universities (Boyer 1990).

The joint production of education and research makes the separation of results between research
output and graduates somehow artificial. The quality of research influences, to a large extent, the
quality of teaching and learning. Some studies argue that teaching can also positively influence
the direction and quality of research (Becker and Kennedy 2005). This feature of academic life
needs to be taken into consideration when examining the determinants of the quality of graduates.
For these reasons, the proposed theory of change looks at the causal chain leading to improved
research and graduates within a single framework.

Furthermore, the range of monetary and prestige incentives that countries and HEIs used to reward
good research and teaching directly affects the behavior of faculty and the likelihood of a strong
link between the two activities. For example, under the influence of the global rankings, a growing
number of universities are offering special monetary incentives for publications in prestigious
international journals, which can result in excessive recognition of research contributions
compared to teaching.

Figure 3 represents the general theory of change for increasing the supply and quality of graduates
and improving the production and quality of research by strengthening the capacities that affect
these two outcomes. After identifying two sets of contextual factors—system-level and
institutional-level dimensions—that affect the performance of HEIs by directly influencing their
mode of operation, the figure shows a sequence of inputs and intermediary results that, according
to the literature, lead to better graduates and research. In this context, staff qualifications and
motivation, examined in Chapter 3, are an essential ingredient in the causal chain explaining the
results of universities. The elements of quality assurance (QA) analyzed in this chapter of the
report are the most important pillar of accountability as part of the system-level and institutional-
level conditions and should also be viewed as tools to enhance quality. Chapter 4, focusing on
research capacity building, looks at the production of knowledge.

The main implication of this analytical framework is that government programs and donor projects
must consider all these dimensions of complexity in the design of interventions in support of higher
education development.




                                                     19
                                                           Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



Figure 3. General Theory of Change for Producing More/Better-qualified Graduates and More/Higher-quality Research


                       System-level enabling conditions

                                          Institution-level enabling conditions
 •   Institutional
     autonomy and
     academic                                                             Sequence of causal links within universities
     freedom
                        •   Leadership,               Appropriate
 •   Accountability         vision, and plan         qualifications,               High-quality and relevant programs/courses;             Increased number
     mechanisms                                      experience and               engaging pedagogical practices and more time               and quality of
                        •   Internal quality          motivation of                     spent on active learning activities                    graduates;
 •   Funding for            assurance (IQA)          academic staff
                                                                                                                                             increased and
     teaching,              and institutional                                     Dynamic collaborative and multi-disciplinary               better-quality
     research and           research                                                               research                                     research
     student aid
                        •   Resources and
                            incentives

                                                         Effective selection of
                                                          incoming students,                                                      Links with industry and
                                                          especially graduate                 Favorable learning
                                                                                                                                 community; stakeholders’
                                                                students                   environment and research
                                                                                                                                          inputs
                                                                                                 infrastructure
Chapter 2. Science, Technology, and Development
2.1. National Priorities and Demand for Skills
Ethiopia is a large, landlocked, and diverse country with more than 90 ethnic and linguistic groups
and a population of over 99 million. With an annual growth rate of 2.5 percent, Ethiopia’s
population is expected to reach 130 million by 2025. The country has experienced fast economic
growth over the past decade. According to official data, real GDP growth averaged 10.9 percent
annually (8 percent per capita) in 2004–14. The recent El Niño drought slowed growth in 2015/16.
The GDP growth was estimated at 8.5 percent, a rate that still places Ethiopia among the fastest-
growing economies in the world. Nonetheless, Ethiopia remains the 13th poorest country in the
world. More than 80 percent of the population lives in rural areas, although urbanization is
increasing as workers move from agriculture toward more proactive manufacturing and services
jobs.

The contributions of different sectors to registered economic growth of 10.3 percent in 2011–14
was as follows: agriculture 2.3 percent, industry 2.7 percent, and service 5.3 percent. In subsectors,
the respective contributions were 2.3 percent for wholesale and retail trade, 2.2 percent for
construction, 1.9 percent for crops, 1.0 percent for hotels and restaurants, and 0.5 percent for large-
and medium-scale manufacturing. The service sector started to produce a larger share of output
than agriculture, although the share of the latter continues to be large compared to the neighboring
countries (figure 4).

Structural transformation, industrialization, and urbanization have been promoted in line with the
country’s aspirations to achieve middle-income status by 2025. Massive public infrastructure
investment has been at the center of the country’s economic strategy to address existing
infrastructure deficits and provide conditions needed for subsequent private sector growth. The
country has been able to achieve a substantial expansion of energy, road, railway, and
telecommunication infrastructure. Roads have been completed to connect Ethiopia with Sudan,
Kenya, Somalia, and Djibouti. The big interstate projects include the Modjo-Hawassa-Kenya
expressway, which is part of the Cairo-Cape Town Highway project. In addition, Ethiopia and
Djibouti recently inaugurated an electrified railway line. Also, with the support of foreign
investors, the Government has been actively promoting industrial parks.

Figure 4. Structure of Output (percent)

 60
       48
 50                  41                                                                   40               43
 40
 30
                                                  16
 20                              12
                                                               6             4
 10
  0
            2000          2015        2000              2015       2000          2015          2000              2015
               Agriculture                   Industry                Manufacturing                    Services

                                  Ethiopia          Kenya      Tanzania          Uganda

Source: World Development Indicators.
                        Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


The labor market situation has generally improved over the past ten years. Unemployment
decreased from 8 percent in 1999 to 5 percent in 2005 and 4.5 percent in 2013, with a sharper
decrease in urban areas (from 26 percent in 1999 to 17 percent in 2013) 4 . Farm employment
increased by half in relation to 122 percent increase in the nonfarm sector. Still, in absolute terms
agriculture has added 8 million new workers since 1999, compared to 5.5 million for the nonfarm
sector. Wage employment in the formal private sector has doubled since 1999 but remains
exceptionally low at a mere 2 percent of total employment. The share of wage employment remains
small overall, accounting for 12 percent of employment in 2013 compared to 9 percent in 1999.

While the sectoral composition of employment changed only marginally, composition of the
workforce has been changing toward middle- and high-skilled occupations (figure 5). Trade and
foreign ownership have labor-augmenting effects in Ethiopia. In firms located close to the capital,
foreign ownership tends to be associated with increased demand for skilled labor (Haile, Srour and
Vivarelli 2013). In 2005–2013, the economy added around 750,000 new skilled jobs (figure 6).

Figure 5. Skills Composition of Employment, 2005–2013



                         21.0                                         74.4                                  2.3
                                                                                                          2.4
           30-64


                                 37.2                                           58.1                        2.0
                                                                                                          2.7
    2013




           15-29


                          24.4                                            73.2                              1.2
                                                                                                           1.3
           30-64


                                        48.9                                           49.1                 0.7
                                                                                                           1.3
    2005




           15-29
                   0%   10%       20%          30%     40%     50%        60%       70%       80%   90%    100%

                           Level 1 (lowest)          Level 2    Level 3         Level 4 (highest)

Source: Bundervoet et al. (forthcoming).

In advanced economies and increasingly also in many developing countries there is a decline in
the routine middle-skills jobs (World Development Report 2016). Based on technological
feasibility, 43.9 percent of all jobs in Ethiopia are estimated to be susceptible to automation, though
the effects are currently moderated by the lower wages and time lag for adoption of technologies
(figure 7). Lessons from the history of technological changes suggest that the winner-countries
will be those with more responsive education and training systems, producing relevant skills for
the changing world.




4
    Hill and Mejia-Mantilla 2016.



                                                                 22
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 6. Changing Demand for Skills in Ethiopia and Comparator and Stretch Countries, Circa 1995–2012
                             1
    employment share, percetage
                           0.8                                                                                                                                High-skilled
     Annual average change in


                                                                                                                                                              occupations (intensive
                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                              in non-routine
                           0.4                                                                                                                                cognitive and
                           0.2                                                                                                                                interpersonal skills)
              points




                             0
                                                                                                                                                              Middle-skilled
                          -0.2                                                                                                                                occupations (intensive
                          -0.4                                                                                                                                in routine cognitive and
                          -0.6                                                                                                                                manual skills)
                          -0.8
                            -1                                                                                                                                Low-skilled
                                                                   Malaysia

                                                                              Tanzania




                                                                                                                                        Botswana
                                                                                                             India
                                                    South Africa




                                                                                         Uganda




                                                                                                                      Namibia
                                                                                                  Thailand




                                                                                                                                                   Ethiopia
                                      Philippines




                                                                                                                                Ghana
                                                                                                                                                              occupations (intensive
                                                                                                                                                              in non-routine manual
                                                                                                                                                              skills)

Source: World Development Report 2016.
Note: High-skilled occupations include legislators, senior officials and managers, professionals, and technicians and
associate professionals. Middle-skilled occupations comprise clerks, craft and related trades workers, plant and
machine operators, and assemblers. Low-skilled occupations refer to service and sales workers and elementary
occupations.
Figure 7. Estimated Share of Employment that is Susceptible to Automation

    90

    80

    70

    60

    50

    40

    30

    20

    10

     0
                 NIC



                 NPL
                 IND




                  CRI
                ECU




                MLT
                UZB



                GEO




                PAN




                THA
                ALB




                LVA

                 SYC
                KGZ




                GTM




                 ZAF




               OECD
                 PSE




                MUS
                MYS
                BOL




                 SLV




                URY
                HRV
                ARG
                 TJK



                UKR
                NGA




                MNG

                BGR
                 ETH




                BGD




                MKD



                ROU



                AGO
                CHN
                KHM




                DOM




                 LTU




                 CYP
                 PRY




                 SRB




                                  Adjusted (technological feasibility + adoption time lags)                                     Unadjusted (technological feasibility)

Source: World Development Report 2016.

Ethiopia’s development needs and priorities increase the demand for applied S&T solutions
(drawing on international knowledge and applying it for local development and growth).
Increasing urbanization and huge infrastructure deficits catalyze the demand for engineering,
technology, and applied science solutions to areas such as water and sanitation, power generation
and supply, environmental management, transportation, and communications.5 The Government


5
 Ethiopia’s urban population is projected to nearly triple from 15.2 million in 2012 to 42.3 million in 2037, growing
at 3.8 percent a year (World Bank Group’s Ethiopia Urbanization Review 2015). However, in 2015 only 27.2
percent of urban population had access to sanitation facilities, well below 40.4 percent of Sub-Saharan Africa’s



                                                                                                                     23
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


also aims to build climate-resilient green economy, develop renewable energy projects, and
leapfrog to energy-efficient technologies in transport, industry, and construction, as identified in
the GTP II. The mining sector; chemical, petrochemical, and pharmaceutical industries; the
construction sector; transport; ICT and electronics; and biotechnology and agro-processing
industries also require adequate engineering and applied S&T capacity. Development of the
National Quality Infrastructure is another important endeavor which requires appropriate capacity,
including for standardization practice, conformity assessment, metrology, and accreditation to
support the expansion of products and services into the export markets.

None of these developments can take place without the effective contribution of high-quality
graduates, especially in S&T, relevant research, and close links between the universities and the
productive sectors. This is particularly important because the lowest scores in the Global
Competitiveness Index for Ethiopia appear to be in the areas of technological readiness (132) and
higher education and training (129).

GTP II underlines the importance of “enhancing the national research and technology capacity of
the country in line with its level of development.” In addition to access, equity, and quality targets
for higher education, the target for admission by public universities was set at 70 percent of
students to S&T programs. GTP II envisages special support for S&T programs and the
establishment of several Centers of Excellence, such as high technology and human resources
(HR) enrichment centers for mega projects that require a high level of construction technology.
The Government has also approved the ESDP V for 2015/16–2019/20 and the National Science,
Technology, and Innovation (STI) Policy, strengthening regulatory framework for the sector. The
policy documents set ambitious targets for the expansion and promotion of equity in the subsector
with the overarching aim of ensuring “quality and relevance [of education] in public and private
higher education institutions.”

With regard to expansion of the sector, the ESDP V aims to increase the gross enrollment ratio in
higher education from 9.4 percent in 2014/15 to 15 percent by 2019/20. The ESDP V recognizes
that this step in the next five years “will move Ethiopia halfway towards a lower middle income
average of GER for higher education, which currently stands at 22 percent.” The Government has
defined intermediary targets to achieve the long-term objectives of the plan. To increase the
enrollments and improve access for underserved groups, 11 new universities are being established
across the regions in Ethiopia. Postgraduate enrollments are expected to double and first-tier
universities are expected to expand the number of PhD students enrolled by the sector. The plan is
also to improve the relevance of research and strengthen the technology transfer capacity of
universities through partnerships with industry and incubation centers.

The impact of tertiary education on employment tends to be positive. Share of persons with tertiary
level of education among the unemployed is lower than the share of the labor force with the same
educational level as shown in annex 2 suggesting that education protects from unemployment. An
analysis of 2013 data is captured in figure 8, which show that the public sector absorbs a higher
percentage of the labor force with higher education than the private sector.6


average. Municipal sewerage system is available only in Addis Ababa and serves a mere 10 percent of its
population. Ethiopian cities also struggle to manage solid waste. Access to electricity and road density remain low.
6
  Kevin Macdonald for this report.



                                                         24
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 8. Labor Market Status by Highest Level of Education Completed - Ages 15 to 30

                                                              Pub. sector (excl. health and edu.)                   Public sector health and edu.
                                                              Private Sector                                        Unemployed available to work
                                                              Unemployed, unavailable to work

                                                   CTE          5                                 63                                       24                2 6
     Post secondary                                                            34                             28                     26                  9        3
   Vocational 10+3                                                       23                         30                         30                       13        3
   Vocational 10+2                                               10           8                           54                                  19              8
   Vocational 10+1                                                  12                    35                              34                       10         8
        Preparatory… 8                                                    11                   30                  14                       37
 Secondary (g9,10)                                             4 4                              56                              14                  23
                       Primary 1                                                          58                              7                   34
     Some primary                                                                                   76                                    4             19
                                             None                                                        85                                        3         11

Source: Labor Force Survey (LFS) 2013.
Note: CTE is College of Teacher Education.
Furthermore, those with post-secondary education earn 106.5 percent (2.06 times) higher monthly
earnings than those who have completed grade 12 (this is the preparatory level and is the base level
in figure 9). However, there are rising concerns about the skill sets of the graduates produced by the
education system.
Figure 9. Labor Force with Higher Education Earns Over Twice As Much As Those with Secondary Education
Accounting for Differences in Experience and Gender



                                                                                                                                                    106.5
                                                        100
          Percent difference in earnings compared to




                                                         75
             graduates of preparatory (grade 12)




                                                         50                                                                               39.5
                                                         25                                                                   0.4
                                                          0
                                                        -25                                                        -2.0
                                                                                                       -14.2
                                                        -50                               -30.1                                                                       -34.3
                                                        -75                       -63.8
                                                       -100      -88.6




Source: LFS 2013 (estimates of a Mincer earnings function).
Note: This figure is only about wage earners. The incomes of those working on own account or in subsistence farming
are not included.



                                                                                                              25
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


While the percentage of firms in Ethiopia identify an inadequately educated workforce as a major
constraint to their operation and growth is quite low (3 compared to 19 for Sub-Saharan Africa),
figures 10 and 11 show that skills concerns are on the rise for manufacturing firms (particularly in
textile, garments, and food producers) and exporters. In addition, 9 percent of large firms and
companies with foreign ownership view skills as one of the binding obstacles to their operation
and growth.

Figure 10. Firms Rating Inadequately Educated Workforce As a Major Constraint (percent)

 14.0
 12.0
 10.0
  8.0
  6.0
  4.0
  2.0                                                                                                                                                      2011
  0.0                                                                                                                                                      2015




Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys data.
Figure 11. Skills As a Major Constraint by Subsectors, 2015

 25.0
 20.0
 15.0
 10.0
   5.0
   0.0
           All




                                                                                                          All




                                                                                                                Retail




                                                                                                                                                     Transport
                      Food




                                  Textiles & Garments




                                                                               Other Manufacturing
                                                        Non-Metallic Mineral




                                                                                                                                    Other Services
                                                             Products




                             Manufacturing                                                                               Services


Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys data.

For example, a small sample survey of Chinese investors, conducted by the World Bank, showed
that 93 percent of all professional positions and 67 percent of skilled production workers’ positions
in these firms are held by Chinese employees. Relatively few of the skilled and professional




                                                                                                     26
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


positions are held by Ethiopians.7 In addition, more than 50 percent of Chinese firms indicated that
an inadequately educated workforce is a major or severe constraint to their operations (compared
to 4 percent result for domestic), particularly in the manufacturing and construction sectors. Also,
a significantly greater proportion of Chinese firms invest in training of workers compared to
domestic firms (75 versus 27 percent). Furthermore, a greater percentage of Ethiopian workers
benefit from training, compared to Chinese workers (69 versus 40 percent). Given Ethiopia’s
relatively small manufacturing basis, the GoE’s investments in higher education are sufficient for
the manufacturing sector. However, these investments may not be providing the kind of quality
that is required for foreign firms that are competing globally.

Furthermore, according to a 2013 employers’ survey, manufacturing firms in Ethiopia struggle to
recruit candidates with both appropriate technical competencies and socioemotional skills and
behaviors, in particular work ethic and commitment (figure 12).

Figure 12. Skills Sought in New Hires, 2013 (percent of firms)

    100%
                                                           15%
                 26%                  32%                                       25%                 32%
    80%                                                    15%
                  0%                                                            3%
                                      0%                                        3%                   5%
    60%                                                    15%                                       5%


    40%          65%                  58%                  23%
                                                                               61%                  41%

    20%
                                                           31%
                                                                                                    18%
                 10%                  11%                                       8%
     0%
             Large (100+)       Medium (20-99)         MSME (<20)       Established (>5 Yrs)   Young (0-5 Yrs)
              Interpersonal and communication skills                  Work ethic and commitment
              Computer/general IT skills                              English skills
Source: Geiger and Moller. 2015.

The question of students’ employability has become an issue of particular concern to many
governments around the world who are aware that the shift to a knowledge economy requires the
students to be equipped with relevant technical, behavioral, and analytical skills to contribute to
economic development. This usually translates into questions about student success, graduate
destination, the fitness between education and jobs, the soft skills that students have acquired,
particularly those related to entrepreneurship, critical thinking, teamwork, and so on.

Skills are at the core of improving employment outcomes and increasing productivity and growth.
Education and training systems, however, may not always provide the skills needed to succeed in
the labor market. Chapter 3 examines issues related to the performance of higher education in
Ethiopia (S&T programs). Figure 13 shows the key building blocks required for the alignment of
the supply and demand of skills, which include a number of elements beyond the education system.


7
 Chinese firms are significant employers in Ethiopia. They accounted for 18,368 full-time jobs equivalent to 6.5
percent of the total full-time permanent jobs (282,306) in the formal nonagricultural sector in Ethiopia. Median
wages in Chinese firms are higher than in domestic firms. Source: Bashir. 2011



                                                        27
                  Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 13. Aligning Skill Supply and Demand: Critical Elements and Possible Disconnects


   Lack of information on skill
   demand and supply used for                                           Lack of information on
   decision making                                                      demand and supply to
                                                                        guide education/training
   No strategy in place that considers         Individual
                                                                        decisions
   short- and long-term demand               Investments in
   expectations                                  Skills                 Inequitable access to
                                                                        quality   and     relevant
   Weak capacity of HEIs                                                education and training
   Other systemic weaknesses:                                           Weak         foundational
   external and internal quality                                        skills    (for   example,
   assurance, governance, financing,                                    literacy, English, STEM
   incentives, and facilitation that                                    skills)
   constrain     access,      quality,
   relevance, and efficiency.




                                             Alignment                    Labor Market
                                               of Skill                  Rewarding Skills
               Responsive                    Supply and
               Education                      Demand
                System




                                                                         Lack of incentives to
   Weak coordination among                                               upgrade skills (skills
   employers, and with HEIs,                                             premiums, disincentives
   to signal mismatches and                                              and barriers to work,
   facilitate relevant education                                         reservation wages due
   and training                             Training and                 to social protection
                                            Coordination                 system or remittances,
   No incentives or possibility             by Employers                 social    norms,    and
   to train                                                              migration options)


Source: Adapted from Hoftijzer (2015).
Note: STEM = Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math.




                                                      28
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



2.2. Science, Technology, and Innovation Performance
Science, innovation, and technological changes are important contributors to economic
development. The Global Innovation Index (GII) produced by Cornell University, European
Institute of Business Administration (Institut Européen d'Administration des Affaires, INSEAD),
and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) allows comparing Ethiopia’s innovation
and higher education performance with relevant countries in Sub-Saharan countries and a few East
Asian countries. South Africa, Malaysia, and the Republic of Korea represent stretch targets.
Vietnam is a useful example of a low-income country that has been progressing rapidly in the past
decade.

The GII ratings show that Ethiopia is lagging behind the comparator countries. As far as the GII
is concerned, Nigeria is the only comparator country placed behind Ethiopia (table 2). Kenya and
Rwanda score significantly higher, reflecting progress in research and development (R&D) in the
first case and in higher education in the second place. The higher education ranking is a composite
indicator measuring the enrollment rate, the proportion of graduates in science and engineering,
and the inbound mobility of students. The Research and Development indicator is based on the
number of researchers relative to the total population and on the level of expenditures on research
calculated as a proportion of GDP.

Table 2. GII and Higher Education Ranking (2016)
                                                              Higher Education              Research and
         Country                         GII
                                                                  Ranking                Development Ranking
 Ethiopia                                110                        110                          82
 Ghana                                   102                         93                          86
 Kenya                                   80                         122                          73
 Nigeria                                 114                          n.a.                         103
 Rwanda                                  83                            98                          115
 Senegal                                 106                          120                           77
 South Africa                            54                            89                           40
 Tanzania                                105                          124                           81
 Uganda                                  99                            82                           87
 Malaysia                                35                             27                           35
 Korea                                   11                             12                            1
 Vietnam                                 59                             84                           99
Source: GII. 2016. https://www.globalinnovationindex.org/.
Note: GII provides an annual ranking of countries by their capacity for, and success in, innovation.

The research capacity improved over the last years but the scientific output of Ethiopian
universities is still quite low at present. Altogether, the Ethiopian universities produce around
1,500 publications every year. However, the research output of Ethiopia has doubled over the past
five years, considering all publications (universities and non-university research institutes).
Figure 14 shows the evolution of the total number of scientific publications between 2010 and
2015 (citable documents).




                                                        29
                       Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 14. Research Output of Ethiopia and Selected Comparator Countries in Absolute Volume (2010 and 2015)


       Vietnam                       3855
                              2057

       Malaysia                                                                            22357
                                                                     15322

        Uganda           1177
                        859

       Tanzania          1159
                        792

    South Africa                                                         15570
                                                         11247

        Senegal         631
                       385

        Rwanda         251
                       135

         Nigeria                       4683
                                        5014

         Kenya                1974
                             1481

         Ghana            1374
                        730

        Ethiopia          1552
                        774

                   0                 5000        10000           15000           20000         25000

                               Citable documents 2015     Citable Documents 2010


Source: SCImago. SJR - SCImago Journal and Country Rank.

The bulk of the research output in Ethiopia between 2005 and 2009 was produced by academics
at the major universities, including Addis Ababa University, Haramaya University, Jimma
University, and Mekelle University (AU–NEPAD 2010). A number of research institutes
contribute to the overall scientific production in agriculture and medical and health research. For
example, the Ethiopian Institute for Agricultural Research has been pursuing applied research with
a view to raise crop yield, quality, and disease resistance and minimize farm-to-market losses.8
Ethiopia’s traditional strengths in livestock research and studies in fauna and flora are reflected in
the substantial contribution made by the agricultural, biological, veterinary, and environmental
sciences (42 percent). Studies in medicine and health services made up 28 percent and there were
significant contributions by the natural sciences (18 percent). At the same time, engineering
research between 2005 and 2009 was still at the nascent state, with only 2 percent research output
(table 3).


8
  There are activities under way to improve soil fertility management; improve rain-fed agronomic methods;
increase the access to irrigation (the potential, according to Mellor is immense); and conserve natural resources.
Mellor. 2014. http://ethioagp.org/aese-and-demar-ethio-afric-plc-host-seminar-on-cereal-production-growth-rates/;
Yusuf. 2014.



                                                          30
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Table 3. Scientific Publication by Disciplinary Area (percent), 2005–2009




                                                                                                                                      Tanzania (%)
                                  Burkina Faso




                                                                                                         Mozambique
                                                  Ethiopia (%)




                                                                                                                       Senegal (%)
                                                                                            Malawi (%)
                                                                  Ghana (%)



                                                                               Kenya (%)
                                      (%)




                                                                                                            (%)
               Area



    Natural sciences                 3            18              1            12           7               8          35             11
    Engineering, energy, and
                                     2             2              4            2            2               2          5               3
    technology
    Medical and health
                                    68            28              38           34           63             49          47             47
    sciences
    Agricultural, biological,
    veterinary, and                 10            42              30           36           18             15          6              30
    environmental sciences
    Sub-total                       83            90              84           84           90             74          93             91
    Social science, law,
                                     6             9              14           8            9               7          6               8
    business
    Education                        0             0               1            0           0.5            0           0.5             0
    Humanities and arts              0            0.3             0.7          0.5          0.1            8           0.3            0.3
    Other                            1            0.7              1            2           0.5           0.2          0.5             1
 Total publications                751           2,408           2,022        4,971        1,047         462          1,333          2,570
Source: World Bank 2014a.

To assess the research output of Ethiopia in a comparative perspective, table 4 presents the
evolution of the number of citable documents relative to the population between 2010 and 2015,
corresponding to the quantitative dimension of research production, and the H-index, which
measures the quality and impact of that research. 9

The data show that Ethiopia made considerable progress in terms of research output relative to the
country’s population over the five-year period, growing faster than all the comparator countries
except Vietnam. It is starting, however, from a much lower base than most other countries. The
quality and impact of the research produced by Ethiopian universities is still very low. Ethiopia’s
H-index is below that of most comparators, though it is about the same as Ghana and well above
Rwanda.




9
 The H-index is a bibliometric index developed in 2005 by Professor Jorge Hirsch, a University of California
physicist. A researcher’s H-index score is the maximum number of publications for which each publication is cited
at least that many times. The index is based on the set of the scientist’s most cited papers and the number of citations
that they have received in other publications. According to higher education expert Alex Usher, the H-index is better
than many other bibliometric measures in that it considers both productivity and impact, is not biased by a small
number of very successful articles, discounts the value of papers that are not influential and uses only publicly
available data (Usher 2012).




                                                                    31
                    Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Table 4. Research Output of Ethiopia and Selected Comparator Countries
                               Citable Documents               Citable Documents
                                                                                                                  H-
        Country             per 1 Million Inhabitants       per 1 Million Inhabitants      Growth rate, %
                                                                                                                Index
                                     (2010)                          (2015)
 Ethiopia                               9.1                            15.6                      71.4            101
 Ghana                                30.0                             50.1                      67.0            105
 Kenya                                36.2                             42.8                      18.2            179
 Nigeria                              31.7                             25.7                     –18.9            131
 Rwanda                               13.1                             21.6                      64.9             54
 Senegal                              29.8                             41.5                      39.3             95
 South Africa                    224.9                                278.0                      23.6            320
 Tanzania                         17.6                                 21.7                      23.3            122
 Uganda                           25.4                                 30.2                      18.9            128
 Malaysia                        547.2                                737.9                      34.9            190
 Korea                         1,201.0                              1,372.9                      14.3            476
 Vietnam                          23.3                                 42.0                      80.3            142
Source: SCImago. SJR - SCImago Journal and Country Rank.

An interesting new measure of rapid progress in scientific production, recently developed by a
team working for the prestigious journal, Nature, illustrates the fact that Ethiopia still has a long
way to go in terms of institutional capacity for scientific research. 10 Table 5 shows the top 25
‘Rising Stars’ in Africa. The results confirm that, seen from a regional perspective, no Ethiopian
research institution has established the capacity to produce high-quality research in sufficient
quantity yet. In addition to research institutions from South Africa (15), it includes also some from
Morocco (4); Tunisia (2); and one each from Algeria, Burkina-Faso, Kenya, and Senegal.

Table 5. Institutional Capacity for Research: Top 25 Rising Stars in Africa (2016)
                                                                                                Rank of the Best
             Country                              Number of Rising Stars
                                                                                                  Institution
 South Africa                                                  15                                      1
 Senegal                                                       1                                      10
 Morocco                                                       4                                      11
 Burkina Faso                                                  1                                        15
 Tunisia                                                       2                                        16
 Kenya                                                         1                                        19
 Algeria                                                       1                                        23
Source: Nature. 2016.



10
  Nature Index 2016 ‘Rising Stars’ identifies the ascendant performers in the world of science, using the power of
the Nature Index, which tracks the high-quality research of more than 8,000 global institutions. The 2016 index
profiles the universities, research institutions, and countries that have significantly improved their scientific output,
often without the longevity and resources that benefit many of the more established institutions that are prominent in
the international academic rankings. The institutions and countries analyzed in the index have significantly increased
their contribution to a selection of top natural science journals—a metric known as weighted fractional count
(WFC)—from 2012 to 2015.
https://www.natureindex.com/supplements/nature-index-2016-rising-stars/index#ni-articles.



                                                          32
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


The rankings of African universities confirm the low visibility of Ethiopian universities. As the
UniRanking shows, only two universities appear: Addis Ababa University (No. 39) and Jimma
University (No. 70).11 Similarly, Times Higher Education’s 2016 rankings of the top 15 African
universities has universities from Uganda, Egypt, Morocco, Kenya, and Nigeria besides South
Africa. Addis Ababa University, the country’s flagship institution of higher learning, appears 16th
in this ranking.

Table 6. Top 100 Universities in Africa (2017)
                                                                          Rank of the Best University in Each
        Country                    Number of Universities
                                                                                       Country
 South Africa                                 19                                           1
 Kenya                                        7                                            7
 Egypt                                        15                                           8
 Mozambique                                   1                                           16
 Uganda                                       3                                           17
 Nigeria                                      11                                             18
 Ghana                                        2                                              21
 Senegal                                      1                                              24
 Tanzania                                     3                                              28
 Botswana                                     1                                              34
 Sudan                                        3                                              36
 Morocco                                         6                                           37
 Ethiopia                                     2                                              39
 Algeria                                      14                                             40
 Namibia                                      2                                              42
 Zimbabwe                                     1                                              48
 Mauritius                                    1                                              62
 Rwanda                                     1                                                68
 Zambia                                     1                                                76
 Swaziland                                  1                                                84
 Cameroon                                   1                                                96
 Malawi                                     1                                               100
Source: UniRank (2017) http://www.4icu.org/top-universities-africa/.

Another useful filter through which to look at the research performance of Ethiopia concerns
measuring scientific production relative to the country’s GDP, which gives a fair notion of research
productivity relative to economic wealth (figure 15). Here, Ethiopia is doing better than Nigeria
and Vietnam; is at the same level as Tanzania; but performs below most other African comparators
(Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda, Senegal, and Uganda).


11
  The UniRank University Ranking is a web-based non-academic ranking calculated on the basis of an algorithm,
including five unbiased and independent web metrics extracted from four different web intelligence sources: Moz
Domain Authority, Alexa Global Rank, SimilarWeb Global Rank, Majestic Referring Domains, and Majestic Trust
Flow. The aim of the UniRank University Ranking is to provide an approximate visibility ranking of world
universities and colleges based upon the popularity of their websites in traffic, trust, and quality link popularity.



                                                         33
                      Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 15. Number of Scientific and Technical Journal Articles Relative to Economic Performance (per billion PPP
GDP) for Ethiopia and Comparator Countries, 2015

     Vietnam                       5
         Korea                                                                                                      29.7
    Malaysia                                                   12.6
     Uganda                                                 11.6
    Tanzania                             6.6
 South Africa                                                              15.6
     Senegal                                            11
     Rwanda                                      8.9
      Nigeria           2
         Kenya                                          10.9
         Ghana                                 8.1
     Ethiopia                            6.7

                 0             5                 10                 15                 20            25           30               35

Source: GII. https://www.globalinnovationindex.org/gii-2016-report#.

Figure 16 shows the ability of Ethiopia to innovate as measured by the annual number of registered
patents per 1 million inhabitants in Ethiopia and comparator countries. The most recent year for
which data on Ethiopia’s patent production are available is 2007, which makes it impossible to
assess progress in the last decade, during which the economy has enjoyed fast growth. The
comparison with the 2007 data reveals that, at that time, Ethiopia had significantly better results
than most countries in the region, except for Kenya and, naturally, South Africa. Ethiopia was far
behind Vietnam and Malaysia, however, and this is most likely a sign that the East Asian nation
started its period of rapid economic expansion well ahead of Ethiopia.

Figure 16. Patent Applications for Ethiopia and Selected Comparator Countries (per Million Inhabitants, 2007)

 5000                                                                                                           4633.77
 4500
 4000
 3500
 3000
 2500
 2000
 1500
 1000
  500                                                                        193.95                  106.24
            0.49        0.13           3.81          0.04          0.17                      0.23                           33.8
     0
           Ethiopia    Ghana       Kenya         Nigeria       Senegal        South         Uganda   Malaysia   Korea      Vietnam
                                                                              Africa

Source: World Intellectual Property Indicators, 2007 (accessed March 2017),
http://www.wipo.int/ipstats/en/wipi/figures.html.




                                                                      34
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



    Chapter 3. Advances in Science and Technology Higher Education
3.1. Recent Developments
The ESDP V indicates how education at all levels should contribute to GTP II. Accordingly, the
priorities for higher education include

        •     Increasing the participation rate, from 9.4 percent in 2014/15 to 15 percent by
              2019/20;

        •     Giving priority to sciences and technology fields;

        •     Developing the research capacity of universities; and

        •     Promoting technology transfer.

Aware of the growing importance of higher education for economic growth and productivity
improvements, the GoE has continuously expanded its university network in the past two decades.
Enrollment growth has been impressive, from less than 40,000 in the mid-1990s to 97,000 in 2000,
142,000 in 2005, 435,000 in 2010, and 762,000 in 2015, according to the Ministry of Education
(figures 20 and 21). While only Addis Ababa University was in operation until 1985, the GoE
achieved this spectacular expansion by constructing new universities across the country. Ethiopia
has now 35 public universities distributed across the country, leaving only one region (Harari) still
without a university. Private higher education has been also expanding, with four private HEIs
officially recognized as universities, in addition to over 100 other types of HEIs. Nevertheless, the
public sector is the main provider of higher education, serving more than 85 percent of the students.
The enrollments, growing from a very low base, have finally reached Sub-Saharan average (figures
17 and 18).

Figure 17. Enrollment in Tertiary Education in 2014 Per 100,000 Inhabitants
2500                                                                                        1800%
                                                                                            1600%
2000                                                                                        1400%
                                                                                            1200%
1500                                                                                        1000%
1000                                                                                        800%
                                                                                            600%
 500                                                                                        400%
                                                                                            200%
   0                                                                                        0%




                              1990          2014           1999-2014 trend, %
Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
Note: Year of data: 2014 for Ethiopia, Botswana, Ghana, Mauritius, and Mozambique and 2013 for others.




                                                      35
                    Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


The Government has reached remarkable progress in expanding access and is making bold steps
to improve quality. In line with GTPs I and II, Ethiopia implemented a 70:30 technology and
science/social sciences and humanities admission ratio, which fell to a 63:37 enrollment ratio in
undergraduate programs (2014 data) and translated to a 48:52 alumni composition (2013 data).
Figure 19 shows that, by 2013, 51.7 percent of youth completed social sciences, business, and law
programs. Another issue is that the 34 percent undergraduate enrollment rate in engineering and
technology programs fell to 20 percent at the postgraduate level. On the contrary, the share of
enrollment in agriculture and life science, medicine and health sciences, and natural and
computational sciences increased at the postgraduate level.

Figure 18. Gross Enrollment Ratio, Tertiary (percent)
  35
  30
  25
  20
  15
  10
   5
   0




                                                                                 female    male    total

Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
Note: Year of data: 2014 for Ethiopia, 2013 for Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Republic of Congo , Madagascar, Rwanda, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe and
2014 for others.
Figure 19. Type of Training Received by Higher Education Graduates (ages 30 or younger)

                                       agriculture
                                         3.5%
            social sciences                             business
                26.3%                                    21.3%




                                                           education
                                                             5.1%
                  science                                 engineering
                  14.7%                                      6.8%
                                                 health
                              other      law
                                                 9.7%
                              8.5%      4.1%
Source: LFS 2013.

As in many developing countries, the rapid quantitative expansion has resulted in a number of
challenges. From a performance viewpoint, the Ethiopian higher education system faces the
following challenges: strong disparities in access and success, issues with quality and relevance,
and low research output. GTP II and the ESDP V acknowledge that in light of the rapid expansion,


                                                          36
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


the quality and relevance will fall unless effective strategies are implemented to maintain
standards.

In equality of opportunities, the 2016 public expenditure review found that access to higher
education for the poorest groups is much lower than for the rest of the population. The disparity
ratio, which measures the ratio of the proportion of students from the highest income quintile over
the proportion of students from the lowest quintile, is 41; it is one of the highest in Sub-Saharan
Africa (Kiringai et al, 2016). By comparison, it is 9.4 in Brazil, one of the Latin America countries
with the highest level of inequality of opportunities in higher education (Salmi 2016).

The percentage of female enrollment increased from 21.6 in 2000 to 33.0 in 2015, but at the
postgraduate level, women represent less than 20 percent of the students. At the undergraduate
level, 59 percent of all female students choose an S&T stream, compared to 65 percent of male
students (figure 21).

 Figure 20. Enrollments in Public and                     Figure 21. Undergraduate Enrollments in S&T in
 Nongovernment HEIs                                       Public HEIs, by Gender

     800,000                                                70%        63%
     700,000
                                                            60%
     600,000
     500,000                                                50%
                                                                                       37%
     400,000                                                40%
     300,000
                                                            30%      65%
                                                                           59%
     200,000
     100,000
                                                            20%
                                                                                     35%
                                                                                           41%
           0                                                10%
               2003/04
               2004/05
               2005/06
               2006/07
               2007/08
               2008/09
               2009/10
               2010/11
               2011/12
               2012/13
               2013/14
               2014/15




                                                             0%
                                                                   Science and      Business,
                                                                   Technology      Economics,
                                                                                  Social Sciences
                Undergraduate    Postgraduate
                                                                       Male       Female      Total
Source: Education Abstract 2014/15, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.
Note: Information on private HEIs is not complete.12




12
     Data from 33.7 percent of the accredited nongovernment institutions is not complete or not reported at all.



                                                            37
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 22. Enrollments in Public HEIs by Field of Study

                Engineering and Technology                         Natural and Computational Sciences
                Medicine and Health Sciences                       Agricultural and Life Sciences
                Business and Economics                             Social Science and Humanities


                20%                                  25%                                       20%

                17%                                                                            17%
                                                     16%
                 7%                                                                            8%
                 9%                                  10%
                                                                                               10%
                12%                                  16%                                   12%

                                                     14%
                34%                                                                            34%
                                                     20%

        UNDERGRADUATE                          POSTGRADUATE                              TOTAL

Source: Education Abstract 2014/15, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

Ten public universities train 43.9 percent of all undergraduate students in public S&T programs,
including 62.7 percent of all undergraduate students in public engineering and technology
programs (figures 23 and 24). Addis Ababa Science and Technology University was established
in 2011 with the particular mandate to play a key role in the technological transformation of the
country in close partnership with industries.

Figure 23. Top 10 S&T Universities by Enrollments

                                                0%           20%       40%         60%           80%    100%
               1. Addis Ababa University
                       2. Jimma University
                    3. Hawassa University
              4. Debre Markos University
                  5. Haramaya University
                    6. Bahir Dar University
                 7. Arba Minch University
                     8. Mekelle University
                      9. Aksum University
        10. Adama Science and Technology…

                        Engineering & Technology               Agriculture and Life Sciences
                        Natural and Computational Sciences     Medicine and Health Sciences
                        Business and Economics                 Social Sciences & Humanities

Source: Education Abstract 2013/14, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

Most current and planned industrial parks are built near these universities to support massive
industrialization projects (figure 24 and map 1). For example, Hawassa Industrial Park houses
large local and international manufacturers specializing on textile and apparel and aims to generate
over US$1 billion export revenues and create 60,000 jobs. The Government has also constructed



                                                              38
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


and leased the Bole Lemi-I Industrial Park in the suburbs of Addis Ababa. In addition, industrial
parks in Dire Dawa, Mekelle, Adama, and Kombocha are almost complete, while Bole Lemi II
Industrial Park, Jimma, Bahir Dar, Debre Birhan, Aysha Dewalle, and Kilinto industrial parks are
expected to be operational in 2017/18.

Figure 24. Top 10 Public Universities Train 62.7 Percent of all Undergraduate Students in Public Engineering and
Technology Programs

                                                    0        2000    4000     6000      8000 10000 12000

                   1. Addis Ababa University
 2. Adama Science and Technology University
                    3. Arba Minch University
                      4. Bahir Dar University
                        5. Jimma University
                        6. Aksum University
                      7. Hawassa University
                     8. Haramaya University
                 9. Debre Markos University
                      10. Mekelle University

                        Engineering & Technology                    Agriculture and Life Sciences

                        Natural and Computational Sciences          Medicine and Health Sciences

Source: Education Abstract 2013/14, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.
Map 1. Major Parks Built or Under Construction by the Industrial Parks Development Corporation of Ethiopia




Source: http://www.ipdc.gov.et/index.php/en/.




                                                             39
                      Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


These ten core S&T universities together with the newly created Addis Ababa Science and
Technology University (2011) could help Ethiopia overcome the disadvantages of being a
latecomer in technological catching-up and drive the industrialization, structural transformation,
urbanization, and growth agenda. However, it will require concerted efforts from the Government
and the universities on multiple fronts.

With respect to quality, the general root of the problem stems from the expansion and dynamism
of the Ethiopian higher education system. The system is under pressure on multiple fronts and
must provide more books, build more laboratories, employ more staff, increase the number of PhD
holders, and focus on their career development. Ethiopian universities enroll large and growing
numbers of students. This is compounded by the low level of academic preparation of incoming
high school graduates; the weak mastery of English as the language of instruction; the shortage of
qualified faculty; inadequate infrastructure, especially in the S&T disciplines; and public funding
constraints. The staffing, resources, and infrastructural constraints are even more severe in the
youngest universities.

Each year, the universities present, to the ministry, an annual expansion plan. In light of the rapid
expansion of the system, a focus on buildings and administrative staff at the initial phase of
constructing new campus facilities is understandable. However, a strong emphasis on academic
activities and academic staff is imperative for ensuring quality.

In addition, the system is expanding without much differentiation in academic program offerings13
and this leads to duplication of resources and redundancies (table 7). The universities are generally
comprehensive. A few initiatives have been taken to sharpen the profile of some universities and
introduce some specialization. For instance, Addis Ababa University is focused on graduate
studies to facilitate the expansion of higher education. It has many postgraduate programs,
including at the PhD level, and 16,000 graduate students, including 2,000 PhD candidates. A
consortium of universities (including European and U.S. partners) is running some of these
postgraduate programs.

Two S&T universities were created in recent years: the Addis Ababa University of Science and
Technology, upgraded from an Institute of Technology, and the Adama Science and Technology
University, split from a comprehensive university. These two universities are central to the national
industrial strategy and the goal of becoming a middle-income economy by 2025. After a few years
of operation, the two universities were moved from the Ministry of Education to the Ministry of
Science and Technology to permit different ways of managing staff and admitting students. These
two universities are expected to focus on applied research and technology transfer.




13
     The list of program offerings is available in the Education Abstract 2013/14, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.



                                                           40
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Table 7. Top and New S&T Academic Programs
      HEIs                    Engineering and Technology, and Agriculture and Life Sciences Programs
 Adama Science     Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Crop Production,
 and               Land Management, and Forestry Management
 Technology        New Programs*: Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Software Engineering,
 University        Information System, Plant Science, and Food Science and Postharvest Technologies
 Addis Ababa
                   Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering
 Science and
                   New Programs: Agribusiness Value Chain Management, Natural Resources Management, Plant
 Technology
                   Sciences, Food Science and Postharvest Technologies
 University
                   Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Pre-Engineering, Electronics and Electrical Engineering, and
 Addis Ababa
                   Veterinary Medicine
 University
                   New Programs: Pre-Engineering, Plant Science, Horticulture, Animal S&T
                   Top Programs: Hydraulics and Water Resources Management, Civil Engineering, Electrical
 Aksum
                   Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Animal Production and Technology, Soil Resources
 University
                   Management, and Plant Science
 Arba Minch        Top Programs: Water Supply and Environmental Management, Civil Engineering, Hydraulic and
 University        Water Resource Management, Plant Science, and Rural Development and Agricultural
 Bahir Dar
                   Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Water Management, Land Administration, and Rural Development
 University
 Debre Markos       Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Control Engineering, Plant Science,
 University         Animal Science, and Natural Resource Management
                    Top Programs: Pre-engineering, Water Resource and Environmental Engineering, Soil and Water
 Haramaya
                    Resource Management, Veterinary Medicine, and Natural Resource Management
 University
                    New Program: Pre-Engineering
                    Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Pre-Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Veterinary Medicine,
 Hawassa
                    General Forestry
 University
                    New Program: Pre-Engineering
                    Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Pre-Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Veterinary Medicine, and
 Jimma
                    Natural Resource Management
 University
                    New Programs: Pre-Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Sugarcane Agronomy
                    Top Programs: Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, Land Resources
 Mekelle
                    Management and Environmental Protection, Veterinary Medicine, and Natural Resources
 University
                    Management
Source: Education Abstract 2013/14, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.
Note: Top programs as measured by the number of students enrolled; new programs are those having enrollments in
Year I to Year III only.

The transition of these two institutions toward becoming research-intensive universities requires
setting up a proper scientific infrastructure and reducing the teaching load to allow faculty
members to focus on applied research. This is not an easy task and requires building a culture that
respects and values research.

These S&T universities are more selective than the regular universities to maintain quality. For
this purpose, the new undergraduate students are recruited outside the central admission process.
Interested students must pass a separate test. In four to five years, these two institutions will
become full-fledged universities and the Government plans to upgrade one additional Institute of
Technology to that level.

These challenges explain the broadly held concerns about the performance of the higher education
system. The universities have grown rapidly, and there is a need for a holistic vision and strategy
for the development of their constituent colleges and research centers. This is most visible at Addis



                                                       41
                     Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Ababa University, which is highly fragmented. Its colleges and research centers operate
independently and the university’s strategic plan is a mere aggregation of individual plans for each
component.

The GoE has indicated a clear commitment to continue its investment in higher education and
make appropriate adjustments to ensure an effective contribution of the higher education system
by establishing a strategic framework for 2016–2030 and launching a road map exercise in the
summer of 2016, with technical support from the German agency Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). The purpose of the endeavor is to elaborate a clear vision
for the future development of the Ethiopian higher education system and a comprehensive plan to
implement this vision. As reported in the press, “the 15-year road map is expected to help reform
the structure, governance, and managerial systems in higher education and human resource
development through increased access to higher education. The road map will enable Ethiopia to
have effective resource and quality assurance management… It will help most…universities to
become centers of excellence by producing demand-driven manpower in the country.”14

Furthermore, the Ministry of Science and Technology is planning to establish 16 research centers
as pillars of future economic growth in these universities. To be successful, these will require
budget, experience, faculty, leadership, and partnerships. Each center has four to five specialized
research programs and will be connected to international partners as decided by the ministry.

There is a road map for the further expansion of higher education, which identifies the capacity of
each university by 2020. The limit is 20,000 for the eight first-generation universities—maximum
that relevant HEIs can feed, house, and teach. The capacity for the second-generation and third-
generation universities is set at 17,000 and 12,000, respectively. Eleven public universities are
being planned and HERQA received 18 applications for new private institutions in 2016.15

The new modalities for appointing board chairs and university presidents, which are envisaged in
Proclamation 650/2009, are expected to bring more strategic leaders into these positions, who will
promote institutional profiling and positioning. The Proclamation states that three candidates will
be proposed to be board chair and that the Government will pick one along with the seven board
members. The university presidents will be evaluated by the ministry down the line. They will be
chosen for their strategic capacity.

3.2. Academic Staff
The qualifications of academic and administrative staff are the key building blocks of a quality
higher education system (figure 25). This is recognized by the ministry, which funds over 3,000
PhD candidates per year. A proportion of them goes abroad to different countries for their studies.




14
     The Ethiopian Herald, September 25, 2016.
15
     Henson Vroeijenstihn, and Elmer. 2016. p, 4.



                                                        42
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 25. The Quality of Higher Education - A Conceptual Framework


                                             QA and Enhancement
                                                  Processes

                            Assessment                        Skilled and Motivated
                             Methods                                   Staff


                   Relevance of Programs          Quality             Learning and Teaching
                     to Labor Demand                                         Methods



                            Facilities and                       ICT, Equipment, and
                            Infrastructure                        Library Resources


Source: World Bank. 2009.

The rapid expansion of higher education in Ethiopia has increased the demand for qualified
academic staff. Between 2010 and 2015, the number of academics increased by 58 percent to more
than 27,000 members (figure 26), out of which 4 percent (around 1,000) were expatriates.16

Figure 26. Student Enrollments and Academic Staff
      30000                                                            350%

      25000                                                            300%
                                                                                       Academic staff
                                                                       250%
      20000
                                                                                       Growth rate,
                                                                       200%            academic staff
      15000                                                                            Growth rate,
                                                                       150%            undegraduate
      10000                                                                            Growth rate,
                                                                       100%
                                                                                       postgraduate
       5000                                                            50%             Growth rate, PhD

          0                                                            0%
               2010/11   2011/12   2012/13      2013/14     2014/15
Source: Education Abstract 2014/15, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.
Note: Information on private HEIs is not complete.

The Government has accelerated the production of postgraduate degree holders, who are the
natural candidates for faculty recruitment. Enrolment in PhD programs has increased from a low
base of only 258 in 2007/08 to around 800 in 2010/11 and over 3,150 since 2012/13. Still, many
universities in Ethiopia do not have sufficient numbers of qualified staff, which undermines the
quality of the education and training offered. In public universities, 29 percent of faculty members
have an undergraduate degree. The situation is of particular concern in the engineering and
technology fields, with 56 percent of staff holding a bachelor’s degree (figure 27). The shortage is
such that universities are hiring newly minted bachelor’s degree holders to teach. Even the flagship
16
  According to the Higher Education Proclamation, an academic staff member in Ethiopia is an employee of a HEI
who devotes 75 percent of his or her time to teaching and 25 percent of time to research. Employees of research
centers are also included but with a reverse workload in teaching and research activities.



                                                            43
                       Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


institution of the country, Addis Ababa University, employs only about 28 percent of academic
staff with PhDs.17

Figure 27. Faculty Staff Composition by Fields of Study in Public HEIs

     100%
                 5%                          6%                           6%             10%        8%
     90%                       13%                         12%
     80%
                33%
     70%                                     44%
     60%                                                                                            54%
                                                                         67%
                                                           61%                           69%
     50%                       66%
     40%
                                             21%
     30%                                                                                            7%
                56%
     20%
                                             26%                                                    29%
     10%                                                   20%           21%             17%
                               13%
      0%
            Engineering and Natural and Medicine and Agricultural and Business and Social Science   Total
              Technology Computational Health Sciences Life Sciences   Economics and Humanities
                             Sciences

                                Bachelors     MD/MDV         Masters    PhD      Other

Source: Education Abstract 2014/15, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

The case of the Addis Ababa Science and Technology University is a good illustration of the
challenges that an institution faces in an expanding higher education system with limited human
resources. The majority of academic staff hold a master’s degree and the university counts only 40
PhD holders among its staff. All staff have been evaluated to ensure their fitness for their position,
and some have been asked to take an examination. On the basis of their examination results, some
staff were let go, while others were asked to take additional courses. Those who were retained
have the obligation to start a PhD program within the subsequent two years. This means that there
will be a gap in the teaching capacity of the university because the PhD candidates will be relieved
from some of the teaching workload. The university recruited 32 international researchers as part
of the strategy to become a research institution, but the university is still faced with a shortage of
qualified lecturers.

The demand for qualified academic staff is growing in most HEIs. To meet this demand in public
HEIs, the Government has been addressing staffing needs by (a) expanding master’s and PhD
programs in the first-generation universities to hire their own graduates into the system;
(b) training Ethiopian students abroad; (c) attracting expatriates with the required qualifications
(providing higher remuneration packages compared to their Ethiopian colleagues); and
(d) covering staff gaps through the contracting of academic staff on a part-time basis in other HEIs,
in addition to their work in the primary employing institution.

It is important to find the right balance among local training, training of students abroad, and hiring
of expatriates. Each of these options has its pros and cons. When the Government decided to

17
  The Government has set the target of bachelor, master’s, and PhD teachers’ qualification mix at 0:70:30 in the
ESDP V.



                                                                44
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


expand access to higher education, it could not afford to send all staff abroad to support this
expansion. Therefore, it mandated some universities to become hubs for graduate training.
Interinstitutional cooperation has been encouraged and international foundations have supported
these efforts. For instance, a block grant from the Swedish International Development and
Cooperation Agency (SIDA) funds universities to send their staff to Addis Ababa University for
PhD training. The grant can also be used to send staff to international conferences and to fund
short mobility periods for PhD candidates.

In-country training allows easier integration of graduates into local institutions due to their
knowledge of the culture, values, and expectations. However, it might limit the transfer of ideas
and practices from other HEIs. This might be particularly true for Ethiopia. In countries where
norms of deference to seniors are deeply engrained in culture, junior academics may be hesitant to
introduce alternative perspectives and new methodologies or pursue new avenues of work (ADB
2011).

In turn, training students abroad is expensive and has raised concerns about brain drain, which
depletes the stock of highly qualified staff in the country. The issue of brain drain is a major
challenge in many developing countries. To tackle these issues, the GoE has recently been using
the ‘sandwich’ model, which combines international and in-country studies. Notwithstanding that,
it is important to note that scholars who remain abroad often establish ties with the Ethiopian HEIs,
enriching interuniversity cooperation and the exchange of ideas and research.

Currently, having expatriates among the faculty helps with knowledge creation and addresses
critical staffing gaps, particularly in engineering and technology programs. With regard to the
qualifications of expatriate staff in public HEIs, more than 97 percent of them have advanced
degrees, with around a half of them being represented by PhD holders. While overall the share of
expatriates in public HEIs is quite small (around 4 percent), engineering and technology programs
are particularly reliant on foreign PhD holders. Expatriates represent around 44 percent of PhD
staff in relevant programs (figures 28 and 29).

The Higher Education Proclamation—a key regulation in the subsector—also allows contracting
academic staff on a part-time basis in addition to their regular position.18 This helps universities to
cover staffing gaps, while also supporting the faculty staff financially. In general, attracting and
retaining talent in the academic profession is widely recognized as a challenge in the country. Even
with benefits such as transportation or housing supplements, salaries in HEIs are typically not
competitive, compared with other sectors. Many staff carry out extra work, including through part-
time employment in HEIs, to supplement their incomes, but, perhaps, negatively impacting the
quality of their teaching. In response to these negative externalities of low academic pay, the
ministry has regraded all jobs and the universities are hoping that when this new salary formula is
envisaged in 2017, salaries will be adjusted upward.




18
     According to information from private universities this is allowed only in public HEIs.



                                                            45
                       Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



 Figure 28. Master’s Level Staff in Public HEIs                          Figure 29. PhD Staff in Public HEIs

  100%                        1%             3%             1%            100%
   90%        17%                                                          90%                        23%                          18%
                                                                                                                    24%
   80%                                                                     80%          44%
   70%                                                                     70%
   60%                                                                     60%
   50%                                                                     50%
   40%                                                                     40%
   30%                                                                     30%
   20%                                                                     20%
   10%                                                                     10%
     0%                                                                       0%
          Engineering and Natural and    Medicine and Agricultural and              Engineering and Natural and Medicine and Agricultural and
            Technology    Computational Health Sciences Life Sciences                 Technology Computational Health Sciences Life Sciences
                            Sciences                                                                 Sciences

                       Ethiopian         Expats                                                 Ethiopian         Expats

Source: Education Abstract 2014/15, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

Increasing the participation of female academic staff presents an even bigger challenge for HEIs
of Ethiopia. Women represent only 10 percent of academic staff (figure 30). Efforts in increasing
their access to higher education can help the country fully harness its human capital.
Acknowledging this, the Government is promoting gender equality at all levels of education and
has set ambitious targets for female participation. The official target is to raise the share of female
teachers to 25 percent and female enrollment in PhD programs to 20 percent. In master’s and
bachelor’s programs the Government plans to increase female enrollments to 35 percent and 45
percent respectively. Currently only 33 percent of undergraduate students are females, with lower
representation in S&T programs (figure 31).

Figure 30. Academic Staff Composition in Public HEIs

 100%
                                      10%                     9%              5%                   10%
               13%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
                                      90%                    91%              95%                  90%
               87%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
            Bachelors              MD/MDV                   Masters           PhD                  Total

                                                   Male        Female

Source: Education Abstract 2014/15, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.




                                                                         46
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 31. Undergraduate Enrollment in Public HEIs

 80%
                         67%
 70%
 60%
 50%
 40%                                                               33%
                   69%          63%
 30%
 20%                                                                     37%
                                                            31%
 10%
  0%
                         Male                                     Female

         Science and Technology       Business, Economics, Social Sciences     Total

Source: Education Abstract 2014/15, Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

As access expands, academic staff face a number of challenges:

        •     Heavier workloads. Because of the low salaries, academics often teach in several
              HEIs, including private ones. This leaves little time and motivation for professional
              development and research activities, despite the Higher Education Proclamation’s
              requirement for academic staff to devote 25% of time for research.

        •     Larger student groups. Currently, the student-teacher ratio is 25:1 in public
              universities and 43:1 in private HEIs.

        •     Broader spectrum of students with unequal academic preparation. Many students are
              admitted with results below the 50 percent threshold in the higher education entrance
              examinations, with particularly low results in physics. Many academic staff lack the
              necessary training in pedagogy to effectively teach large and diverse groups of
              students.

Therefore, institutions need to create supportive environments that help staff develop
professionally.

Staff Development

In Ethiopia, academic staff development consists in a semester-long training course (HDP), which
is well accepted and useful in developing pedagogical skills and introducing staff to active
pedagogies and student-centered learning. However, only a few universities such as Addis Ababa
University are implementing it to improve the qualifications of its lecturers. The Senate of Addis
Ababa University has many committees supporting teaching and research functions, including the
Academic Standards and Curriculum Review Committee; Staff Recruitment, Appointment, and
Promotions Committee; and Research and Publications Committee. At the same time, there is no
evaluation of the delivered programs in Addis Ababa University, which is important for improving
their quality and relevance. The dearth of PhD holders and the goal of developing research capacity
are pressuring university lecturers (holders of a master’s degree) to opt for a PhD.




                                                          47
                 Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Professional development is extremely important for strengthening the quality of academic staff
and improving the quality of instruction in HEIs. Skills and competencies of academic staff need
to be continually strengthened and enhanced. This is relevant both for young staff entering the
profession and for established faculty members. Generally, staff development may cover various
aspects of teaching and learning pedagogy, research methods, computer literacy, soft skills, and
other competencies according to the identified needs. Importantly, professional development
should be the result of a collaborative process to ensure its usefulness and commitment among the
faculty, building on both top-down approaches and bottom-up innovations in teaching and
learning. Also, programs in research methods are typically offered to young researchers who are
about to start their master’s or PhD studies.

Establishing a strong SDU within HEIs is a long-term process. Such units should be able to (a)
identify training and development needs for all categories of staff and (b) develop and implement
an HR development plan in line with the overall strategic plan of the university. SDUs should be
staffed with highly qualified and motivated full-time academic staff, supported by administrative
staff. In Sri Lanka, for example, the ‘staff development center’ is staffed by senior-level academics.
They serve in the center for a period of three years, after which they return to their regular academic
positions (World Bank 2013).

SDU should be able to conduct training programs and courses and/or help place academics in
courses conducted in other universities or by suitable external providers (for example, for certain
computer software, statistical analysis, or qualitative research applications). All programs should
be monitored and evaluated to ensure efficiency and that the content is relevant to the needs of
faculty members and their students. Each university should have an HR development plan, which
should contain information on situations and measures to address the existing capacity gaps with
costed implementation plans, including a general action plan for monitoring and evaluation of staff
development activities.

Interuniversity cooperation is also vital to gain and maintain excellence in teaching and research,
particularly in countries such as Ethiopia with a large need for staff development and relatively
low experience in the field. Through interuniversity national or international networks and forums,
HEIs that are new to HR development, which is the case in the younger Ethiopian universities, can
learn the best strategies, practices, and experiences from others. These networks and forums
support the exchange of ideas and materials on staff development programs and activities of
relevant units within HEIs, strategies for staff development, and best practices in the field, as well
as facilitate direct staff exchanges among the participating institutions.

In relation to staff development opportunities in the context of S&T programs relevant to the
country’s economic needs and priorities, it is worth mentioning the ACE Project II, which was
launched in 2016 by the Governments of Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and the Interuniversity Council for East Africa, with support from the
World Bank. It is a regional Higher Education Project (HEP) designed to address critical HR gaps
in HEIs with the potential to become the leading scientific and academic institution in the region
in their particular field and tackle shared development challenges of the participating countries
(box 1). A rigorous, competitive, and transparent selection process has been conducted to identify
the centers to be financed under the project.




                                                    48
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Ethiopia was successful in obtaining four Centers of Excellence: (a) ACE for Water Management
(ACEWM) in Addis Ababa University, (b) African Railway Education and Research Institute in
Addis Ababa University, (c) Center for Innovative Drug Development and Therapeutic Trials for
Africa in Addis Ababa University, and (d) ACE for Climate Smart Agriculture and Biodiversity
Conservation in Haramaya University. Faculty and staff in the ACEs will benefit from improved
teaching and research conditions and professional development opportunities. Faculty and students
in STEM and other priority sector disciplinary areas are to benefit from exchange visits,
collaborative teaching and research, and other knowledge-sharing activities across the ACEs
organized by the ACE II Regional Facilitation Unit. ACE-hosting universities will benefit from
the strengthened capacity of their ACEs and quality improvement measures, including
benchmarking with other institutions initiated under the project (see box 1).

A number of initiatives can support professional development, including in-service training for
academic staff, establishing communities of teaching practices, supporting innovative pedagogy
and experimentation, accountability and reporting procedures to evaluate the effectiveness of
teaching delivered, and the benchmarking of practices. Importantly, these initiatives will need to
be implemented within the budget envelope available for the subsector, as the country already
spends a large share of its education budget for higher education (around 13.5 percent in 2015
compared to 8.4 percent in 2011). Encouragingly, the quality of teaching can “start improving
without a significant investment” (OECD 2012).




                                                     49
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



 Box 1: ACE II
 The Project Development Objective of ACE II supports the governments of eight participating countries in
 strengthening the selected ACEs to deliver quality postgraduate education and build collaborative research capacity
 in the regional priority areas. All these ACEs are expected to perform the following tasks:
 •   Build institutional capacity to provide quality postgraduate education with relevance to the labor market
 •   Build institutional capacity to conduct high-quality applied research, relevant to addressing a key development
     challenge/priority
 •   Develop and enhance partnerships with other academic institutions (national, regional, and international) to
     pursue academic excellence
 •   Develop and enhance partnerships with industry and the private sector to generate greater impact
 •   Improve governance and management of the institution and set up a role model for other HEIs
 •   Deliver outreach and create an impact to society by delivering excellent teaching and producing high-quality
     applied research
 For example, the goals of ACEWM based in Ethiopia are to
 •   Strengthen Addis Ababa University’s teaching and research capacity in water S&T to train human capacity
     required to address national and regional development needs;
 •   Enhance the capacity of faculty and students to conduct high-quality research and scholarly activities to help
     solve regional problems in water management and climate change issues, as well as provide trained research
     scientists and engineers to support national and regional development goals; and
 •    Provide training and support for the development and adoption of best practices in teaching, research, academic
      administration, and management through regional and international partnerships, coupled with mobilization of
      African diaspora scientists.
 To foster female staff recruitment, ACEWM closely works with the Gender Office at Addis Ababa University and
 collaborates with the Gender Studies Institute. Female candidates graduating from ACEWM will be encouraged to
 join as future faculty of the center.
 ACEWM has a number of partners such as
 •   In-country partners, including Ministry of Water, Irrigation, and Electricity, Arbaminch University, and Jimma
     University;
 •   Regional academic partners (University of Nairobi, Kenya, Kenyan Marine Science and Fisheries Research
     Institute, University of Dare Salam in Tanzania, and University of Malawi);
 •   International academic partners (University of Boku, Austria; University of Oklahoma, the United States;
     University of Johannesburg, South Africa; University College of London, United Kingdom; University of
     Cincinnati, the United States; Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Switzerland; among
     many others); and
 •   National and regional private sector partners, including Alphasol Modular Energy and Midroc from Ethiopia,
     Lifelink and Women’s Participation in Agricultural Research and Higher Education from Kenya.
 Source: http://ace2.iucea.org.

Performance Assessment and Motivation of Staff

International evidence suggests that high-performing universities are characterized by their ability
to attract, motivate, and retain the best in the academic profession, support improved instruction,
create a favorable environment for staff development, and conduct an effective evaluation of staff
performance (Salmi 2009; Altbach and Salmi 2011).




                                                         50
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


The Ethiopian Higher Education Proclamation of 2009 states that quality training, education, and
service are the major guiding values of HEIs. The document further underlined that HEIs should
develop an IQA system as they are responsible for the quality of education and training they offer
their learners.

Performance assessments in Ethiopia include assessments by supervisors and feedback from peers
and students. However, they do not work very well in practice, in large part because they are
similar for all academic staff irrespective of the academic program. Adjustments of performance
assessment templates are not allowed across faculties and institutes, which limit the usefulness of
feedback for academic staff. The results of the assessments are not always communicated to staff
members and seem to matter only during the promotion process.

To attract and retain highly qualified faculty staff, an effective incentive framework needs to be
developed. Some of these incentives such as salary differential, allowances, bonuses, pension,
housing, and other benefits are monetary; others are not. For example, intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation, including recognition and prestige of the profession can play an important role (figure
32). Currently, apart from promotion, there are no performance incentives evident in the public
HEIs of Ethiopia.

Figure 32. Performance Incentives



                              Recognition and                   Job stability
                                 prestige

                  Intrinsic
                 motivation                                         Salary differentials


                                                qualified,
                    Professional                motivated,
                    development                  effective
                                                 teachers
                                                                       Bonus pay and
                                                                          awards


                                                             Pensions and
                                                               benefits


Source: Adapted from Vegas 2005.

If they are properly implemented, regular performance assessments of staff and aligning the results
with clearly defined promotion criteria represent an important incentive to motivate staff. For
example, a performance-based salary system is now widely instituted among private universities
in Korea. In 2000, Pohang University in Korea introduced a faculty salary scheme that is not based
on staff seniority but on his or her accomplishments in teaching, research, and community services
over the previous three years, thus encouraging high performance among faculty members and
supporting faculty staff’s professional development.




                                                        51
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Teaching excellence should also be recognized and rewarded. Academic staff need to be
encouraged to adopt new methods of instruction and teaching. It is important to emphasize and
recognize the importance of teaching quality and encourage staff to invest time and effort in
modern methods of teaching. A promising approach is to support and reward teaching excellence
through the use of targeted funding; this is successfully used in a number of developing and
developed countries.

3.3. Internal and External Quality Assurance
Internal Quality Assurance

While quality has always been a concern in higher education, accountability is a fairly recent
phenomenon. This can be explained by the fact that in many countries the higher education system
has been mostly composed of public institutions and the sector managed centrally by ministries.
Typically, these countries did not see the need to quality assure higher education, which, in such a
context, would have been tantamount to evaluating the ministries.

However, the QA processes have quickly spread around the world since the 1980s. This
development is usually attributed to several trends: the expansion, massification, and related costs
of the higher education sector; ‘New Public Management’, which required greater accountability
of public institutions in exchange for increased autonomy; and the internationalization and
globalization of higher education, which placed renewed emphasis on demonstrating the quality
of higher education provision (Sursock 2011, 111).


While the early stress on quality assurance focused on the creation of QA agencies, today there is
an increased recognition of the importance of IQA processes. This is signaled by the emergence
of two new acronyms: “EQA (for external QA) and IQA (for internal QA), in addition to the
ubiquitous QA (for quality assurance in general)” (Sursock 2015, 39).

Experience shows that EQA and IQA must be thought through together so that appropriate
responsibility is vested in HEIs. This means that the EQA processes must leave room for the
internal processes to develop. This would alleviate the risk of alienating university staff who
consider that they are spending too much time on QA rather than on their core role.

Alongside the QA processes, many countries have extended their accountability requirements.
This can take the form of performance contracts between each university and the ministry or the
appointment of external members of governing boards. Accountability can also take the form of
new reporting requirements such as requiring institutions to produce information on the career
trajectories of their graduates.

IQA in universities was developed at the initiative of the Government in 2008. This was the
watershed year for a range of governmental initiatives to deal with quality issues due to the
expansion.

All four universities that were visited have a QA director and the IQA processes in place. The
universities have recently constituted a network of QA directors and have produced a charter. At



                                                   52
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Addis Ababa University for instance, the QA office has two main functions: a management
information system (MIS) that allows the QA office to gather data and provide an annual report to
all senior management, including deans, and a quality management function that provides support
to the academic units in the colleges for developing their own IQA processes. The QA office
produces an action plan every five years.

The Addis Ababa University course approval process looks rigorous. It goes through the
department’s academic commission, then to the college’s academic commission, and to the vice-
president; a graduate program goes to external reviewers and then to stakeholders; both
undergraduate and graduate programs are approved by the senate. Course outlines and continuous
assessments are monitored very closely. Syllabi are evaluated every three years; this review
includes stakeholders and goes through the same accountability chain as new programs. The
university has developed a range of policies that are posted on the website (for example, research
policy, gender policy, promotion, strategic plan, and so on).

Addis Ababa University has conducted two searches that introduced a new process: an application,
public lectures, and an evaluation of the candidates by the audience.

The administrative staff undergo an evaluation. The legislation prescribes that academic staff must
be evaluated by their students, their peers, and their department head. The latter can provide advice
and send staff for training if required. The aggregate data are presented to the dean and play a role
in the promotion process.

The student evaluation form is a standard questionnaire used by all universities in the country. It
would be best to promote a sense of ownership by ensuring that each institution develops its own
questionnaire with the input of staff and students. Annex 3 presents a set of good practices in
seeking student feedback. These include good practice in student questionnaires and other formal
and informal ways to ensure that the students’ views are taken into account.

In addition, a good internal quality system includes many different aspects such as the following:

        •     Information provided to students on the institution’s study programs (for example,
              number of students and staff involved in a program, staff to student ratio, intended
              learning outcomes, qualifications granted, teaching and learning and assessment
              methods, external learning opportunities such as internships, employment prospects,
              accessibility and support of students with disabilities, and so on)

        •     A good management and information system that collects information about student
              profile (for example, age, gender, educational, and socioeconomic background);
              progression and success rate; student to staff ratio by departments/faculties and tracer
              studies.

        •     Evaluation procedures to cover, at minimum, the quality of teaching and learning,
              including the learning resources (for example, libraries, laboratories, computing
              facilities) and student support services.

        •     Structures to support such procedures, including a senior academic in charge of
              oversight (for example, vice-president) who chairs a university committee, a


                                                     53
               Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


            centralized QA unit and QA officers in faculties, and a unit responsible for supporting
            academic staff development.

       •    Processes to ensure wide ownership and engagement in the QA processes through the
            formal participation in governance and advisory bodies of academic and
            administrative staff, university and faculty leadership, students, external stakeholders,
            and alumni. This should include formal and informal communication about the results
            of the IQA processes so that everyone understands their value.

       •    Processes to ensure links with strategic management and planning through the use of
            key performance indicators and ensuring that the university and faculty leadership are
            informed regularly of results of the evaluations and are required to provide a response.

       •    A systematic process for designing new study programs and improving the established
            ones, often with the help of external stakeholders. Today, such procedures include the
            development of learning outcomes and their assessment.

While many reports have looked at effective ways of supporting university-industry collaboration
to promote applied research and knowledge transfer, little work has been done on employer
engagement for curriculum improvement purposes. A recent study in the United Kingdom fills
this gap with noteworthy findings (see box 2).




                                                  54
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



 Box 2: Good Practices of Employer Engagement for Curriculum Improvement Purposes
 A recent study in the United Kingdom has identified four main categories of employer engagement in higher
 education provision (course development and delivery):
 •   Giving accurate and up-to-date information, advice, and guidance to students about the knowledge and skills
     needed to enter particular industries and professions
 •   Facilitating and supporting work placements and internships to provide students with valuable work experience
 •   Developing curricula, pedagogy, learning materials, and learning-related research projects
 •    Establishing learning and teaching facilities aimed at providing students with the specialist skills they need in
      the workplace, often with financial support from firms
 Experience shows that successful and sustainable partnerships require specialist staff, ongoing relationship
 management, and significant development time.
 Typically, this engagement will take place with companies near the university. While research and knowledge
 transfer activities are often administered centrally and are thus highly visible in universities, employer
 engagement activities tend to be managed at faculty level or below.
 The five case studies documented in the report yielded the following findings:
 •   Collaborations should be designed to respond to a strategic need recognized by all partners. This need will
     often be a shortage of graduates with the skills required by a particular company or group of companies, but it
     may encompass areas of research, particularly in advanced manufacturing or engineering. There may also be
     more specific needs such as identifying innovative delivery methods.
 •   Collaborations require strong leadership from the senior teams of all the organizations involved, including the
     recognition that developing and implementing projects of this kind will be time-consuming and that
     engagement will need to be sustained indefinitely to keep curricula current.
 •   Co-location of staff and joint appointments can support the culture change required to work together effectively
     and speed up decision making.
 •   External funding streams can be important to give initial impetus to the partnership and give all organizations
     the confidence to release their own funds.
 •   Benefits to business can include availability of graduates with relevant skills, recruitment efficiencies, and
     access to other university/business services. Benefits to universities include the development of an up-to-date
     and relevant curriculum, which will increase student recruitment and progression outcomes and enhance the
     university’s reputation.
 Source: University Alliance 2015.


External Quality Assurance

HERQA was established in 2003 and is responsible for four processes:

        •     Accreditation of new programs and institutions

        •     Unannounced visits

        •     Quality audits based on ten standards

        •     Document authentication

Views about the agency were collected from the universities, the ministry, and the senior
leadership of the agency itself. There is very broad consensus about the strengths and weaknesses
of HERQA.



                                                          55
                 Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


HERQA is commended for closing some private programs and five institutions (for example,
teachers’ training and some distance education institutions) and putting another 11 private
universities on probation. It is also credited for promoting internal quality processes in institutions
as well as some important social values such as gender equity and access through its 10 audit
standards.

However, there are widespread concerns which are all linked to the agency’s limited resources:

       •     HERQA has a limited number of staff and does not have the resources to hire staff
             with the appropriate qualifications. The accreditation approach needs to be
             streamlined and rely on more than a single external expert, which means that, at
             present, the evaluation of programs can be held hostage to fortune.

       •     The limited resources result in difficulties in attracting good or committed experts
             (who receive a very low per diem) and training them to ensure that the institutions do
             not receive a discouraging stream of contradictory recommendations from one
             evaluation to the next.

       •     The lack of resources leads the agency to focus on the private institutions and ignore
             the weaker public institutions. This is referred to as the ‘dichotomy problem’.

       •     Linked to the dichotomy problem is the issue of balance between improvement
             (support and attention to the development of new universities) and control for quality.

Furthermore, the agency is not sufficiently autonomous from the ministry. HERQA’s board
includes three ministers and the director general of the agency, which means that there is lack of
independence and potential conflicts of interests. There are no representatives from business and
no international members.

HERQA confirmed the quality concerns in both the public and the private sectors. Given the
limitations in HR (both staff and experts), it can only control threshold standards. As a result, they
concentrate on private institutions, which need more regulations.

The ministry is aware of these challenges and has made a request to the Ministry of Public Service
to get more staff. There are suggestions to introduce a standardized exit exam for all students which
might help solve the dichotomy problem and expose the weaker institutions. There is already such
an exam in law and medicine.

HERQA was reviewed in 2016 and received a useful report, which confirms the weaknesses
identified above (Henson, Vroeijenstihn, and Elmer 2016). The review report also noted that
HERQA has the word ‘relevance’ in its name but “… while it is quite clear that HERQA is the
guardian of quality for—at least—private HEI and has explicit activities that relate to this, it is less
clear how HERQA explicitly discharges responsibilities in the area of relevance” (Henson
Vroeijenstihn, and Elmer 2016, 5). This is primarily because the legal responsibilities assigned to
HERQA are not sufficient to address the needs of the national higher education strategy (Henson,
Vroeijenstihn, and Elmer 2016, 7). The report offers a range of recommendations to be
implemented in a step-by-step fashion within the next 20 years (see box 3). However, such a long-



                                                    56
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


term horizon might be compromised by the rapid changes being experienced in higher education
worldwide.

 Box 3: The 2016 HERQA Review
 The report praised staff for executing HERQA’s mission within challenging resource constraints and provided 31
 recommendations, including the following:
     (a) The governing body of HERQA should be autonomous from the ministry and the agency should report to
         Parliament rather than the ministry.
     (b) An international perspective should be ensured through an advisory body.
     (c) Higher education relevance would be best addressed through a dedicated directorate in the Ministry of
         Education, which would be responsible for serving as a filter for the establishment of new private
         institutions and new programs (these would be tested for their relevance). HERQA would no longer have
         ‘relevance’ in its name. Other functions such as data collection and the authentication/equivalence
         responsibilities should be transferred to other agencies.
     (d) The rest of HERQA’s activities need to be streamlined and reviewed. The agency needs to achieve a better
         balance between improvement and accountability and support the IQA processes in the institutions. The
         public and private institutions should be treated in the same way.
     (e) Regional HERQA offices should be distributed across Ethiopia, the structure of the agency should be
         simplified, and an IQA process developed.
     (f) Audit fees should be collected from the for-profit private institutions. Any surplus would go to HERQA.
     (g) HERQA should produce an action plan and undergo a follow-up review. In parallel, if the
         recommendations contained in the report are implemented, the Government will need to redeploy certain
         activities and issue a new Proclamation.
 Source: Henson, Vroeijenstihn, and Elmer. 2016.


3.5. Role of Cooperation and Partnerships
Cooperation and partnerships are important tools to maintain and improve the quality and
relevance of a higher education system. Three types of cooperation can be distinguished: national,
international, and with external stakeholders (such as economic, social, and cultural actors).

First, with respect to national cooperation, the leadership of the Ministry of Education has
supported the networking of public universities through ICT. The long-term goal of this very useful
initiative is to network all public universities so that students have access to library resources and
virtual labs and to promote international partnerships. So far, the eight oldest public universities
are networked nationally.

Second, internationalization strategies appear to be inexistent even if the universities acknowledge
that international partnerships are essential to address their current challenges. Currently,
international partnerships are driven by individual staff who have studied abroad and use their
professional networks. In the case of the two S&T universities, it is the Ministry of Science and
Technology which is shaping their internationalization strategy. Undergraduate student mobility
does not seem to be a practice because it is too expensive.

Third, regional cooperation between university and industry is a key development goal. The
leadership of the Ministry of Education noted that there has been progress in building research
capacity as measured by the increase in the number of papers published in high-impact



                                                       57
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


international journals. The first goal, however, is to promote regional development through
technology transfer. This does not entail new discoveries but in applying research outcomes to
local problems. The two public universities that were visited have dedicated units to support these
links through consultancy activities and community service. The university-industry links remain
weak and the Government is looking at ways of bolstering these links. It is focused on four aspects:
internships; externships (faculty going to industry); industry trainer (guest lecturing at university);
and joint business (that is, spin-offs).

ACE projects complement other regional initiatives in Africa that focus on developing S&T skills
through collaboration and partnerships. These include the World Bank-supported PASET which
seeks to build a technical and scientific skilled labor force for priority sectors, from
technical/vocational to higher education levels as well as research, to support the structural
transformation of Africa (see box 4). The ACE II project collaborates with the benchmarking
exercise overseen by PASET to seek best practices in science education. To date, one Ethiopian
University—Jimma University—has already benefitted from the benchmarking exercise. Its
results are presented in the following paragraphs.

 Box 4: PASET
 PASET was launched in 2013 by African Governments with facilitation by the World Bank to accelerate the
 creation of a critical mass of highly skilled workforce for the socioeconomic development of Africa. It aims to
 address systemic gaps in skills and knowledge in priority applied sciences, engineering, and technology fields and
 build the capacity of African education and training institutions to train high-quality technicians, engineers, and
 scientists in line with countries’ demands. Over 20 African countries and representatives of Brazil, China, India ,
 and Korea have participated in PASET’s consultations and regional forums.
 In 2015, Senegal, Ethiopia, and Rwanda and later Kenya and Côte d’Ivoire have committed financially to the
 PASET Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund (RSIF), which aims, among others, to help participating
 countries build capacity of faculties of African universities through training of academically talented staff who lack
 PhD education. This will be achieved through partnerships with universities that have the capacity in applied
 science, engineering, and technology through both international and in-home study (‘sandwich model’). The target
 is to train about 10,000 PhD holders over a 10-year period. The RSIF will provide further support to PhD graduates
 once they return to their faculties to undertake high-quality applied research in priority development sectors. The
 programs will also focus on development of entrepreneurial skills.
 PASET has also launched the Regional Benchmarking Initiative to identify strengths and inadequacies of
 participating institutions through the assessment of institutional performance(inclusion, learning achievement,
 labor market outcomes, research output, and technology transfer) and institutional health (access and retention
 strategy, curriculum and pedagogical practices, internationalization, IQA, relevance, skills mismatch and links to
 the economy, governance and management, and financing).
 Source: http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/paset.


3.6. Benchmarking for University Performance Improvement
One internationally tested approach for improving performance of universities is participation in
benchmarking. In 2016, more than 30 Sub-Saharan universities participated in a benchmarking
exercise conducted in collaboration with the World Bank and Shanghai Jiao Tong University in
the context of the Africa-led PASET initiative. Jimma University was the only Ethiopian university
that volunteered to take part.

From a methodological viewpoint, the benchmarking analysis makes a fundamental distinction
between the results of tertiary education institutions (their performance indicators) and the drivers


                                                          58
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


of performance that account for these results (institutional health indicators). Examining the
performance indicators results can help Jimma University assess how well it fares in attaining the
expected outputs. From the institutional health perspective, the benchmarking results can be used
to understand how well the key inputs that the university has invested, together with its main
processes and enabling factors in its environment, reflect conditions that are known to bring about
favorable outcomes (table 8).

Table 8. Conceptual Framework for Benchmarking Tertiary Education Institutions in Sub-Saharan Africa
      Focus of Benchmarking                                 Main Dimensions of Analysis
                                       Inclusion
                                       Learning achievement
 Institutional Performance             Labor market outcomes
                                       Research output
                                       Technology transfer results
                                       Access and retention strategy
                                       Curriculum and pedagogical practices
                                       Internationalization
 Institutional Health                  Internal Quality Assurance
                                       Relevance, skills mismatch, and links to the economy
                                       Governance and management
                                       Financing
Source: Salmi, Cheng and Liu (2016).

The benchmarking results are examined in two ways. First, for each of the performance and
institutional health indicators, the participating universities can see where their institution fits into
one of three broad bands: the top 25 percent (that is, greater than the third quartile); the middle 50
percent (that is, between the first quartile and the third quartile); and the bottom 25 percent (that
is, less than the first quartile). Second, the time evolution perspective is incorporated into the
analysis, whenever possible, by comparing the indicators for the most recent data period to those
of the period five years earlier. This allows the participating universities to understand the
evolution of performance and its determinants over time and identify those indicators that are
improving or deteriorating at different paces. Table 9 shows Jimma University’s results with
respect to the performance indicators for which it provided data.

Table 9. Performance Indicators
                           Performance Category                                  Benchmarking Result
 Proportion of female graduates                                               Middle 50%
 Proportion of graduates passing professional examinations successfully       Bottom 25%
 Student satisfaction                                                         Bottom 25%
 Number of high-impact scientific papers                                      Middle 50%
 Proportion of master’s graduates                                             Top 25%
 Number of patents in past 3 years                                            Bottom 25%
 Number of spinoffs in past 3 years                                           Bottom 25%
 Jobs created through technology commercialization                            Bottom 25%

The benchmarking results reveal that the only area where Jimma University’s performance is
above average is in the production of research master’s graduates. This reflects the GoE’s strategy
to boost the research production by building up the capacity to conduct research. When it comes
to its research output, Jimma University’s results, as measured by the number of high-impact
scientific papers, are average compared to the other universities in the benchmarking sample. Of


                                                       59
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


concern is the fact that the university’s results are below average in two of its main three categories
of outputs: teaching and learning and technology transfer. The low student satisfaction and
proportion of graduates successfully passing professional exams reflect the pressure on quality
brought about by the rapid increase in student enrollment. The patents, spin-off, and job creation
indicate that the university is not very successful in its technology transfer activities.

The determinants of performance. Table 10 provides information on the main factors explaining
the above performance.

The best results achieved by Jimma University with regard to the institutional health indicators are
in the areas of accessibility for wheel-chair bound students, the graduation rate for bachelor’s
students, the proportion of foreign academics, the proportion of academics publishing at least one
paper a year, and the proportion of academics involved in technology transfer activities. However,
the low on-time graduation rate confirms the impression of poor quality of teaching and learning
indicated by the results of the satisfaction survey and professional exams.

The combination of a high proportion of academics involved in technology transfer activities and
low technology transfer outputs reveals a disconnect that the university leadership needs to
investigate. Either work on applied research has only recently started, which would explain the
absence of tangible results to date, or the technology transfer and commercialization activities are
not properly organized and focused to achieve good results.

Jimma University has below-average results in a number of domains, including the proportion of
students receiving needs-based financial aid, the proportion of foreign students, the proportion of
academics with a PhD, the proportion of the university’s budget spent on research, and the time of
study lost to strikes and other political disturbances. These issues reflect the lack of focus on low-
income students in the financial aid policy, the lack of internationalization policy to attract foreign
students, the struggle of all universities in the country to train, find, and retain Ethiopian academics
with a PhD, as well as lack of funding for research in the budget that the universities receive from
the Government.

This benchmarking analysis of Jimma University’s performance suggests that, if the university
wants to become a research-intensive university, it needs to invest heavily in training and attracting
qualified academics with a doctorate, provide them with adequate resources (funding and scientific
infrastructure) to stimulate their research output, and create postdoctoral positions. Special
attention must be paid to translating the research results in technological applications that are
relevant to the needs of the local economy and community.

Table 10. Institutional Health Indicators
                                                                                           Benchmarking
                              Institutional Health Category
                                                                                               Result
 Proportion of first-year female undergraduate students                                   Middle 50%
 Accessibility for wheel-chair bound students                                             Top 25%
 Proportion of students receiving needs-based financial aid                               Bottom 25%
 Proportion of students receiving merit-based financial aid                               Middle 50%
 Student-teacher ratio                                                                    Middle 50%
 Use of innovative pedagogical practices                                                  Middle 50%
 Proportion of academic staff having received pedagogical training                        Middle 50%



                                                        60
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


                                                                                          Benchmarking
                              Institutional Health Category
                                                                                              Result
 Graduation rate (bachelor level)                                                        Top 25%
 On-time graduation (bachelor level)                                                     Bottom 25%
 On-time graduation (master’s level)                                                     Middle 50%
 Quality of educational facilities                                                       Middle 50%
 Proportion of students during an internship                                             Middle 50%
 Proportion of foreign academics                                                         Top 25%
 Foreign academics with a master’s or PhD                                                Middle 50%
 Proportion of students doing a semester abroad                                          Middle 50%
 Proportion of foreign students                                                          Bottom 25%
 Proportion of joint international publications                                          Bottom 25%
 Proportion of graduate students                                                         Middle 50%
 Proportion of academics with a PhD                                                      Bottom 25%
 Proportion of academics who publish at least one paper a year                           Top 25%
 Internal research funding per academic staff                                            Middle 50%
 Proportion of institutional income spent on research                                    Bottom 25%
 External research funding per academic                                                  Middle 50%
 Successful research grants applications                                                 Middle 50%
 Proportion of academics involved in technology transfer activities                      Top 25%
 Proportion of institutional budget spent on technology transfer activities              Middle 50%
 Technology transfer income                                                              Middle 50%
 Proportion of students involved in community service as part of the curriculum          Middle 50%
 Income from continuing education                                                        Middle 50%
 Study time lost because of strikes                                                      Bottom 25%
 Per-student expenditures                                                                Middle 50%

Finally, the benchmarking results also show those areas where Jimma University does not have
the relevant data and needs to build its MIS. For example, in terms of performance, the university
does not track data on the socioeconomic origin of its students and graduates. It does not have
information on the labor market results of its graduates, which is a serious limitation. The
university also failed to report on its IQA system and the number of accredited programs, which
may be due to the lack of QA tradition so far. Furthermore, many of the data available for recent
years were not collected in the past, which makes it difficult to look at the historical evolution of
Jimma University’s performance and institutional health indicators.

3.7. Student Support Services and Career Counselling
At the moment, it is broadly recognized that the students entering higher education need to be
prepared better. There is widespread consensus that many lack mastery of English—the language
of instruction—as well as the basic foundation of knowledge and skills that would allow them to




                                                       61
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


succeed in higher education.19 The country’s ESDP V, reported that “many students joined higher
education institutions with results below the 50 percent threshold in the higher education entrance
examinations”. The problem is particularly serious in certain fields. In physics, a basis for
engineering studies, students’ results are extremely low. For example, “the average score for test
takers in the fields of mathematics and physics were 48.3 and 50.5, respectively.” (Woldegiyorgis
2017).

The leadership of the Ministry of Education has directed the universities to expand access and to
be inclusive, among others, of students with disabilities, those who come from the four emerging
regions of the country, and girls (33 of public university students are women). The senior leaders
of the public universities were clearly cognizant of these goals. Universities have opened gender
offices and launched many initiatives to support students.

According to the leadership of the institutions, the first-generation universities get the best
students, while the private universities get the weakest. This was confirmed during the visits to
both the public and private universities. The private universities explained that the admission
system is based on a maximum of 700 points; the ministry decides what should be the cutoff point
but this is sometimes set too low, which results in admitting very weak students into private
institutions. The private institutions also point to the unfair competition between the public and
private institutions, because students get free tuition in public institutions, while those enrolling in
the private institutions cannot get a private loan to fund their education.

At the request of the ministry, universities in Ethiopia have taken many initiatives to ensure
students’ success. This includes modularization and continuous assessment, as well as developing
a number of student support services. Universities also mentioned that they are introducing active
learning gradually. These initiatives are reported to have reduced the attrition rate (for example, at
Addis Ababa University from 30 to 5 and at the University of Science and Technology, a
remarkable 2.3)20.

Nevertheless, some Addis Ababa University teachers think that the three-year bachelor’s degree
is too short and should be extended by one year to address the needs of the weaker students. The
national policy of using English as the language of instruction is reported to be a challenge to both
staff and students. The rapid expansion of the system presents its own challenges. Thus, teaching
laboratories at the science and technical university are now almost fully equipped, but some lack
qualified technicians or adequate space to use the equipment. So, they send students to other
universities for their laboratory work.

The universities have developed a range of services and initiatives to support students. While some
are more advanced than others, all are worthy of further development:



19
   The level of student learning outcomes remains low and should be further improved for a country like Ethiopia
aiming to become a middle-income country in the next decade. The level of proficiency of many students in both
Grades 4 and 8 are ‘Below Basic’. Analysis of test item distractors shows that a significant number of students in
Grade 4 did not grasp fundamental concepts such as how to calculate an area of a shape. Similar misunderstanding
led to a sizable share of Grade 8 students not being able to calculate the volume of an object (World Bank 2016).
20
   According to information from the representatives of these universities.



                                                        62
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


        •     Libraries are digitalized at the public institutions and the first-generation universities
              are able to share their online learning resources and virtual medical laboratories.

        •     Student support services and initiatives include bridging courses in English, tutorial,
              peer advising, a disability office, and a gender office. With respect to bolstering
              English language skills, one university noted that, despite best efforts, it is difficult to
              bring the students up to the university level when their foundation is very weak.

        •     Academic staff members are asked to hold regular office hours and offer academic
              development courses (Chapter 2); their attendance in class and that of their students
              are monitored in at least some of the institutions.

        •     The awareness of gender issues and the need to provide support to female students
              was remarkably strong at all levels of the universities, including the students. To
              signal the importance of this, the Addis Ababa University gender office reports
              directly to the President. Such offices provide assertiveness training, academic
              advising, and tutorial for students, as well as financial help, as required. A private
              university mentioned that a woman always leads their student service division and
              that it requires gender balance in the student union leadership and for student
              representation in the senate.

        •     Similarly, students with disabilities are receiving a great deal of attention. For
              instance, the Addis Ababa University disability office handles a very large caseload
              of 400 students. At Addis Ababa University, sight-impaired students share a narrow
              campus road with cars, while students in wheelchairs are seen waiting at the foot of
              buildings. The Ministry of Education is aware of these challenges and reports that
              efforts are being made to address these infrastructural needs.

With respect to student life, each class has its own representatives and there is student
representation in the university senates and academic commissions. There are student residences
and canteens on campuses as well as a number of student clubs, which provide opportunities for
cultural and social life.

Interviews with the students revealed a number of issues related to their campus experience.

        •     With respect to their curricular activities, there is no active learning in large classes
              but rather reliance on lectures and theoretical learning and limited access to up-to-date
              learning resources.

        •     In case of academic difficulties, they turn to their friends rather than to academic staff
              and make little use of office hours. Their knowledge of the available support services
              seemed patchy and female students are reported to be particularly hesitant to bring up
              the challenges they may be facing.

        •     With respect to their extracurricular activities, the students mentioned that it is
              difficult to create student associations because there is too little funding and too many




                                                     63
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


              bureaucratic requirements. They complain that the student residences are “not
              comfortable or interesting” and the canteen food is not good.

The following two case studies in box 5 present initiatives to ensure the retention of at-risk
students. Annex 4 presents an institutional checklist for student retention initiatives.

 Box 5: Widening Participation and Improving Retention
 Uniminuto University, Colombia, was created with the explicit purpose of offering good-quality education to
 young people from low-income families living in disadvantaged areas.
 The Integrated Focus Model—a program of academic support dedicated to at-risk students—operates during the
 entire course of studies and provides students with the following support services:
 •   Academic counseling, including (a) monitoring academic results before the first midterm exam,
     (b) monitoring of unusual absence and low grades, (c) tutoring and mentorship, (d) academic strengthening
     workshops, (e) counseling on course selection and attendance and career counseling more generally,
     (f) counseling in case of conflict with professors, and (g) individualized study contracts where students commit
     to applying themselves to their studies.
 •   Financial support can take three forms: (a) help with getting a student loan from the country’s national student
     loan agency (the first ever such institution in the world, founded in 1951), (b) loans from Uniminuto’s own
     funding cooperative, and (c) scholarships from Uniminuto for students experiencing very difficult economic
     situations.
 •   Psychological support is offered in four ways: (a) psychological counseling, (b) counseling for students with
     special needs, (c) workshops with the parents of first-year students to talk about student autonomy and
     financing options, and (d) meetings with parents at their initiative.
 •   Life project course. All students are required to take the life project course during their first year. This course
     is designed to help them formulate a clear vision of their professional and personal goals and identify, on that
     basis, the educational options that best meet their needs.
 •    Remedial courses. Over the years, Uniminuto observed that the main areas of weakness of incoming students
      were their level of mathematics and their ability to communicate in writing and orally. Therefore, it has put in
      place a series of remedial courses to overcome these deficiencies among at-risk students. These courses are
      available on a voluntary basis. In addition, students who find themselves struggling in key courses in their
      undergraduate major can get relevant remedial help.
 A deputy vice-chancellor oversees the implementation of the Integrated Focus Model. Each faculty or school has a
 dedicated person responsible for coordinating the relevant interventions. The program reduced the dropout rate
 from 31.1 to 11.1.
 University of Bío-Bío (Chile)
 The University of Bío-Bío launched the First-Year Induction and Integration program in 2007, with the objective
 of improving student retention and employability while maintaining the quality of education. The program consists
 of the following phases:
 •   Transition phase. During the first induction period (four days), relevant university authorities welcome the
     new students and brief them on the learning style and requirements in their chosen academic path.
 •   Identification of initial difficulties. During the second phase (one to two days in the middle of the first
     semester), the main objective is to identify, through participative methodology workshops, the difficulties
     encountered by the new students and help them overcome the challenges through relevant advice provided by
     peer tutors.
 •   Academic counseling and planning. Organized at the beginning of the second semester, this third induction
     session gives the new students the opportunity to self-assess their achievements so far and outline the
     challenges they have faced, and seeks to offer positive motivation from the peer tutors to stimulate their
     integration into their new academic and university life.




                                                          64
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


 •    Identification of at-risk students. In the middle of the second semester, the induction program teams identify
      students at risk of not passing their first year and determine remedial actions to help them overcome their
      academic deficit at that point.
 The First-Year Induction and Integration program has been strengthened through four complementary
 interventions:
 •   Organizing the basic science curriculum (mathematics and physics) into shorter, self-contained modules that
     allow students who have trouble understanding the science curriculum to take a remedial course and repeat a
     module before moving on to the next level.
 •   Developing a bridge program for the local high schools. The university works with interested students to help
     them understand the range of academic options available to them and become familiar with the university
     environment.
 •   Offering remedial interventions with peer tutors and professors.
 •   Offering cultural and professional internships organized specifically for new students from the lowest two
     income quintiles, with the goal of widening their cultural horizons and giving them the opportunity to become
     familiarized with the world of work.
 Source: Learning Excellence 2015.

In sum, the efforts to provide a very diverse student population with a supportive environment are
very commendable and it is highly encouraging that issues of equity are a concern everywhere. It
would be useful to explore this area in greater depth and evaluate the extent to which the student
support activities and campus environment could serve the students’ success better and if the low
attrition rate is a sign of lowered standards.

Career Counselling

Boosting the employability of graduates requires a joint approach between the universities and
industries. At the moment, career advising was found in the two private universities but not in the
two public ones because of a feeling among the latter that their graduates were able to find jobs
easily. With respect to contacts with employers, the students in public universities mentioned that
some companies do come to campus but to advertise their products rather than take an interest in
the students and that they have not seen any guest lecturers from industry.

Anecdotal evidence pointed to a good practice in one private university that closely monitors their
students when they are placed in an internship, while public university students mentioned the case
of fellow students who ended up doing irrelevant internship work. They noted that courses in
entrepreneurship are taken but that this is not sufficient because they need capital to launch a
business.

These issues are clearly acknowledged by the authorities, which commissioned a study on the labor
market and anticipating labor market needs. Career advising has been flagged as a support service
that should be offered in all universities. Lifelong learning opportunities exist but a detailed
analysis would require further data collection. Based on these preliminary findings, it is clear that,
at minimum, the universities should be developing their career services (including tracer studies
and career advising), bolstering their links with employers, and developing a monitoring
framework for internships. Graduate tracer studies and employers’ surveys serve the purpose to
get better information about the distribution of skills among new hires, as well as the demands for
those skills from different economic sectors, to support the design of skills development policies
and improve employability and productivity.



                                                        65
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


The national observatory that the Government is planning to create would provide significant
support to the universities’ activities in this area. Box 6 and figure 33 illustrate how a career
guidance system and a labor market observatory could operate.

 Box 6: Establishing a Career Guidance System and a Labor Market Observatory
 Establishing a career information system and a labor market observatory is essential to perform the information
 management functions that are needed to guide the higher education and Technical and Vocational Education
 and Training (TVET) subsystem. A career information and guidance system can be defined as a set of tools and
 services intended to assist individuals of any age to make educational, training, and occupational choices and
 manage their careers. To operate in an effective manner, the career information and guidance system must be
 designed and put in place as a coherent system linking all necessary stakeholders (Ministry of Education and
 Science, Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Economy, city authorities, higher education and TVET institutions,
 Chambers of Commerce, Association of Employers, and so on) together. It must rely on sound measurement
 tools for assessing quality throughout the system, including the quality of the specialists and the quality of the
 information offered to students and graduates.
 The system should facilitate information access; allow for self-help and self-development; lead to increased use
 of ICT; and promote interaction among HEIs, TVET institutions, the private sector, and nongovernmental
 organizations (NGOs). Finally, it would be important to use evidence-based processes through which the system
 could track who uses what information and to what extent the services offered are based on client demand and
 usage.
 As part of the career guidance system, the labor market observatory would monitor the labor market outcomes
 of higher education as well as technical and vocational education and training graduates on a continuous basis,
 widely disseminate information about careers and pathways, and advise decision makers on necessary
 adjustments at the level of higher education and TVET institutions as well as labor market policies. The labor
 market observatory could function as an independent policy research body or as a policy research institute
 attached to a university.
 Source: Watts and Fretwell 2004.

Figure 33. Labor Market Observations: Best Practices


 •Objectives clearly
 defined
 •Leadership and
 vision among                 Information is of           Information is             Information is
                                high quality                  useful                      used
 key stakeholders
 •Accountability to
 stakeholders


                             •Data available,
                             reliable, updated          •End users clearly         • Effective
                                                        defined                    communication and
                             •Statistical
                             infrastructure             •Products tailored         dissemination to
                                                        and presented in           end user to inform
                             •Analytical                accessible way             his/her decisions
                             capacity


Source: Adapted from Hoftijzer (2015).

Furthermore, it would be useful to encourage universities to develop two complementary
approaches to bolster employability:



                                                          66
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


          •      To embed employability in the curriculum by developing courses that meet the need
                 of industry and ensure that soft skills such as communication, teamwork, and so on
                 are taught across the curriculum. In this context, it would be helpful if universities
                 could identify the key attributes of their graduates.

          •      To work with industry to offer students opportunities for work placements, paid
                 internships, alumni, and guest speakers. A framework for monitoring and evaluating
                 work placements and internships would need to be developed to ensure that students’
                 training needs are ensured (see box 7).

      Box 7: Ensuring Graduates Are Employable Through Experiential Learning and Cocurricular Learning
      Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University (NMMU)
      NMMU is located in the Eastern Cape, one of the poorer areas of South that suffers from very high
      unemployment levels. The students who come to NMMU are mainly from deprived catchment areas and
      are mostly first-generation university students.
      NMMU has a two-pronged approach to learning: experiential learning through cocurricular activities
      (education, learning, and development acquired from out-of-classroom activities) and experiential
      learning embedded in academic programs (service learning, internships, and work-based placements).
      Both cocurricular activity and experiential learning are universitywide and are managed by means of a
      decentralized integrated management model composed of
      •       The cooperative Education Unit within the Centre for Academic Engagement and Collaboration,
      •       Faculty academic staff, and
      • Academic administration.
      A central university committee approves activities and outcomes, which are then recorded.
      Students are prepared for experiential learning so that they have the necessary skills and are clear about
      their roles and obligations, as well as the nature of the industry in which they will work. Learning criteria
      and specific outcomes are documented to give guidance to the students, mentors, and employers.
      Employers are visited regularly to ensure that the learning takes place in accordance with the prescribed
      standards and criteria. Employers are required to sign off on any logbooks or similar documents. There
      are guides for how to design and structure work-integrated learning for the workplace.
      The work is monitored by faculty staff through visits to the workplace, discussions with students,
      employers, and mentors; these are documented. Logbook entries, presentations, or other agreed evidence
      for portfolios or artifacts are used to assess student progress. Interim and continuous assessment may
      occur throughout the experiential learning period. Finally, structured and recorded feedback by students
      and employers serve as a review of QA.
      Experiential learning is evaluated by faculty staff members and records of experiential learning are
      approved by academic department heads or program coordinators in the normal way before being sent
      to the Examinations Office for entry in the student’s record; they are thus subject to regular university
      QA processes. Program Advisory Boards and professional body requirements also help ensure that the
      experiences are relevant. The experiential and especially work-based learning components of
      qualifications are further subjected to cyclical quality reviews (in a 3 –5-year period). Many of these
      reviews are conducted by external professional bodies.
      Source: Learning Excellence UK 2015.

In addition, the following initiatives would strengthen accountability and ensure evidence-based
decision making:

          •      Asking HEIs to publicly report their graduates’ employment rates for different fields
                 of study and conduct tracer studies to understand their graduates’ labor market


                                                          67
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


            outcomes. This will help adjust education programs and make them more responsive
            to the needs of economy.

       •    Completing the Higher Education Management Information System (HEMIS) and
            Labor Market Information System to collect evidence on the effectiveness of various
            programs, including in S&T streams.

       •    Conducting an enterprise survey to assess employers’ satisfaction with the skills of
            recent university graduates, particularly in S&T programs.

Through the provision of relevant information on the quality of education and training institutions
(graduation rates, salaries, job satisfaction) as well as on occupations, wages, and sector of
employment, education and training institutions can become more accountable and transparent
while leading to better career and educational choices among the population. This would not only
enhance productivity in Ethiopia but also make the country more attractive to international firms
seeking to invest in Africa (Geiger and Moller 2015).




                                                   68
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



       Chapter 4. Determinants of the Present Research Performance
The outstanding results of well performing universities—highly sought graduates, leading-edge
research, and dynamic knowledge and technology transfer—can essentially be attributed to three
complementary sets of factors: (a) a high concentration of talent (academics and students);
(b) abundant resources to offer a rich learning environment and support advanced research; and
(c) favorable governance features that encourage strategic vision, innovation, and flexibility,
enabling institutions to make decisions and manage resources without being encumbered by
bureaucracy. While the configuration of results—research, learning and technology transfer—
depends on the nature and specific mission of each HEI (research intensive, teaching, applied
science, and so on), the alignment of the three sets of factors is a requirement for any type of HEI
(Salmi 2009, Salmi 2012c). This analytical framework can be used to understand the research
performance of Ethiopian universities.

4.1. Talent Development
The first measure of talent development is the stock of researchers. Figure 34, which calculates the
number of researchers relative to the overall population, shows the low proportion of researchers
in Ethiopia, on par with Ghana, Tanzania, and Uganda. Ethiopia is significantly behind Kenya and
Senegal in this respect.

Figure 34. Researchers Per Million Inhabitants in Ethiopia and Comparator Countries (2010)

 500
                                                                                        467.1
 450

 400
                                             361.1       362.6
 350

 300

 250                             230.7

 200

 150

 100
          42.3        38.7                                           35        38.1
  50

   0
        Ethiopia     Ghana       Kenya      Senegal   South Africa Tanzania   Uganda   Malaysia

Source: http://data.uis.unesco.org/ (accessed February 2017).

The situation is not likely to improve rapidly, because the number of Ethiopian PhDs trained in
the country and overseas, relative to the population, remains very low. Figure 35 presents the
number of PhD graduates for Ethiopia and relevant comparator countries per million inhabitants,
for the few countries for which data are available. The statistics clearly show that Ethiopia needs



                                                        69
                     Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


to ramp up the production of graduates with a doctoral degree. Ghana and Vietnam presently
produce 5 times more PhDs per million inhabitants than Ethiopia every year and Senegal 22 times.

Figure 35. PhD Graduates Per Million Inhabitants, 2012

 300.0

                                                                                          246.8
 250.0


 200.0


 150.0

                                                                            99.2
 100.0


  50.0                                                         36.0
                                              17.9
               0.8             4.3                                                                    4.4
    0.0
            Ethiopia         Ghana           Senegal    South Africa      Malaysia        Korea     Vietnam
Source: http://data.uis.unesco.org/ (accessed February 2017).

The low proportion of academics with a doctorate is one of the major constraints for the training
of Ethiopians at the postgraduate level. Overall, only 6.3 of academics have a PhD. Table 11
provides the proportion for the principal disciplinary areas. The three domains with the highest
proportion are natural and computational sciences, agricultural and life sciences, and the social
sciences and humanities. At the same time, engineering capacity is an issue.

Table 11. Proportion of Academics with a PhD by Disciplinary Area (2014/15)
                    Disciplinary Area                                  Proportion of Academics with a PhD
 Engineering and technology                                                        2.8
 Natural and computational sciences                                                10.2
 Medicine and health sciences                                                       4.4
 Agricultural and life sciences                                                     9.9
 Business and economics                                                             3.1
 Social sciences and humanities                                                     9.0
                                                       Total                        6.3
Source: Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

Data from the nine oldest universities confirm this diagnosis (table 12).




                                                         70
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Table 12. Proportion of Academics with a Master’s or PhD in Top Ethiopian Universities (2015 /16)
                                   Proportion of Academics with a
         University                                                      Proportion of Academics with a PhD
                                              Master’s
 Adama                                          52.2                                 13.7
 Addis Ababa                                    42.3                                 27.6
 Arba Minch                                     49.1                                  9.1
 Bahir Dar                                      57.5                                 11.3
 Gonder                                         48.2                                  3.4
 Haramaya                                       71.5                                 13.2
 Hawassa                                        68.1                                 15.4
 Jimma                                          54.0                                  7.5
 Mekelle                                        33.0                                 13.9
Source: Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

There is serious lack of academic and research capacity in Ethiopian universities. Another way of
measuring the gap between Ethiopia and other Sub-Saharan African countries is to analyze how
Addis Ababa University fares in relation to the flagship university of other countries (table 13).
Even though the data for the other universities are older than those for Addis Ababa University
(2011/12 and 2015/16, respectively), they clearly illustrate how imperative it is to accelerate
doctoral training to prepare the next generation of Ethiopian academics.

Table 13. Proportion of Academics with a PhD in Flagship African Universities
                     Flagship University                             Proportion of Academics with a PhD
 University of Botswana                                                              65
 Addis Ababa University                                                              28
 University of Cape Town                                                             63
 University of Dar Es-Salam                                                          43
 Eduardo Mondlane University                                                         17
 University of Ghana                                                                 50
 Makerere University                                                                 43
 University of Mauritius                                                             42
 University of Nairobi                                                               45
Source: Ministry of Education of Ethiopia; Buntin, Cloete, and van Schalkwyk (2013).

Academic inbreeding, the practice of recruiting academics who are graduates of the same
university, is a serious issue at the oldest Ethiopian universities, especially at Addis Ababa
University. Studies of academic inbreeding have demonstrated that this tradition is not conducive
to innovation and high performance. In the words of one of the leading researchers on this topic,
academic inbreeding promotes “institutional parochialism and intellectual isolation” (Horta, Sato,
and Yonezawa 2011, 37). Universities that have lower levels of inbreeding tend to have a higher
scientific production.

Women are underrepresented in S&T higher education. Gender disparities is another dimension
that affects the size and quality of the talent pool for Ethiopian universities. Table 14 shows the
evolution of the gender gap between academic year 2004/05 and academic year 2014/15, the latest
year for which official statistics are available. While the situation has improved significantly over
the past 10 years, the loss of talent that the low proportion of females represents remains of
concern. Women account for only 10 academics with a master’s degree and only 7 of those with a
PhD. A worrisome decrease is also seen when the proportion of women enrolled in postgraduate



                                                      71
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


programs is compared to the proportion that actually graduates (24 versus 17). This gap did not
exist in 2004/05. It would be important for university leaders to investigate the factors that prevent
women from graduating.

Table 14. Evolution of the Gender Gap in Higher Education (2004–2014)
            Proportion of Females                             2004/05                        2014/15
 Undergraduate students                                        24.0                           34.7
 Undergraduate graduates                                       14.8                           28.9
 Master’s and PhD students                                      9.2                           23.8
 Master’s and PhD graduates                                     9.0                           17.2
 Academics with a master’s                                      n.a.                          10.2
 Academics with a PhD                                           n.a.                           7.2
Source: Ministry of Education of Ethiopia.

4.2. Research Funding
In 2006 the member states of the African Union endorsed a target of investing 1 percent of GDP
for R&D. Still, Sub-Sahara African countries tend to invest less than 1 percent of their GDP to
fund R&D activities, unlike European countries that manage to spend on average 1.9 of GDP. At
0.6, Ethiopia is among the better performers, almost on par with the leading African countries,
Kenya at 0.8 and South Africa at 0.7 (see figure 36).

Figure 36. Gross Expenditure on Research and Development as of GDP for Ethiopia and Comparator Countries
(2014)

   5

 4.5                                                                                   4.3

   4

 3.5

   3

 2.5

   2

 1.5
                                                                               1.1
   1                     0.8                            0.7
         0.6                                    0.5               0.5   0.5
                0.4
 0.5                             0.2                                                            0.2
                                         n/a
   0
       Ethiopia Ghana   Kenya Nigeria Rwanda Senegal South Tanzania Uganda Malaysia South Vietnam
                                                     Africa                         Korea

Source: GII, https://www.globalinnovationindex.org/gii-2016-report#.

However, universities receive a very small share of that funding. The 0.6 percent of GDP spent on
R&D corresponds to about US$369 million of public and research funding for 2015. But the
competitive research allocation provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology is less than
US$2 million a year.


                                                      72
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


In addition, very few universities have sufficient number of researchers and the scientific
infrastructure necessary to conduct research in a meaningful manner, even among the nine most
ancient universities in the country. Out of Ethiopia’s 34 public universities, 3 of them (Addis
Ababa University, Mekelle University, and Addis Ababa Science and Technology University)
capture the lion’s share of the competitive research funding provided by the Ministry of Science
and Technology since its formation a few years ago.

Table 15. Competitive Research Allocations (2014/15 and 2015/16)
                                                                       Amount                  Share of Total
                        University
                                                                   (ETB, millions)                  (%)
 Addis Ababa University                                               34.7                           31.1
 Mekelle University                                                   15.7                           14.1
 Debre Birhan University                                               5.1                            4.6
 University of Gondar                                                  0.8                            0.7
 Addis Ababa Science and Technology University                        20.4                           18.3
 Semera University                                                     4.2                            3.8
 Jimma University                                                      0.9                            0.8
 Non-university research institutions                                 29.9                           26.8
                                                    Total            111.7                         100.0
Source: Ministry of Science and Technology.

The field visits revealed that, despite significant efforts to invest in new laboratory facilities, many
departments lack the up-to-date scientific equipment needed for advanced research, even in the
two new S&T universities. Access to broadband is unequal across the universities. However, Addis
Ababa University has made significant progress in recent years to strengthen the library and ICT
facilities. The ministerial initiative to network the university libraries is a positive development.

4.3. Governance Dimensions
At the national level, the Ministry of Science and Technology is the main authority in charge of
coordinating, encouraging, and financing research. However, its influence is very limited as the
research budget that it allocates to universities represents less than 1 percent of the country’s total
research effort.

The GoE has embarked on an ambitious policy to establish and develop a number of Centers of
Excellence to boost research in priority areas in the country’s development agenda. In addition to
those centers financed directly by the Government, Ethiopia has received World Bank support to
set up four Centers of Excellence. Three of them operate within Addis Ababa University, with a
focus on railways engineering, water management, and innovative drug development and
therapeutic trials. Haramaya University hosts the last one, devoted to climate smart agriculture and
biodiversity conservation.

The field visits brought out a number of obstacles at the institutional level, linked, in great part, to
the lack of autonomy characterizing Ethiopian universities. Staffing autonomy (that is, the capacity
of universities to manage their staff), in particular, is quite limited, which makes it difficult to
develop the research output. The grade structure and corresponding remuneration conditions are
very rigid, leaving the universities with little room for maneuver to offer internationally
competitive packages and manage academic staff in a flexible manner. Seniority, rather than track



                                                     73
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


record, is the main criterion for fitting incoming academics into the salary scale. Faculties and
departments cannot easily decide on staff deployment and assignments based on the respective
strengths and profiles of academics. The ‘civil service’ status of university staff is also a
complicating factor for some of the administrative staff, such as information technology specialists
and lab technicians, whose remuneration levels and conditions of employment are not attractive
compared to the private sector. The academics and senior administrators met during the visits all
decry the cumbersome procurement and financial management practices that hinder efforts to
improve the quality of teaching and research.

One positive development, at Addis Ababa University, has been the establishment of a grants
coordination office to help researchers with information and resources about grant opportunities
and support for grant implementation.

Because of the rapid quantitative expansion at all universities, academic staff have heavy teaching
loads and cannot make much time, if any, for research. In addition, the low salaries drive many of
them to teach in private universities or take on consulting assignments to make ends meet. This is
a major impediment to the development of the research capacity of Ethiopian universities. It
presents a risk, particularly for the new Centers of Excellence mentioned earlier, which may find
it difficult to mobilize researchers because of their many teaching commitments.

When Addis Ababa University of Science and Technology and Adama University of Science and
Technology were transferred to the Ministry of Science and Technology, their staff received a
special remuneration package that placed them in a more favorable situation than the academic
staff of the other public universities. But this special status, meant as an incentive to encourage
them to devote 30 percent of their time to applied research, lasted only two years as the salaries of
academics in the other public universities were adjusted upward. Today there is no difference
between the academic staff of universities under the Ministry of Education and those under the
Ministry of Science and Technology. Therefore, the rationale for having universities operating
under two separate ministries is not clear.

Generally speaking, the Ethiopian universities have few links with industry. Recent efforts to boost
the research output have focused on scientific publications, much less so on knowledge and
technology transfer activities. There is also little collaboration among the universities, although
some donor projects do support collaborative arrangements.

Another challenge faced by Ethiopian universities is the high degree of similarity and duplication
in program offerings and disciplines across the sector. In the case of Addis Ababa University, the
physical dispersion of the university buildings is not conducive to bringing academics from various
disciplines closer. This does not favor the kind of concentration of efforts and resources needed
for achieving critical mass in funding, talent, and infrastructure that are the hallmark of excellence
in research.

The lack of information on research funding and activities is a paramount problem throughout the
university system both at national and institutional levels. Neither the Ministry of Education nor
the Ministry of Science and Technology have the overall picture of research expenditures and
research output in Ethiopia. This is the direct result of the universities’ lack of capacity to track
the publications and other research products of their academic staff.



                                                   74
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



4.4. Policy Options for Building Research Capacity
Contribution of Research to Innovation and Competitiveness

In July 1945, Vannevar Bush wrote the following statement in his pioneering book Science, the
Endless Frontier: “a nation which depends upon others for its new basic scientific knowledge will
be slow in its industrial progress and weak in its competitive position in world trade.” While the
book was written with the United States in mind, other nations heeded the call for developing
scientific capacity, especially in Southeast Asia.

Rapid technological progress, the spread of global value chains, and the increasing importance of
knowledge-based capital mean that knowledge has become the most important factor in economic
development, not only technical knowledge but also knowledge about attributes, that is, the
informational characteristics that support analysis and decision making (World Bank 1999).

The innovation strategy recently articulated by the OECD (2015) outlines five priorities: (a) the
need to strengthen investment in innovation and foster business dynamism, (b) the importance of
investing in an efficient system of knowledge creation and diffusion, (c) the opportunity of
capturing the benefits of the digital economy, (d) the need to foster talent and skills, and (e) the
urgency to improve the governance and implementation of innovation policies. A strong tertiary
education system is vital to support the second and fourth priorities.

More specifically, tertiary education supports knowledge-driven economic growth and poverty
reduction strategies by (a) training a qualified and adaptable labor force, including high-level
scientists, professionals, technicians, and teachers in basic and secondary education and future
government, civil service, and business leaders; (b) generating new knowledge through basic and
applied research; and (c) providing the platform for accessing existing stores of global knowledge
and adapting this knowledge to local use. Tertiary education institutions are unique in their ability
to integrate and create synergy among these three dimensions.

The success of East Asian economies illustrates the symbiotic relationship among tertiary
education, innovation, and growth through the production of research and skills. A recent World
Bank report analyzed the positive links between economic growth and tertiary education as
measured by the tertiary gross enrollment ratio, science test scores, levels of R&D investment, and
the number of scientists and engineers relative to a country’s population. Firm innovation surveys
undertaken in Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand showed that the most active innovators are
those with higher levels of R&D expenditures, more highly qualified staff, and located in more
R&D-intensive industries (World Bank 2012b).

As far as research is concerned, the same World Bank report on East Asia found that universities
and other tertiary education institutions not only added to the knowledge stock, but also helped
raise the technological capacity of low-income countries and supported countries with medium
technology capacity in the transition from technology assimilation to innovation through
consulting services, hosting incubation facilities, and customizing foreign technologies for local
requirements (World Bank 2012b).




                                                     75
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


National Policy Dimensions

To urge the universities to build up their research capacity, the GoE must consider three
prerequisites: (a) a clear S&T development strategy, (b) innovative funding for research, and (c) a
more flexible governance framework for the research-intensive universities.

S&T Policy

Ethiopia cannot live up to its economic growth ambitions and commitment to the SDGs unless the
country is prepared to accelerate its efforts toward forming a pool of high-level researchers trained
either in the top national universities or overseas. The example of Brazil is very relevant in that
respect. In the past three decades, the Coordination of Improvement of Higher Level Personnel
(Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior, CAPES) Foundation, operating
as an arm of the Federal Ministry of Education, has coordinated the country’s interventions to
improve the quality of Brazil’s academic staff through grants and rigorous evaluations programs.
More recently, the Government stepped up its efforts through the Science without Frontiers
initiative, which finances 25,000 annual scholarships for overseas studies at the master’s and PhD
levels.

The establishment of the Ministry of Science and Technology is an important step forward. The
road map document on the future of higher education, which is under preparation, will undoubtedly
include a strategy and detailed plans for improving the research contribution of Ethiopian
universities. It will also be critical to decide how many research universities the country should
have and how many the country can afford to fund adequately.

To facilitate the insertion of young doctoral graduates into dynamic research teams, Ethiopia must
consider funding postdoctoral schemes. In doing this, it would be emulating government programs
operating in other parts of the world, which give accredited universities the opportunity to hire
promising young researchers for up to two years, at no cost or little cost, as happened, for instance,
in Pakistan in the first decade of the new century.

Uganda’s experience with its Millennium Science Initiative (MSI) offers relevant lessons on
research promotion. The Uganda MSI project, which was implemented between 2007 and 2013,
made use of innovative funding mechanisms such as competitive grants to enhance research
capacity through high-powered teams and collaboration. The project aimed to accelerate the
training of better-qualified science and engineering graduates and the production of higher-quality
and more relevant research. The first component of the project (US$16.7 million) focused on
developing research capacity through competitively awarded grants. Its second component
(US$16.7 million) aimed to improve public understanding and appreciation of science and
strengthen the institutional capacity of Ugandan universities and research centers. The project
design was adapted to the Ugandan context and the country’s level of scientific development
(World Bank 2014c).

The main policy innovations supported by the MSI project included

       •     Building human capital by linking research with postgraduate education to develop
             the country’s scientific future;



                                                   76
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


        •     Building the capacity of research teams for high-quality scientific research; and

        •     Encouraging statistical and policy analysis through scientific research.

The MSI achieved major results. Over a six-year period, Uganda was able to significantly increase
its human capital in S&T, raising the number of researchers from 261 to 720 and the number of
S&T students from 24 to 41 at the PhD level, from 245 to 633 at the master’s level, and from 3,241
to 4,892 at the Bachelor’s level. The Government established a fully functional competitive
funding mechanism operating with high scientific standards as grant proposals were evaluated by
top Ugandan and international scientists. The ratio of applicants to funded proposals was 11:1,
which allowed for the selection of high-quality research proposals only. The initiative also
facilitated the development of the capacity of the Uganda National Council for Science and
Technology for national statistics on science, technology and innovation and the Uganda Industrial
Research Institute, where the number of services offered increased fourfold and revenue increased
from UGX 0 to UGX 67 million to enhance efficiency and self-sustainability.

An example of the new strategy, proposed in 2015 by the Prime Minister of Australia, illustrates
the range of measures that a comprehensive research promotion strategy incorporates (annex 5).

Research Funding

It is important to underline Ethiopia’s capacity-building efforts to protect funding from
interferences and maintain stable funding levels over the years. A number of arrangements exist
around the world to fund university-based research. These comprise instances in which instruction
and research are funded together, performance-based research block grants, competitive research
grants, direct funding of Centers of Excellence, demand-side funding, and excellence initiatives.

        •     Combined funding for teaching and research. This is perhaps the most common
              and traditional approach for financing campus-based research, whereby universities
              use some of the public resources they receive to pay for the conduct of research in
              addition to expenditures for academic instruction and institutional operations. Most
              countries around the globe fund research together with instruction as part of their
              negotiated budgets or funding formulas. Joint funding of instruction and research has
              the strength of being the research funding method most likely to integrate teaching
              and research efforts. Its downside is that the Government has little leeway to influence
              the direction of research or the efficient use of resource funding.

        •     Performance-based block grant funding. Under this mechanism, which very few
              countries in the world rely on, universities receive a block grant allocation for research
              that is not differentiated or earmarked but is based on the past performance of
              institutions or academic units. Eligibility for the block grant is usually linked to
              institutional demonstrated capacity. Faculties have wide latitude in setting their own
              priorities for the use of these funds. The amount of public research funding for each
              university is based on a periodic peer-reviewed assessment of collective faculty
              capacity to conduct research in an innovative fashion. In Australia and England, for
              example, the ‘blue skies’ approach for allocating research funds—allowing
              researchers to choose their areas of investigation without being restricted by specific



                                                     77
       Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


    national areas of priority defined by the Government as in the case of the competitive
    funding available through the research councils—is based on the results of the
    Excellence in Research for Australia assessment and the Research Excellence
    Framework in the United Kingdom, conducted every five to seven years to measure
    the quality of the research produced at different universities.

•   Competitive research grants. This is one of the most common ways of allocating
    public resources for research. Faculty members apply for funding for specific research
    projects, which are granted based on peer reviews of proposals. By measuring the
    quality and potential of proposals in an objective way, the process is somewhat
    insulated from political pressures. Multiple agencies are usually responsible for
    funding peer-reviewed research projects. Funding is sometimes provided on a
    matching grant basis, whereby government funds are complemented by institutional
    or private sources. This matching grant approach is used in Singapore (three from the
    Government and one from private sector), Hong Kong SAR, China, and New York
    State in the United States, for instance. The main risk with peer-reviewed projects lies
    in the homogeneous selection of peers, with those in the establishment excluding
    dissenters, which could stifle innovation, result in narrow research agendas, and
    detract from the quality and relevance of the projects funded.

•   Centres of Excellence. Another way of allocating research funds through block
    grants is to fund Centres of Research Excellence at particular institutions that often
    specialize in certain fields or endeavours. In the United States, the Federal
    Government and a number of states have adopted this approach as a way to
    supplement the research funding embedded in their core funding. New Zealand and
    the Netherlands are examples of OECD countries that have funded much or all of their
    academic research through Centres of Excellence. Centres of Research Excellence
    have the potential of achieving critical mass and improving the relevance of research
    if the focus of the centres accurately reflects national and regional needs. Some
    nations, Canada for example, also fund chairs of excellence. Finally, countries such
    as France and Germany have traditionally maintained a large network of separate
    research institutes and centres—the National Center for Scientific Research (Le
    Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, or CNRS), Max Planck Institute—that
    operate independently from the universities.

•   Demand-side funding. In a number of countries, university-based research is funded
    indirectly through the provision of scholarships, fellowships, and research
    assistantships in support of graduate students. Canada, the United Kingdom, and the
    United States are prime examples of this demand-side approach in which the multiple
    agencies that fund research typically have various programs of graduate student
    support.

•   Excellence initiatives. As explained earlier, excellence initiatives are hybrid funding
    mechanisms, which provide significant additional funding to a select group of
    universities or Centres of Excellence in the countries involved. With a few exceptions
    (that is, Thailand where nine universities were designated as recipients of the




                                          78
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


              additional funding), the selection of beneficiaries is usually done on a competitive
              basis.

The sources of research funding are also varied, including (a) national and state governments
through the education/higher education ministry or the funding buffer body, (b) national and state
research bodies or councils, (c) industry and commerce, and (d) foundations and charities. Table
16 presents a summary analysis of how research funding is distributed in nine OECD countries
with high levels of research performance.

Table 16. Research Funding Mechanisms in Selected Countries




                                                                  Netherlands




                                                                                         Switzerland
  Countries




                                                   Germany
                                         Denmark




                                                                                                       Kingdom
                    Australia
  Research

  Modality
  Funding




                                                                                Norway
                                Canada




                                                                                                        United



                                                                                                                 United
                                                                                                                 States
 Combined
 funding for
 teaching and                ✓                     ✓              ✓                      ✓                        ✓
 research
 Performance-
 based
 block grant        ✓                   ✓                                       ✓                       ✓
 funding
 Competitive
 research                    ✓          ✓                                       ✓                       ✓         ✓
 grants
 Centers of
 excellence/Ch
 airs of                     ✓                                    ✓
 excellence
 Demand-side
                             ✓                                    ✓                                     ✓         ✓
 funding
 Excellence
                    ✓        ✓          ✓          ✓                            ✓
 initiative
Source: Elaborated by Salmi for this report.

At present, the GoE relies principally on competitive research grants through the Ministry of
Science and Technology and the establishment of the four new Centers of Excellence with World
Bank funding. The Government should carefully review all possible mechanisms described in table
16 and box 9 and opt for the configuration that is most appropriate to the national conditions and
ambitions.

Data from South Africa clearly show how the level of research funding and the type of allocation
mechanism chosen combine to enhance research output (World Bank 2014c). Figure 37 includes
data on the growth of research products because of increased funding and the introduction of
performance-based funding mechanisms in 2001 that provided incentives to researchers.




                                                             79
                   Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 37. Research Funding and Output in South Africa (1996–2008)




Source: World Bank 2014c.

To complement this picture, data from Mozambique (box 8) and Uganda illustrate the direct
correlation between level of funding and research output. In both countries, the research output is
higher in health than in STEM disciplines generally, because of the lower amount of available
funding. This is in sharp contrast with Malaysia, which dedicates much more research funds to
S&T than to health.

 Box 8: Quality, Innovation, and Excellence Receive Attention: Quality Enhancement and Innovation Fund in
 Mozambique
 In 2002, the Government set up a competitive fund called the Quality Enhancement and Innovation Fund (QIF),
 which was designed to encourage innovation in teaching programs and research projects. QIF was succeeded by
 two competitive funds—the Institutional Development Fund (IDF) for higher education and the National Research
 Fund (NRF) for science, technology, and innovation.
 Over the past three years, the IDF has financed a range of projects among public and private HEIs. The total
 allocated funds amount to approximately US$5.3 million. About 60 percent of this amount was allocated to HEIs
 outside Maputo.
 From 2006 to 2012, the NRF financed 233 research projects by students at both the undergraduate and postgraduate
 levels. The fund has also financed several activities designed to promote the visibility and acceptance of science in
 society. The NRF disbursed US$7.4 million from the World Bank (69 percent), Sweden (27 percent), and Finland
 (4 percent).
 The Provincial Scholarship Fund was launched by in 2002 as a way to encourage underprivileged academic
 achievers from provinces outside Maputo to pursue higher education. The scheme provided the basis for the
 establishment of the Institute for Scholarship (IBE), a government program, which started to operate in 2008.
 Currently, through IBE, about 3,000 students benefit from scholarships of which 33.7 percent are funded by the
 Higher Education Science and Technology Project. About 80 percent of the beneficiaries are from households that
 earn less than US$270 per month; 39 percent are women and 42 percent are enrolled in science, engineering, and
 health.
 Source: World Bank 2014b.




                                                         80
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



 Box 9: The Power of Competitive Funds
 Well-designed competitive funds can greatly stimulate the performance of tertiary education institutions and can
 be powerful vehicles for transformation and innovation to improve the quality of teaching, learning, and research.
 One of the first funds promoted by the World Bank, Argentina’s Quality Improvement Fund ( Fondo para el
 mejoramiento de la calidad universitaria, or FOMEC), was instrumental in encouraging universities to engage in
 strategic planning for the strengthening of existing programs, the creation of new interdisciplinary graduate
 programs, and the strengthening of research. Within universities, faculties that had never worked together started
 cooperating in the design and implementation of joint projects. In Egypt, the Engineering Education Fund helped
 introduce the notion of competitive bidding and peer evaluation in the allocation of public investment resources.
 The fund promoted, in an effective manner, the transformation of traditional engineering degrees into more applied
 programs with close links with industry through relevant consulting and joint research projects.
 A fundamental prerequisite for the effective operation of competitive funds—and one of their significant benefits—
 is the practice of transparency and fair play through the establishment of clear procedures and selection criteria, as
 well as the creation of an independent monitoring committee. In Chile, a second wave of tertiary education reforms
 was in the early 2000s by a competitive fund for quality improvement in research upgrading in all public
 universities. Brazil, Ghana, Mexico, and Uganda have encouraged the formation of advanced human capital in S&T
 through competitive funding mechanisms. In all these cases, the participation of international peer review experts
 figured prominently.
 In countries with a diversified tertiary education system with unequally developed types of institutions, as is the
 case in Ethiopia, there may be a compelling argument for offering several financing windows with different criteria,
 or for setting up compensatory mechanisms to create a level playing field between strong and weak institutions. In
 a project supported by the World Bank in Indonesia during the 1990s, three different schemes were designed to
 serve universities according to their actual institutional capacity. In the last tertiary education project financed by
 the World Bank in China in the early 2000s, the top universities were required to form a partnership with a
 university in a poor province as a condition for competing. In Egypt, the competitive fund in the Engineering
 Education Reform Project had a special window for technical assistance to help less-experienced engineering
 schools prepare well-formulated proposals. In Chile, a special window was opened to provide preparation funds
 for universities requiring assistance in strategic planning and subproject formulation.
 The voluntary nature of competitive funds is an important success factor. The availability of additional resources
 can encourage tertiary education institutions to embrace reforms and innovations, while leaving out those not
 willing or ready to transform themselves.
 Source: Salmi 2016.

Figure 38. Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research by Field




Source: World Bank 2014c.




                                                          81
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Ethiopia could also bear in mind some useful lessons from the experience of Singapore. Among
other critical decisions, the city-state adopted a long-term view in building up its research capacity
and focused on strengthening basic research as the indispensable foundation to support the nascent
innovation system (annex 6). To promote relevant research and close links with industry, the GoE
could also consider the experience of a few OECD countries that have set up ‘innovation vouchers’
as financial incentives for that purpose (annex 7). Innovation vouchers are small lines of credit
provided by the Government to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to purchase services
from knowledge and technology providers with a view to introducing innovations (new products,
processes, or services) in their business operations.

Research Governance

At the national level, the GoE could consider three measures to improve the governance of
research: (a) setting up a single coordination authority for university research, (b) granting
increased autonomy for research universities, and (c) organizing a comprehensive MIS to monitor
and evaluate research results.

In the first place, it would be highly recommended to bring all the universities destined to become
research-intensive institutions under a single government agency, with a unified regulatory
framework. The main responsibility of that agency would be to offer the universities strategic
guidance and appropriate incentives to stimulate significant progress in research production and
technology transfer. In that context, it would be useful to encourage Addis Ababa University to be
more proactive in supporting the research capacity-building efforts of the other Ethiopian
universities through appropriate partnership arrangements.

A recent evaluation of how governments can best support the development of effective university-
industry links, based on the European experience, underscores the following three elements
(Science Business Innovation Board 2012):

       •     Stay the course. Policy makers need to ensure a predictable, stable environment of
             funding and regulation for long-term strategic partnerships to thrive.

       •     Give institutional autonomy. It is important to allow universities the autonomy to
             operate effectively and form partnerships with the industry. The best people to decide
             a university’s strategy are its own board and faculty heads, not government ministries.
             Without freedom to operate—with appropriate checks and balances—they cannot
             form effective partnerships.

       •     Reward dynamic, successful collaborative universities. Funding incentives work:
             government policy should reward, or at least not discourage, universities and
             companies that form strong partnerships.

Second, to improve their research performance, Ethiopian universities must enjoy the ability to
make decisions in a more autonomous manner and manage their academic and financial resources
with more flexibility. Institutional autonomy is a key element in the successful transformation of
public universities (Salmi 2009). Autonomous institutions are more responsive to incentives for
performance improvement and efficient use of available resources. It would be important for



                                                   82
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Ethiopian universities to be free to determine their own employment conditions, such as hiring and
staff remuneration, and the remuneration conditions to encourage academic staff to engage in
research. Flexible procurement rules are needed to accelerate and simplify the purchase of goods
and services funded under both the public budget and donor projects. Finally, the Ethiopian
universities must have independent fiscal control, including the ability to reallocate resources
internally according to self-determined criteria. Independent fiscal control is necessary so that
institutions can strengthen weak academic units, cross-subsidize programs, and fund new
initiatives quickly and flexibly in response to evolving needs.

The GoE can consider two options to introduce performance elements in the personnel status of
researchers. The first one would be to maintain the civil service status of academic staff but allow
universities to establish benefits and rewards to recognize performance levels and contributions of
individual staff. The second one would be to eliminate the civil service status of academic staff
and make each university the employer of its academic and administrative staff.

        •     Public universities in several Western European countries have brought in additional
              benefits to reward outstanding academic performance. In France and Germany, for
              example, universities benefiting from the excellence initiatives initiated special
              incentives to support postdoctoral researchers, create tenure tracks for talented young
              researchers, and offer salary supplements for senior professors. The University of
              Montpellier set up attractive postdoctoral programs, tenure tracks, and high profile
              positions combining higher incomes and dedicated research support. Heidelberg
              University, for instance, developed a new HR policy whereby progression is not
              linked directly to seniority anymore but associated with a performance-based system
              of bonuses that recognizes good research and teaching and successful participation in
              administrative tasks. In a way, many faculties in the Ethiopian universities already
              have a system of salary supplements but the reform proposed here would involve full
              transparency and consistency in designing, implementing, and monitoring these
              practices as an objective system of rewards and bonuses.

        •     The second approach consists in removing the academic and administrative staff from
              the civil service status and transforming them into employees of their university, as
              happened in Finland for example. This means that each research-intensive university
              in Ethiopia would develop and post its own criteria for recruitment and establish its
              own salary scale and package of benefits. The creation of two S&T universities under
              the Ministry of Science and Technology could have been a right move in that
              direction, but as mentioned earlier the special salary remuneration conditions offered
              at the beginning were not maintained. It is not too late to consider a more favorable
              personnel status for these universities, to help them establish themselves as dynamic
              and high performance institutions of teaching, research, and technology transfer.

With respect to the third dimension of governance reform, it would be important to design and
implement a comprehensive MIS on research funding, research activities, and research products.
The MIS would link all research-intensive institutions and Government agencies. Progress on this
front can happen only if the ministries and the universities are willing and able to develop a culture
of openness about information and data sharing.




                                                     83
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Progress at the Institutional Level

Talent Development

The most important factor in any university’s strategy to strengthen its research capacity is its
ability to attract and retain top-rate academics—young promising researchers and experienced
proven researchers—who can contribute to building critical mass of excellence in research and
knowledge transfer. While progress has been achieved in a few faculties and institutes, Addis
Ababa University and the other universities likely to become more research intensive need to have
a clear capacity-building program in place and provide adequate incentives to encourage and
reward high-impact research. These incentives, which would signal a cultural shift in favor of
research, could include financial rewards for good research performance, flexible schedule
arrangements that would allow productive researchers to have a reduced teaching load, especially
those linked to Centers of Excellence, and opportunities for academic mobility and participation
in international research networks.

The university leadership teams ought to put in place special programs to attract more qualified
female academics into research, combining financial and non-monetary measures to remove
existing obstacles. At the national level, the state can implement affirmative action policies to
promote women’s entry into academic institutions as students and ensure that university faculty,
administrative staff, and leaders have a greater gender balance. A quota system could further
strengthen the balance among faculty and staff. Underscoring the importance of equal
opportunities, the GoE can also conduct targeted outreach campaigns across communities to build
awareness about educational opportunities for girls. Campaigns focusing on girls’ access to tertiary
education at the secondary level can especially help introduce young women to STEM subjects
(Fredua-Kwarteng and Effah 2017). In addition to building awareness, the state must also address
access issues that hinder women’s educational attainment (cost of studies and living expenses,
transport, safety, and so on).

At the institutional level, universities can put in place key policies to address gender imbalance,
but they first need to establish a comprehensive understanding of the context. A thorough gender
analysis or gender audit can allow institutions understand where gaps exist and which areas need
to be addressed. On this basis, institutions are in a better position to draft a targeted action or
strategic plan, monitor progress against the original gender audit, and hold themselves accountable.
Gender mainstreaming policies are significant in ensuring that gender is considered in all
institutional activities—from hiring procedures to admissions and curriculum building (INASP
2017).

To ensure greater gender balance in enrollment and completion, universities can modify admission
requirements for women or allow them conditional access based on their completion of pre-entry
or bridging courses that allow women to gain the additional skills and knowledge they may be
lacking due to limited opportunities at the secondary level (Fredua-Kwarteng and Effah 2017).
Mentorship programs, knowledge sharing, networking opportunities, and transparent and targeted
hiring practices can address gender imbalance in faculty and staff. Additionally, institutions can
strive to ensure a safe learning and teaching environment for all students, especially for women
who face gender-based sexual violence or harassment (Taiwo 2014).




                                                   84
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


At both the institutional and state level, gender-focused research can complement the
abovementioned policies by providing a financial and institutional commitment to gender equity
in tertiary education. Grants supporting women scholars and gender-focused research will provide
greater opportunities for access and contribute to the goals of mainstreaming gender in academia.
Table 17 shows a range of possible measures at the national and institutional levels.

Table 17. Policy Measures and Good Practices to Promote Gender Equity
                                                               Instruments                     Financial
                                                                               Policy
 Policy Measures                                                                               Incentives
                                                   National Level
 Quotas and/or affirmative action                                                X                 X
 Gender-specific access issues (funding, safety, transport, lodging)             X                 X
 Grants for gender-focused research                                                                X
 Grants for women postdoctoral scholars and young researchers                                      X
                                                 Institutional Level
 Affirmative action                                                              X
 Community links, bridges, and outreach programs, especially in STEM
                                                                                 X
 subjects
 Gender research unit for analysis/audits/strategic plan/monitoring and
                                                                                 X
 evaluation
 Gender mainstreaming                                                            X
 Mentoring and networking opportunities for female academics
 Addressing gender-specific access issues (funding, safety, transport,
                                                                                                   X
 lodging)
 Ensuring safety of learning environment                                         X
 Effective grievance procedures for sexual harassment                            X
 Support for faculty and students returning from maternity leave
 Diversity and equity training
Source: Elaborated by Salmi for this report.

Several Ethiopian universities have followed the lead of Addis Ababa University in appointing a
vice-president for research, responsible for coordinating and promoting research activities. Those
universities keen on increasing the intensity of research activities may want to establish a dedicated
research coordination and development office to support the efforts of the vice-president. Box 10
illustrates the benefits of this kind of structure.




                                                         85
                  Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



 Box 10: Coordinating Research Activities at Imperial College
 The research office of Imperial College of London is an impressive example in terms of organizational structure
 and success rate. Imperial College of London has been granted €76 million from the Horizon 2020 program and it
 ranks second among the top 50 universities receiving Horizon 2020 funds. These outstanding results are due to a
 well-structured research office, which gathers 34 full-time equivalent professionals, including a European Union
 specialist unit of 6 full-time equivalent professionals. The centralized office relies on European Union dedicated
 teams located in each faculty.
 The office has developed many practical tools to provide expert guidance and services, for example, information
 on funding sources, preparation of research project proposals, costing and pricing, and project management. The
 research office also coordinates a mobility program to boost exchanges for both researchers and students, with a
 specific emphasis on relations with selected universities, among which are UC Davis, Heidelberg, Wageningen,
 and Barcelona.
 Source: http://www.imperial.ac.uk/research-and-innovation/research-office/.

To improve the quality of teaching and research, several measures can be envisaged to reduce
inbreeding in the Ethiopian universities, especially at Addis Ababa University. At the national
level, the state can use the QA system by incorporating, among the new accreditation criteria,
guidelines about the maximum proportion of ‘inbred academics’ in each university, faculty and
even academic department, a desirable minimal proportion of foreign academics or foreign-trained
Ethiopian academics, and academic mobility more generally. In addition, the state can offer a range
of financial incentives to support employment opportunities in other universities for recent PhD
graduates and young researchers, promote short-term outbound academic mobility for academics
without international academic experience, subsidize the recruitment of foreign academics and/or
Ethiopian scholars employed in foreign universities, fund research projects that involve
international collaborations, and encourage nonacademic institutions (research institutes, state
agencies, and companies) to hire scientists.

To reduce inbreeding at the institutional level, universities can define rules to limit the number of
PhD graduates recruited directly after they finish their research degree, establish promotion criteria
that take into consideration the experience in foreign academic settings—including at least a short
stay at a good quality foreign university—, provide guidelines on the maximum proportion of
‘inbred academics’ in each department, and set up joint doctoral programs with partner
universities. To accompany these policies, universities can set aside funding for academic mobility
and collaborative research projects. At the end of the day, the best mechanism to prevent
inbreeding is to have, in place, a fully transparent and meritocratic recruitment and promotion
process that allows for open competition on the basis of objective measures of academic
achievement. Table 18 shows the full range of possible measures at the national and institutional
levels.




                                                        86
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Table 18. Policy Measures and Good Practices to Reduce Inbreeding
                                                              Instruments                      Financial
                                                                                 Policy
 Policy Measures                                                                               Incentive
                                                    National Level
 Accreditation criteria                                                            X
 Recruitment of foreign academics/Ethiopian scholars from the diaspora             X              X
 Short-term outbound academic mobility                                             X              X
 Grants for postdoctoral and young researchers                                                    X
 Grants for collaborative research projects                                                       X
 Subsidies to encourage nonacademic institutions to hire scientists                               X
                                                  Institutional Level
 Transparent, meritocratic recruitment procedures                                  X
 Limits on the recruitment of own PhDs                                             X
 Minimum of outside academics in each department                                   X
 Promotion criteria                                                                X
 Compulsory mobility for PhDs and postdoctoral scholars                            X              X
 Short-term outbound academic mobility                                                            X
 Joint doctoral programs among several universities                                X
 Participation in collaborative research projects                                                 X
Source: Elaborated by Salmi for this report.

Multidisciplinary

During the field visits, several academics mentioned multidisciplinary as an important priority,
giving examples of research programs that bring multiple disciplines together. But it appears that
these are the exception rather than the rule. University leadership teams should encourage, through
appropriate financial and academic incentives, the design of research programs based on solution-
focused research questions directly linked to the main development challenges of Ethiopia in
general and those of the regions where the universities are located. This would allow a more
systematic meshing of disciplines across faculties and institutes that would result in higher-impact
research.

Each research-focused university should also try to define areas of concentration that are different
from the other universities and that are directly relevant to the regional environment. An important
lesson from the experience of research universities that have rapidly achieved a high level of
performance is that they have managed to concentrate their efforts to reach excellence on niche
programs and research areas (Salmi 2011). Through this niche-seeking strategy, Moscow Higher
School of Economics and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, for example, have
successfully built a critical mass of excellence in teaching and research much faster than
comprehensive universities in their respective countries.

Strategic Partnerships

As many universities in the world tend to do, Addis Ababa University and the other first-generation
universities have a large tradition of signing Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with
universities in other countries. Very often, the MOUs focus on academic and student mobility. To
ensure that international collaboration serves to fully support the Ethiopian universities’ efforts to
build up their research output and improve the quality and impact of the research, the universities
could envisage entering into a few long-term strategic partnerships aligned with their key



                                                      87
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


development priorities. Strategic partnerships are deep relationships with carefully chosen
institutions that are not necessarily at the same level of development but that share a common
vision and similar values. The principal objective is to undertake common activities in research
and knowledge transfer that are mutually beneficial. From the Ethiopian universities’ viewpoint,
these partnerships should have an institutional strengthening dimension through the development
of joint academic programs and/or double degrees, joint supervision of graduate students,
collaborative research projects, joint services to the community, and possibly joint benchmarking
exercises that could help the Ethiopian universities in the definition of stretch goals. Strategic
partnerships are not restricted to other universities, but can include government entities, NGOs,
companies, and community groups.

Open Science Mindset

In recent years, the Open Science movement has been challenging conventional modes of
knowledge acquisition, generation, and dissemination. Open Science represents a novel approach
to scientific development, based on cooperative work and information distribution through
networks using advanced technologies and collaborative tools. Rather than restricting the
‘ownership’ of discoveries and scientific advances, Open Science seeks to facilitate knowledge
acquisition through collaborative networks and encourage the generation of solutions based on
openness and sharing. Figure 39 proposes a representation of how the various dimensions of Open
Science are connected and interact.

Drawing from a pioneering analysis of publications over the past three decades, Jonathan Adams
announced the ‘fourth age of research’, the age of collaborative research and international research
networks, following the age of individual researchers, the age of the research institution, and the
age of the national research enterprise (Adams 2013). Collaborative research yields faster results
and facilitates a quicker transfer of these results, thereby serving the needs of both producers and
users of knowledge in a more effective and efficient manner.




                                                   88
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Figure 39. Open Science and Related Phenomena




Source: Salmi 2015.

This trend represents a great opportunity for Ethiopian universities, which can work together
within international research networks and develop joint research projects of a multidisciplinary
nature to address big challenges that are common to countries, using open data sources. These
new, collaborative approaches also represent a unique opportunity to explore innovative ways of
integrating teaching, research, and service activities.

Open Science is also a useful framework to build up the research infrastructure. Because of the
high expenses involved in establishing modern laboratories for advanced science, the Ethiopian
research universities ought to explore ways of sharing resources and collaborating in an open
science spirit. In a growing number of fields, expensive equipment can be accessed through fast
Internet in a distance mode, allowing for the development and organization of shared labs within
and among universities. Ethiopian universities can even be linked to research labs in industrial
countries, allowing PhD students to have access to the best possible scientific equipment at a much
reduced cost.




                                                     89
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Stronger Links with Industry

The leading Ethiopian universities must strengthen their R&D activities to build their capacity to
engage with the local economy and support the national and regional innovation system. They can
play a critical role as one of the key pillars of the country’s innovation strategy. Indeed, the
presence of strong universities is important to regional development, through both direct links and
spillover effects. The successful experiences of technology-intensive poles such as Silicon Valley
in California; Bangalore in Karnataka State, India; Shanghai in China; and Campinas in São Paulo
State, Brazil, attest to the positive effects that the clustering of advanced human capital alongside
leading technology firms can have.

In addition to contributing to the local economy through salaries and the purchase of goods and
services, universities can be essential economic agents through relevant applied research and the
training of highly qualified professionals who can help make the local firms more innovative and
productive. The universities can fulfill this role in several ways, not only by participating in new
innovations, but perhaps even more importantly by facilitating technology upgrade and absorption.

By setting up their own incubators or linking up closely with the industrial parks under
development, the strongest Ethiopian universities could contribute directly to inventing innovative
ways of producing goods and services. This implies systematic efforts to undertake industry-
oriented research and seek opportunities for technology commercialization.

Conducting research that results in patents and licenses that allow firms to make new products and
develop new lines of business is important, but it is not the only manner in which technology
transfer can take place. Firm-strengthening ideas pass between the academic world and companies
through other forms of collaboration. The contribution of Ethiopian universities to technology
upgrade and absorption can best be achieved in two ways. First, involving employers in curriculum
design and having them take on students as interns strongly increases the probability that firms
will employ qualified graduates. These graduates, in turn, will be agents of technology transfer,
bringing new techniques and know-how to firms, especially small and middle ones. At the end of
the day, the best conduit for moving ideas back and forth between universities and firms is through
the students and graduates themselves.

Second, by opening their doors to firm representatives and organizing technology information and
diffusion events, the universities can act as knowledge exchange platforms which, despite the often
informal character of interaction between academics and industry people, can have a significant
technology transfer influence on industry and services.

In supporting the transformation of the existing economic sectors and the creation of new ones,
the contribution of universities can take several forms. Table 19 provides a summary description
of the principal modalities of collaboration on knowledge transfer and technology
commercialization that Ethiopian universities could consider developing. It also indicates what
role the national and local authorities must play to facilitate these collaborations. A more detailed
matrix is presented in annex 8.




                                                   90
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Table 19. Most Effective Knowledge- and Technology-Transfer Mechanisms
    University-Industry            Role of National and/or Local
                                                                                        Comments
          Links                             Authorities
                                                                          • With education and training, this
 Public space function for   • Develop and fund programs to create
                                                                            function is seen by firms as the most
 networking and                and support clusters
                                                                            important contribution of
 dissemination
                                                                            universities
                             • Priority setting and incentives for
 Human capital formation
                               establishment of new programs
 (students and firm                                                       • Primary role of universities in
                             • Targeted scholarships
 employees                                                                  support of innovation
                             • Funding and tax incentives to facilitate
                               insertion of PhD graduates
 Research                    • Matching grants and tax incentives
                             • Criteria for evaluating the performance
                                                                          • Increased returns at the intersection
 Problem-solving and           of researchers
                                                                            of traditional disciplines
 consulting                  • Support for cluster formation
                             • Targeted assistance to SMEs
 Sharing of technical                                                     • Need for clear revenue-sharing
                             • Funding
 infrastructure                                                             arrangements within universities
                             • Appropriate Intellectual Property Right
                                                                          • More likely to happen in
 Knowledge                      legal framework
                                                                            biotechnology, nanotechnology, new
 commercialization           • Technical assistance
                                                                            materials, and information
                             • Financial autonomy of public
                                                                            technology
                                universities
Source: Elaborated by Salmi for this report.

To build trust, as part of their efforts to develop closer links with economic partners, Ethiopian
universities could emulate the practice of intellectual capital statements (ICS) initiated in Austria
(annex 8), as a way of rigorously assessing their scientific potential and competencies and
presenting it to the outside world.

Conclusions

To build the research and technology transfer capacity of the Ethiopian universities, it is important
to act on two levels. At the national level, the GoE could focus its interventions on the following
three aspects: (a) elaborate a clear S&T development strategy; (b) innovative funding for research,
preferably through competitive research grants such as those offered by the Ministry of Science
and Technology; and (c) establish a more flexible governance framework for the research-
intensive universities, which would give them the necessary autonomy to operate with more
flexibility

At the institutional level, the universities keen on becoming research intensive must define a
realistic talent development plan that includes substantial efforts to train academics at the master’s
and PhD levels, especially in S&T areas, and courageous measures to reduce inbreeding.
Universities should be encouraged to forge partnerships with leading institutions in other countries
for capacity-building and joint research purposes and develop close links with the productive
sectors, particularly in the key priority areas of economic growth identified in the Government’s
strategy.




                                                       91
            Chapter 5. Conclusions and Policy Recommendations
The preceding chapters presented an analysis of the S&T higher education developments in
Ethiopia and its links to the country’s economy. To maximize the contribution of its universities
to economic and social development through S&T, the GoE needs to carefully manage expansion
to ensure quality and relevance of education. Policy recommendations in the priority areas are
summarized in the following paragraphs.

5.1 Adequately Preparing and Deploying Academic Staff
HEIs need to make the most effective use of their human resources, especially their academic staff.
Increased access and the rapid expansion of higher education require even more attention to
maintain and strengthen the quality of academic staff. Teachers must be ready to meet the changing
learning needs of a wider and more diverse student group. It is important to ensure that staff obtain
advanced education and phase out lecturers with only undergraduate degrees, as well as keep
attracting high-quality staff in areas demonstrating significant shortages, particularly within the
S&T streams (at the PhD level). SDUs should be established and staffed with experts capable of
organizing and delivering professional staff development programs.

It is important to ensure evidence-based staff-related decision making. This includes routine
collection and utilization of HEMIS data on various dimensions of academic staff quality
(including staff qualifications, research outputs, disciplinary orientation, inbreeding, and so on),
participation in benchmarking exercises within the PASET and ACE initiative and beyond, as well
as undertaking specialized studies to provide robust evidence on issues such as job satisfaction of
faculty member—essential for their motivation—attraction and retention of talent in HEIs,
effectiveness of staff development programs, innovative pedagogy and experimentation, and
quality of the interaction of academic staff with the students.

Fostering collaborations for staff development and quality improvements through ACE II; PASET;
and other interuniversity, national, regional, and international networks and forums could be
particularly beneficial for Ethiopia. It is important to gain and maintain excellence in teaching and
research, considering the large need for staff development and relatively low experience in the
field. Ethiopian HEIs, presently at the beginning of the learning curve in HR development, can
benefit from good practices and experiences from other countries and institutions. These networks
and forums support the exchange of ideas and knowledge on staff development programs and the
work of relevant units within HEIs, strategies for HR development, and best practices in the field
and facilitate direct staff exchanges programs among the participating institutions.

5.2. Strengthening the Relevance and Quality of Higher Education
The current efforts focused on improving the quality of primary and secondary schools are
essential. Without good-quality schooling, it will be challenging to build quality higher education.

The quality of academic and administrative staff is the backbone of the quality of universities.
Therefore, great attention should be placed on reviewing the incentives, benefits, salaries, and
training that they receive.
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


The efforts to increase and broaden access are commendable. The inclusion of students with
disabilities requires that the infrastructure and the support meet their needs. It is also important to
get more women into the academic pipeline and up to the highest steps of the academic and
leadership ladder.

More efforts are required to ensure student success by offering a range of activities such as bridging
courses, more complete student services, orientation, and better information to students about these
activities. It would be useful to evaluate the extent to which the campus environment could better
serve the students’ success and if the low attrition rate is a sign of lowered standards.

Crucially, greater participation in higher education should match the labor market requirements.
The destination of university graduates must be tracked and students provided with career support
services. At minimum, the universities should be developing their career services (including tracer
studies and career advising), bolstering their links with employers, and developing a monitoring
framework for internships. It will be important to complete the HEMIS and Labor Market
Information System to help collect evidence on the effectiveness of various programs, including
in the S&T streams and assess employers’ satisfaction with the skills of recent university
graduates, particularly in S&T programs.

While the development of the doctoral level is strategic, it is also essential to increase the number
of PhD candidates in a deliberate way to ensure quality supervision. In addition, the universities
that are allowed to open PhD programs must demonstrate that they have the appropriate policies
in place to ensure the quality of these programs.

Such policies include criteria for admissions, as well as all aspects of supervision, student
assessment, and funding.

The internal quality system could be bolstered by focusing on ways to ensure that academic and
administrative staff and students feel a sense of ownership of these processes and ensuring that a
more exhaustive QA framework is implemented than just the current evaluation of staff.

The accreditation of professionals involved in areas of health and safety (for example, medical
professions, engineers, architects) must be reviewed and aligned with international practice.

HERQA was reviewed in 2016 and received a report containing very cogent recommendations
that need to be implemented. It would be useful to require the agency to produce written reactions
to this review and an action plan and to foresee a follow-up review in four years. The report offers
a range of recommendations that will be implemented in a step-by-step fashion within the next 20
years. However, such a long-term horizon might be compromised by the rapid changes being
experienced in higher education worldwide. In addition, agency staff should be encouraged to
connect with international peer agencies to keep abreast of international development.

5.3. Building Up Research Capacities
As Ethiopia’s first university, established 60 years ago, Addis Ababa University’s trajectory has
been impressive. It has become the country’s flagship university and has trained most of the leaders
and academic staff of the other universities in the country. Addis Ababa University and the other



                                                     93
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


first-generation universities have aspirations of strengthened research capacity. At the same time,
their ability to perform optimally as autonomous and dynamic institutions appears to be somehow
constrained by the prevailing centralized governance framework and arrangements and limited
public research funding because of the ambitious national expansion program to increase higher
education enrollment.

Ethiopia is therefore at a crossroad. If the country wants to fulfill its ambition of developing a few
full-fledged research universities to serve the national innovation system, it needs to modify the
governance framework and grant more institutional autonomy. By removing the constraints that
prevent Addis Ababa University and the other aspiring research universities from operating at their
full potential, the GoE can empower its top universities to achieve the highest levels of
performance that they legitimately aspire to. Additional funding is also indispensable to support
the leading universities’ efforts to train more PhDs, build up their scientific facilities, and engage
in relevant research.

Within the universities, a number of adjustments ought to be made to improve their mode of
operation and performance as research institutions. More emphasis should be placed on excellence
in research along the current priority of expanding access. Addis Ababa University, in particular,
should be allowed to focus on increasing the share of graduate programs and students and
developing a strong culture of research through appropriate incentives and resources. The S&T
universities could also be supported through competitive capacity-building grants responsive to
national development goals (PhD training, laboratory equipment, partnerships with industry,
partnerships with foreign universities) and competitive research grants in S&T domains aligned
with country’s priorities.




                                                   94
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



                                              References
Adams, J. 2013. “Collaboration: The Fourth Age of Research.” Nature 497, 557-560.
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2011. Improving Instructional Quality: Focus on Faculty
        Development. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: ADB.
Agrawal, A., and Cockburn, I.M. (2002), University research, industrial R&D and the Anchor
        Tenant Hypothesis, NBER Working Paper, 9212, Cambridge, MA.
AU–NEPAD. 2010. African Innovation Outlook 2010. Pretoria, South Africa: AU–NEPAD
Bashir, S. 2011. “China’s Contribution to Skills Development in Sub-Saharan Africa.” African
        Centre for Technology Studies (ACTS). Retrieved on May 20, 2017, http://blog.acts-
        net.org/bloggers/the-african-technopolitan/13-china-s-contribution-to-skills-
        development-in-sub-saharan-africa.
Becker, W. E., and P. E. Kennedy. 2005. “Does Teaching Enhance Research in Economics?”
        The American Economic Review Vol. 95, No. 2. Philadelphia, PA, pp. 172-176
        https://www.jstor.org/stable/4132811
Boyer, E. L. 1990. Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate. Princeton, NJ:
        Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
Bundervoet et al. Forthcoming. “Ethiopia Employment and Jobs Study.” World Bank.
Development Portfolio Management Group. 2014. “Theory of Change and Methods for Evaluating
        NORHED.” Washington, DC: Development Portfolio Management Group. Unpublished.
Fredua-Kwarteng, E., and C. Effah. 2017. “How to Get More Women into Engineering at
        University.” University World News, May 5.
        http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=20170501184109403 (accessed
        June 2017).
Geiger M. T. and Moller L. C. 2015. “Fourth Ethiopia Economic Update: Overcoming
        Constraints in the Manufacturing Sector.” World Bank.
Haile G., Srour I. and Vivarelli M. 2013. The Impact of Globalization and Technology Transfer
        on Manufacturing Employment and Skills in Ethiopia. IZA. Discussion Paper No. 7820.
        December 2013
Henson, M., T. Vroeijenstihn, and M. Elmer. 2016. Analysis of the Current and Potential Role
        and Function of the Higher Education Relevance and Quality Agency in Ethiopia. A
        report prepared for the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit as part
        of the Sustainable Training and Education Programme.
Higher Education Academy. 2015. Learning Excellence. UK: Higher Education Academy, 2
        vols.
Hill, R., and C. Mejia-Mantilla. 2016. Labor Markets in Urban Ethiopia: Profile, Trends and
        Constraints. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hoftijzer, M. 2015. “Matching Skill Supply with Demand: Experiences and Lessons Learned
        from World Bank Supported Activities.” Building Bridges between Education and
        Employment. ETF, Turin.
        http://www.etf.europa.eu/eventsmgmt.nsf/(getAttachment)/540AE6C6904B7B30C1257F
        0D004789ED/$File/9_Session%203_Panel2_Hoftijzer_World%20Bank.pdf.



                                                     95
               Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Horta, H., M. Sato, and A. Yonezawa. 2011. “Academic Inbreeding: Exploring its Characteristics
        and Rationale in Japanese Universities Using a Qualitative Perspective.” Asia Pacific
        Education Review 12: 35–44.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2016. Key Indicators of the Labour Market. 9th ed.
        Geneva: ILO.
INASP (International Network for the Availability of Scientific Publications). 2017. “Gender
        Mainstreaming.” International Network for the Availability of Scientific Publications.
        http://www.inasp.info/en/work/gender-mainstreaming/ (accessed June 1, 2017).
Nature. 2016. https://www.natureindex.com/supplements/nature-index-2016-rising-
stars/tables/africa.
NPCA. 2014. African Innovation Outlook 2014. Pretoria, South Africa: NPCA
OECD (2012). Fostering Quality Teaching in Higher Education: Policies and Practices. An
        IMHE Guide for Higher Education Institutions. Paris: OECD.
———. 2015. The Innovation Imperative: Contributing to Productivity, Growth, and Well-Being.
        Paris: OECD.
O’Malley, B. 2015. “PM Signals Culture Shift on Innovation and Science.” University World
        News, Issue 394, December 11.
        http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=20151211222422418.
Pircher, R., and A. Pausits. 2011. “Information and Knowledge Management at Higher
        Education Institutions.” Management Information Systems 6 (2): 8–16.
Salmi, J. 2009. The Challenge of Establishing World-Class Universities. Directions in
        Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-
        1099079877269/547664-1099079956815/547670-1237305262556/WCU.pdf.
———. 2011. “The Road to Academic Excellence: Lessons of Experience”. In The Road to
        Academic Excellence: The Making of World-Class Research Universities, edited by P.
        Altbach and J. Salmi. Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015. Study on Open Science: Impact, Implications and Policy Options. Brussels: The
        European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/research/innovation-union/pdf/expert-
        groups/rise/study_on_open_science-impact_implications_and_policy_options-
        salmi_072015.pdf.
———. 2016. Higher Education and the Sustainable Development Goals: In Search of a Viable
        Funding Model. New York: International Commission on Financing Global Education
        Opportunity.
Salmi, J., Y. Cheng, and N. Liu. 2016. Benchmarking Institutions of Applied Sciences,
        Engineering and Technology (ASET) in Sub-Saharan Africa. Revised Methodology.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.
Science Business Innovation Board. 2012. Making Industry-University Partnerships Work:
        Lessons from Successful Collaborations. Brussels: Science Business Innovation Board.
Sursock, A. 2011. “Accountability in Western Europe.” In Accountability in Higher Education:
        Global Perspective on Trust and Power, edited by B. Stensaker and L. Harvey. Milton,
        UK: Routledge.



                                                  96
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


———. 2015. Trends 2015: Learning and Teaching in European University. Brussels, Belgium:
       European University Association. http://www.eua.be/Libraries/publications-homepage-
       list/EUA_Trends_2015_web.pdf?sfvrsn=18.
Taiwo, M. O. 2014. “Best Practices in Gender Mainstreaming in the Academia: Lessons from
       African Higher Education Institutions.” International Journal of Humanities Social
       Sciences and Education 1 (10): 81–87.
Thomas, L., R. Jones, and H. May. 2010. “Literature Review: A Research-Informed Approach to
       Improving Institutional Retention.” In Access to Success: Fostering Trust and Exchange
       between Europe and Africa, edited by EUA. Brussels: European University Association.
University Alliance. 2015. Mind the Gap: Engaging Employers to Secure the Future of STEM in
       Higher Education. London: University Alliance.
Usher, A. 2012. “Bibliometrics Part Four: Introducing the H-Index.” The Globe and Mail, April
       5.
Vegas, E. 2005. Incentives to Improve Teaching: Lessons from Latin America. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.
Wangui K. J., Geiger M. T., Bezawagaw M. G., and Jensen L. 2016. Ethiopia Public
       Expenditure Review. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/176471468178145744/Ethiopia-public-
       expenditure-review.
Watts, A., and D. Fretwell. 2004. Public Policies for Career Development: Case Studies and
       Emerging Issues for Designing Career Information and Guidance Systems in Developing
       and Transition Economies. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Woldegiyorgis, A. 2017. “Ethiopia: Transformation of Higher Education Must Defeat the
       Quality Trap.” University World News, Issue No. 465, June 23.
       http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=20170621094158706.
World Bank. 1999. World Development Report 1999: Knowledge for Development. New York:
       Oxford University Press.
———. 2002. Constructing Knowledge Societies: New Challenges for Higher Education.
       Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2009. The Towers of Learning: Performance, Peril and Promise of Higher Education in
       Sri Lanka. Washington, DC: World Bank,.
———. 2012a. Jobs and Human Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/139561468338982552/Jobs-and-human-
       development.
———. 2012b. Putting Higher Education to Work: Skills and Research for Growth in East Asia.
       World Bank East Asia and Pacific Regional Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012c. The Road to Academic Excellence: The Making of World-Class Research
       Universities. Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013. Higher Education in Afghanistan: An Emerging Mountainscape. Washington,
       DC: World Bank.
———. 2014a. Applying Science, Engineering and Technology for African Competitiveness and
       Development. Science, Technology, and Skills for Africa's Development. Washington,



                                                     97
               Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


       DC: World Bank Group.
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/271451468194353211/Applying-science-
       engineering-and-technology-for-African-competitiveness-and-development.
———. 2014b. Mozambique's Sustained Efforts on Higher Education, Science and Technology.
       Science, Technology, and Skills for Africa's Development. Washington, DC: World Bank
       Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/847641468323988924/Mozambiques-
       sustained-efforts-on-higher-education-science-and-technology.
———. 2014c. A Decade of Development in Sub-Saharan African Science, Technology,
       Engineering and Mathematics Research. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015. Ethiopia - Urbanization Review: Urban Institutions for a Middle-Income
       Ethiopia. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Yusuf, Shahid. 2014. Sustaining Ethiopia’s Growth Acceleration. Washington, DC: GWU.
Yusuf, S., and K. Nabeshima. 2007. How Universities Promote Economic Growth. Washington,
       DC: World Bank.




                                                  98
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



                            Annex 1: Meetings and Field Visits
The team met with the State Minister for Higher Education and the Minister of Science and
Technology on two occasions, as well as with the leadership of HERQA (the QA agency) and the
Secretary General of the Chamber of Commerce. Meetings were organized with the senior
leadership, deans, academic staff, students, and the heads of support services of Addis Ababa
University and Addis Ababa Science and Technology University. At Addis Ababa University, the
team also visited the three newly selected African Centers of Excellence (railways engineering,
health sciences, and water management); the Institute of Science and Technology; the Ethiopian
Institute of Architecture; Building Construction and City Development; and the College of
Business and Economics. In addition, the team met with the university’s grants coordinator.
Meetings were also held with the leadership of Saint Mary’s and Unity University College.




                                                     99
                  Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



Annex 2: Share of Labor Force and Unemployed with Tertiary Level of
                      Educational Attainment




Source: International Labour Organization 2016.




                                                    100
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



                  Annex 3: Good Practice in Student Evaluation21
Student Questionnaires

Student questionnaires have become a popular way of collecting student feedback.

Standard questionnaire design principles include the following:

        •     Identifying its purposes. Is the focus on the individual module (individual unit of
              study), the course (composite of units that constitute the degree award), or the
              student’s (learning) experience as a whole? Is it focused on the teaching, the resources,
              the learning, or all these elements? Defining the purpose will be the primary factor in
              determining the content.

        •     The frequency of the questionnaire should be thought through. A single questionnaire
              that is used too frequently for all classes every term will bore students and probably
              result in a very low response rate. This may mean that not every module is surveyed
              in every semester it is delivered.

        •     Questions should be meaningful to the students, unbiased, and unambiguous. Staff
              should feel that the questions are fair and useful. Therefore, student and staff input
              during the design phase is important.

        •     The questionnaire should be piloted before it is rolled out.

Apart from these standard design issues, the institution might also consider the following important
principles:

        •     A focus on learning, rather than just teacher performance, will encourage students to
              think about their engagement in the learning process.

        •     While a standard questionnaire is often used across an institution, it is important to
              have a flexible instrument, adapted to the different disciplines. One way of achieving
              this goal is to give the different disciplines the opportunity to add or adapt some of
              the questions to specific teaching practices (for example, clinical training versus
              mathematics education).

        •     Online questionnaires are convenient to score but may result in a lower return rate
              than the paper version. Appropriate solutions to ensure a meaningful response rate are
              important. This usually requires communicating about the confidentiality of the
              process and finding a way for students to easily access the online questionnaire at an
              opportune time.



21
  Adapted from the Good Practice Guide of the University Quality Assurance Board (UQAIB), the QA body in
Dubai’s free zones, elaborated by Andrée Sursock.
https://www.khda.gov.ae/CMS/WebParts/TextEditor/Documents/UQAIBStudentfeedback_English.pdf.



                                                     101
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


       •    Measurement is important but so is the use of results.

            o    One of the critical parts of feedback to students is to explain that their
                 contributions through surveys and other means are designed to improve student
                 learning and their success. Therefore, a useful technique is to inform students
                 about how the data are used for enhancement, to motivate them to provide
                 meaningful feedback.

            o    Without equating student feedback with remedial activities for staff, it is a good
                 idea to develop training and advisory services to teachers who are interested in
                 improving their teaching skills. An academic development structure such as a
                 ‘Leaning and Teaching Unit’ would offer workshops and individualized training
                 to interested teachers, as well as a library of relevant material and equipment. It
                 could also provide a tutoring service for students (group and individual sessions)
                 to help students improve their study skills, time management, computer skills,
                 and discipline-based skills. The combination of these two functions within a
                 single unit would serve to ensure synergy and cross-learning.

            o    The QA officers and senior office holders would normally look at emerging
                 themes and identify what needs to be done, how, by whom, and when. This would
                 be appropriate to the level and scope of the issue: ranging from action by
                 individual teachers and heads of departments to major decisions at the
                 institutional board level.

Informal Midterm Questionnaires

In addition to the formal questionnaires, it is useful to encourage academic staff to conduct their
own evaluation during the term to reorient their teaching if necessary. This is usually done a few
weeks within the term. An instructor would, for example, stop class a few minutes early and ask
students to respond anonymously and in writing to questions such as:

       •    What was the most important thing you learned during this class?

       •    What important question remains unanswered?

       •    What classroom activities or assignments have been most/least effective in helping
            you learn this term, and why?

Each teacher would normally be able to develop the midterm questionnaire to suit his/her needs
and the needs of the students. The results need not be communicated to the administration. In some
cases, the midterm feedback may be a discussion with the teacher rather than a questionnaire,
depending on factors such as the size of the class, the level and nature of the module, and the
purpose of the feedback process. It is important, however, to stress students’ anonymity and safety.
They should be safe from recriminations, either personally or as a class. Students must be advised
about their responsibility to take the surveys seriously and the rewards for doing so (a better
learning experience).




                                                  102
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


Oral and Informal Feedback

Informal discussions with students can be an effective way to elicit feedback from them. These
can be organized in a variety of ways as the following examples illustrate:

        •     The deans and vice deans would meet regularly with student representatives.

        •     A faculty could organize three feedback meetings a year to which all academic and
              administrative staff are invited. The meetings would be focused on a specific theme
              but would allow the student representatives to extend the agenda by voicing any
              student concerns.

        •     Teachers should have office hours and consult students informally.

        •     An external teacher could meet with a group of students, at the end of a module or the
              beginning of a semester, to discuss what they liked and did not like and their
              recommendations. The actual teacher would not be present during these conversations
              but would get a summary of the discussion.

Student Participation in Committees

The student questionnaires would normally be part of a package of instruments for evaluating
teaching and learning: a package that would include analyses of written instructional materials (for
example, course descriptions that include learning targets, reading material, description of
activities, assignments, and examinations). These are usually examined in curricular committees
that could include academic staff, students, and external stakeholders (for example, employers).

In addition, students would normally be part of the self-study groups when the institution
undertakes an external evaluation or accreditation or in any internally organized quality review
that is focused on aspects related to learning and teaching.




                                                     103
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



 Annex 4: Improving Student Retention: An Institutional Checklist for
                          Self-Reflection
This checklist was developed by Thomas, Jones, and May (2010, 40) for a joint African-European
project on student access and success. The checklist is based on a literature review of institutional
approaches aimed at improving student retention and reflects the major factors identified by the
authors that contribute to student success.

1. Do we, as an institution—directly and through our partnerships—ensure that students are
sufficiently prepared to make the transition into higher education (HE)?
Issues to review include:
        1.1 Pre-entry information, advice, and guidance (IAG)
        1.2 Pre-entry preparation for HE-level study
        1.3 Induction and transition support
        1.4 Recruitment and admissions processes (including clearing)

2. Is the curriculum designed and delivered to promote the success of all students?
Issues to review include
         2.1 Learning, teaching, and assessment practices
         2.2 Curriculum content, development, and organization
         2.3 Academic skills development
         2.4 Academic support

3. Do the formal and informal extracurricular activities support students and promote the
engagement of all students in the HE experience?
Areas to reflect on include
       3.1 Peer engagement, friendship, support, and learning
       3.2 Access to appropriate learning and social spaces
       3.3 Integration of students living both on and off campus
       3.4 Pastoral and financial support
       3.5 Provision and accreditation of nonacademic student experience to promote
       engagement

4. Is the student learning experience managed and coordinated to promote student success?
Issues to consider include
        4.1 Policy development and integration
        4.2 Use of institutional data to identify and support
        students/modules/courses/departments /faculties
        4.3 Institutional processes and reporting structures
         4.4 Staff engagement
         4.5 Student engagement
         4.6 Evaluation

5. Is the HE system set up to facilitate student retention and success?
Issues to consider include




                                                  104
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


        5.1 Funding and performance review models support institutional flexibility and student
        choice
        5.2 Institutions are able to respond flexibly to the needs of diverse students
        5.3 Students have flexibility and choice, for example, to move in and out of HE and
        between HE providers




                                                     105
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



                 Annex 5: A New Research Agenda in Australia
The Australian Government in 2015 announced a National Innovation and Science Agenda backed
initially by AUD 1.1 billion (US$790 million) over four years, aimed at encouraging ‘smart ideas
that create business growth, local jobs, and global success’, signaling the start of an era of
systematic ongoing—rather than stop-start—funding for science, with a permanent watchdog
established at the heart of government. It will include a flexible funding stream for university
research and a program to support the training of the next generation of researchers and innovators.

Through the National Innovation and Science Agenda, the Government will invest in the following
four priority areas:

       •    Culture and capital, to help businesses embrace risk and incentivize early stage
            investment in startups

       •    Collaboration, to increase the level of engagement between businesses, universities,
            and the research sector to commercialize ideas and solve problems

       •    Talent and skills, to train Australian students for the jobs of the future and attract the
            world’s most innovative talent to Australia

       •    Government, as an exemplar, to lead by example in the way the Government invests
            in and uses technology and data to deliver better quality services

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said: “The government’s National Innovation and Science
Agenda will help to create a modern, dynamic, 21st century economy for Australia.” He said the
opportunities for Australia have never been greater. But Australia could improve in key areas.
“Australia is falling behind on measures of commercialization and collaboration, consistently
ranking last or second last among OECD countries for business-research collaboration. Our
appetite for risk is lower than in comparable countries, which means Australian startups and early
stage businesses often fail to attract capital to grow. And participation in science, math, and
computing at high school is declining.”

A Government statement said while innovation is at the heart of a strong economy it is “not just
about new ideas, products, and business models; innovation is also about creating a culture where
we embrace risk, move quickly to back good ideas, and learn from mistakes.” The National
Innovation and Science Agenda had therefore put forward a package of initiatives in the four key
areas. “We’re backing our entrepreneurs by opening up new sources of finance, embracing risk,
taking on innovative ideas, and making more of our public research. We’re increasing
collaboration between industry and researchers to find solutions to real world problems and to
create jobs and growth. We’re developing and attracting world-class talent for the jobs of the
future.” And the Government will lead by example by “embracing innovation and agility in the
way we do business.” According to the Department of Education and Training, the agenda will
ensure that high-quality research drives innovation “that saves lives, answers social and
environmental imperatives, improves economic productivity and growth, and creates the jobs of
the future.” The agenda includes a number of measures that will be delivered by the Education and
Training portfolio:



                                                  106
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


        •     Ongoing funding for the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy,
              (NCRIS), as part of a broader package of AUD 2.3 billion over ten years in new,
              sustainable funding for national-scale research infrastructure, including the AUD 1.5
              billion for NCRIS

        •     AUD 885 million in 2017 for a new Research Support Program to Australian
              universities as a flexible funding stream to support the costs of research

        •     AUD $948 million in 2017 for a new Research Training Program to support the
              training of the next generation of researchers and innovators

        •     More than AUD 64 million to encourage young Australian students to study science,
              technology, and math subjects at school to embrace the digital age and prepare for the
              jobs of the future.

Source: O’Malley 2015.




                                                     107
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



   Annex 6: Lessons from Singapore’s Experience in Building a Strong
                            Research Base
In interview with the Irish Times in 2015, Professor Seeram Ramakrishna, one of Singapore’s
foremost scientists, shared his thoughts on Singapore’s success. Maintaining a global vision and
putting more money into science are essential for any country that wants to have an international
impact on research and innovation. Any economy could be at risk of missing the boat if it fails to
invest at a higher lever and abandons basic research in favor of research that delivers short-term
returns.

Singapore had a slow build to reach its current research intensity. “We felt we needed to innovate
so we went to the multinationals and asked what they would need, high-quality manpower, access
to international markets, and a good environment to operate, for example power facilities and a
stable financial system.” Singapore then looked to see how it might invest to build its research and
innovation capacity. Higher education was an early target for funding. Through the 1970s, the
country had one university, a second was built in the 1980s and another in the 1990s, and now it
has five, one per 1 million in population.

Internationalization became a key theme. “We took internationalization very seriously, attracting
faculty members from abroad, international students and research partnerships with universities
and industries outside Singapore. We have been pursuing this for the past 10 years.”

“We also kept our eye on global excellence from the start. We think we have to do things in a
global way, meaning global benchmarks and global standards. And we invested quite a bit in this.
Typically, we are investing 2.7 percent to 3 percent of GDP in research and that translates into a
high research intensity.” Funding poured into PhD and graduate education.

The Government also prioritized research, taking a whole-of-government approach with
management of the national research effort set at prime minister level. “The prime minister’s office
chairs the meetings at cabinet looking at all aspects of science and innovation. The idea of reducing
research investment was never considered. Singapore is primarily an export economy. The view
is you have to look at the long term. You have to invest more to prepare for the future,” says
Professor Ramakrishna. The national policy protects blue skies research but also supports applied
and orientated research, he says. “We provide opportunities for both. It comes down to money but
you need a broad approach.”

Source: http://www.irishtimes.com/business/lessons-for-state-in-singapore-s-scientific-research-
investment-1.2120342




                                                  108
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



                        Annex 7: Innovation Vouchers for SMEs
A few OECD countries (for example, the Netherlands, Ireland, and the United Kingdom, among
others) have used innovation vouchers as an instrument to stimulate collaboration between small
and medium firms and universities. Innovation vouchers are small lines of credit provided by the
Government to SMEs to purchase services from knowledge and technology providers with a view
to introducing innovations (new products, processes, or services) in their business operations. The
amount of these vouchers is usually around €10,000.

SMEs tend to have limited exposure to universities and research organizations as they may see
such institutions as irrelevant to their business activities or be unwilling to invest in the costs
involved in identifying and contracting relevant providers. Innovation vouchers are helpful to
provide SMEs with a platform for solving minor technological problems or scoping out larger
technological issues. They can also serve the wider innovation strategy in which voucher recipients
can reach further stages of business innovation. Examples include collaborative research programs,
incentives for internal R&D, clusters and networks for innovation, and so on.

While they differ from country to country, voucher schemes have, in general, the following
characteristics: (a) widespread advertising in the press and through the Internet, (b) simple
electronic application, (c) lottery system to determine the recipients of vouchers when the number
of applicants greatly exceeds the funding available, (d) a time limit of 6–12 months to use the
voucher, and (e) limited reporting requirements by the firm and the knowledge provider, taking
into account that innovation vouchers offer small amounts of funding.

The evaluation results of these schemes have identified a number of success factors such as (a)
simple administration and implementation procedures, (b) active involvement of universities and
research organizations in the design of the scheme, (c) simple applications and selection
procedures, and (d) dedicated staff to manage the program and link the voucher scheme with
innovation policies at the national and local levels.

The experience has also demonstrated the following risks: (a) the vouchers strategy only facilitates
one-off, subsidized, industry-university cooperation (short-term effects), which is often not
enough to transform the long-term attitude of SMEs toward R&D and innovation, (b) when the
scheme is restricted to knowledge institutions from the same country or region as the firm, this can
limit the search patterns of SMEs and their ability to find an effective solution to their technological
problems.

Source: http://www.oecd.org/innovation/policyplatform/48135973.pdf.




                                                     109
                 Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



Annex 8: Matrix of Knowledge- and Technology-Transfer Mechanisms
                                                Role of National      Role of Local
        University-Industry Links                                                            Comments
                                                 Government            Authorities

Public space function                                                                    • With education
 • Contacts and networking                                                                 and training, this
                                               • Develop and fund programs to create       function is seen
 • Conferences, fairs, and forums
                                                 and support sectoral clusters and         by firms as the
 • Publications and dissemination of
                                                 networks                                  most important
   findings
                                                                                           contribution of
 • Alumni associations                                                                     universities
Human capital formation                        • Priority setting
• Student participation in firm R&D              and incentives for
  (internships and co-op programs)               establishment of
                                                 new programs
• Employment of first-level and master’s
                                                 (emerging and
  graduates
                                                 interdisciplinary    • Funding and
• Employment of postdoctoral graduates
  in R&D
                                                 fields)                tax incentives   • Primary role of
                                               • Targeted               to facilitate      universities in
• Participation of industry practitioners in
                                                 scholarships           insertion of       support of
  teaching and curriculum development
                                               • Mobility               PhD.               innovation
• Joint diploma thesis or PhDs
                                                 scholarships           graduates
• University researcher participation in
                                               • Employment
  firm
                                                 flexibility
• Participation of firm employees in             (sabbaticals,
  university training course (on-campus or       leave without
  on-site)                                       pay)
Research                                                              • Funding
 • Research contracts                          • Funding              • attracting       • Increased returns
 • Joint R&D projects                            (direct/matching)      ‘anchor            at the intersection
 • Research consortia                          • Tax incentives         tenants’           of traditional
 • Industry researchers seconded to            • Assessment of        • Helping            disciplines
   university labs                               research capacity      cluster
                                                 of universities        formation
Problem-solving and consulting                 • Criteria for         • Targeted
 • Consulting contracts                          evaluating the         support for
 • Testing, standards, prototypes, and           performance of         SMEs
   proof of concept designs                      researchers          • Intermediary
                                                                        agencies
Technical infrastructure
 • Use of university labs                                                                • Need for clear
                                                                      • Funding
                                                                                           revenue-sharing
 • Common lab                                                         • serviced land
                                               • Funding                                   arrangements
 • Common use of machines (on campus                                    and
                                                                                           within
   or in firm)                                                          infrastructure
                                                                                           universities
 • Science parks
                                               • Intellectual                            • More likely to
Knowledge commercialization                      Property Right                            happen in
 • Licensing of university-held patents          legal framework      • Funding            biotechnology
 • Incubators                                  • Financial            • Technical          and biomedical
 • Start-ups                                     autonomy of            assistance         sciences, also
 • Spinoffs                                      public                                    nanotechnology,
                                                 universities                              new materials,




                                                     110
Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note


                                                                                            and information
                                                                                            technology
Source: Elaborated by Salmi for this report, with some material from Yusuf and Nabeshima (2007) and Agrawal and
Cockburn (2002).




                                                     111
                Improving the Performance of Ethiopian Universities in Science and Technology: A Policy Note



              Annex 9: Intellectual Capital Statements in Austria
ICS, which are widely used in Austria, allow for incorporating intangible assets into internal
reporting and management procedures. The basic idea behind an ICS is to represent the value of
institutions’ intangible assets such as knowledge and competences and thereby complement
financial reporting procedures. One model of ICS has been developed by the Austrian Research
Center. In this model, intellectual capital is captured through quantitative and qualitative measures
and a narrative part within the ICS.

Taking the institution’s overarching vision as a starting point, knowledge objectives and related
measures (covering intellectual capital, results, and impact) are derived. The ICS developed this
way can then be used to provide external stakeholders with knowledge on the institution and
support internal management processes. In Austria, ICS have been made part of the yearly
reporting duties of public HEIs to the Ministry for Education, Science, and Culture.

Source: Pircher and Pausits 2011.




                                                  112
