THE ART OF DESIGNING
AND IMPLEMENTING
STUDY TOURS
A Guide Based on
The Art of Knowledge Exchange Methodology

Shobha Kumar & Ryan Watkins
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not
necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors,
or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in
this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, D.C.
20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
THE ART OF DESIGNING
AND IMPLEMENTING
STUDY TOURS
A Guide Based on
The Art of Knowledge Exchange Methodology

Shobha Kumar & Ryan Watkins
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Art of Designing and Implementing Study Tours was a team effort. The preparation
of the guidebook was led by Shobha Kumar, Senior Knowledge and Learning Specialist,
The World Bank Group. Ryan Watkins and Shobha Kumar served as the lead writers.
Thanks and deep appreciation go to Yianna Vovides who provided valuable inputs to the
overall content and design. Greg Johannesen provided his graphic design expertise, and
Sheldon Lippman served as copy-editor.

This guidebook is based on the foundation of the World Bank Group’s flagship and widely
adopted and adapted publication, The Art of Knowledge Exchange: A Results-Focused
Planning Guide for Development Practitioners. Shobha Kumar also led the production
of that guidebook with a core team of contributors which included Aaron Leonard, Ryan
Watkins, Yianna Vovides, and Brigitte Kerby.

The team is grateful for contributions to good practice stories and the toolbox from
Vandana Bhatnagar, Yianna Vovides, Taibou Maiga, Enrique Pantoja, Pyush Dogra,
Nga Nguyet Nguyen, Camilo Villa, Richard Crabbe and Robert Schreiber.

A special thank you goes to Bhavna Bhatia, Pronita Chakrabarty Agrawal, Mathews
Mullackal, Phil Karp, Camilo Villa, Jenny Gold, Robin Van Kippersluis and Mariappa
Kullappa for their time, thoughtful inspiration, and commentary. The guidebook is richer
because of their input.

Deep appreciation goes to Roby Senderowitsch and Edward Olowo-Okere with whose
vision and leadership the guidebook was initiated and launched.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction to the Art of Designing and Implementing Study Tours . . . . . . . . I

What is a Study Tour and Why Use One?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  II

Study Tour in Action: India, Algeria, and Spain Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . III

Step 1: Anchor the Study Tour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
  1.1 Understand the development priorities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
      Define the challenge(s) the Study Tour will help resolve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
  1.2 
      Consider what will change as a result of the Study Tour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
  1.3 

Study Tour in Action: Niger, Kenya, and Ethiopia Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

Step 2: Define the Study Tour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
  2.1 Identify knowledge-seeking participants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
  2.2 Determine intermediate outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
  2.3 Identify the most appropriate knowledge providers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
  2.4 Prepare participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
  2.5 Organize a design and delivery team . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

Study Tour in Action: Honduras and Columbia Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

Step 3: Design the Study Tour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
  3.1 Design for intermediate outcomes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
  3.2 Support the selection of knowledge-seeking participants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
      Select the blend and sequence of activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
  3.3 
  3.4 Design each Study Tour activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
  3.5 Plan the logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20

Study Tour in Action: India and Mexico Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22

Step 4: Implement the Study Tour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
      Guide participants along their learning journey. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
  4.1 
      Help participants achieve learning outcomes and
  4.2 
      support their action plans. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
      Document implementation and track results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
  4.3 

Study Tour in Action: Vietnam, Bulgaria, Latvia,
and Turkey Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26

Step 5: Evaluate the Study Tour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
  5.1 Measure the success of Study Tour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
  5.2 Report and share results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31

Study Tour Toolbox: Activity Descriptions and Tips from the Field . . . . . . . . 34

Study Tour Toolbox: Samples & Checklists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
INTRODUCTION TO THE ART OF DESIGNING
AND IMPLEMENTING STUDY TOURS
Designing and implementing Study Tours that get results can be a big undertaking.
This Guide, The Art of Designing and Implementing Study Tours, aims to take out the
guesswork by breaking down the process into simple steps. The Study Tour Guide is
written specifically for those who broker or coordinate or facilitate Study Tours between
knowledge seekers and knowledge providers. A Study Tour is a learning journey for
both the knowledge providers and seekers as it truly taps into the power and potential of
peer-to-peer learning. When designing a Study Tour, it is useful to consider the different
needs and characteristics of these two groups separately.

Based on the World Bank Group’s flagship publication, The Art of Knowledge Ex-
change: A Results-Focused Planning Guide for Development Practitioners, this Study
Tour Guide benefits greatly from the tried and tested roadmap and results-focused
methodology of The Art of Knowledge Exchange. It is an effort to delve deeper into one
of the knowledge exchange instruments from the Art of Knowledge Exchange Toolbox,
and provide detailed guidance on how to design and implement Study Tours for higher
development impact.

This Guide uses a primary case study, Study Tour in Action, to illustrate the five steps in
The Art of Knowledge Exchange methodology. These five steps — Anchor, Define, De-
sign, Implement, and Evaluate — provide the roadmap for effective Study Tours that get
results. The Guide also highlights four additional examples to illustrate how Study Tours
have supported development outcomes when systematically designed and integrated
as a part of a larger change process.




                                                                                              I
     What is a Study Tour and Why Use One?
     A visit or series of visits — learning journey(s) — to one or more countries or sites by an
     individual or group with a specific-learning goal in mind; participants learn firsthand from
     the experience of their peers how a challenge was solved or solution implemented.

     Study Tours are best used for…
       »» Raising awareness of what is possible, gaining new knowledge, and learning different
          ways of doing things from others who have gone through or are going through
          similar challenges.
       »» Forging networks and partnerships with people working in similar areas.
       »» Building consensus and developing shared understanding and motivation for
          collaborative action among different stakeholder groups.
       »» Customizing, replicating, and scaling up tried and tested development solutions.

     What is needed to get results from a Study Tour?
     Study Tours that get results require close attention to intentional design of learning and
     experience sharing beyond the technical content. The key is to allocate adequate time
     and resources, have a strong design and delivery team, and give adequate attention to
     design and implementation — from beginning to end — with a focus on the results you
     want to accomplish from the Study Tour.

     Who should be involved in a Study Tour?
     Study tours are a team effort and require coordination with several partners and
     stakeholders:
        »» Knowledge seekers who learn from others and share their experiences.
        »» Knowledge providers who share their experiences and learn from others.
           Knowledge provider also refers to, and includes, the country sharing its knowledge
           and experience.
        »» Host institutions that share their organizational knowledge and experiences.
        »» Brokers who bring knowledge seekers and providers together.
        »» Local delivery partners who make sure that implementation of the Study Tour
           moves forward efficiently.

II
                                                  STEP 1: ANCHOR THE STUDY TOUR




STUDY TOUR IN ACTION:
INDIA LEARNS ABOUT PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNER-
SHIP OPTIONS FROM ALGERIA AND SPAIN
The Challenge. The Government of Karnataka, a southern state in
India, has undertaken significant efforts to improve urban water
and sanitation service levels for its population of more than 23
million living in urban centers (38 percent of the state’s popula-
tion). These efforts included the World Bank-supported Karnataka
Urban Water Sector Improvement Project. This water project
lacked clarity and consensus on suitable models for engaging the “We need to see and under-
private sector. There was also a lack of trust and understanding   stand the range of PPP
between public and private sectors which proved to be an           options  to determine what
impediment to successful public–private partnerships (PPP).        would  work  best in the
                                                                   Indian context.” Study Tour
The Solution. To address these challenges, as part of the ongoing participant.
Karnataka Urban Water Supply Modernization Project, officials of
the Karnataka Government engaged in discussions with the World “We were able to meet and
Bank Global Water Practice to identify other countries             interview all cadres of staff
implementing alternate PPP models to improve urban water           within the utility in Algeria
asset management and service delivery. Algeria and Spain           to get candid feedback
offered a range of successful examples.                            from them about what they
The World Bank funded a knowledge exchange to increase                  felt about the change pro-
awareness and understanding of how innovative PPP options are           cess and their roles before
arranged and executed. The exchange offered Karnataka an                and after the change.”
opportunity to explore a range of different options as a basis          Study Tour participant.
for decision-making.
                                                                        “This knowledge exchange
A Study Tour was arranged. An Indian delegation had the oppor-           was a great opportunity to
tunity to visit project sites in Algeria and Spain. The delegation       help participants consider
included key policy-makers, senior managers, and technical staff         innovations outside the nor-
of water utilities; senior officers from the Ministry of Urban Devel-    mal way of doing business.
opment and Planning Commission and from the Department of                It was also very useful to
Economic Affairs; and representatives from the Government of             explore many of the trust
Karnataka.                                                               issues currently existing be-
During the StudyTour, the participants had a valuable opportunity        tween the public and private
to share the India water supply experience and to interview key          sectors and which needed to
stakeholders in Algeria and Spain’s water projects.                      be addressed as a priority
                                                                         within the India context.”
Two post-tour workshops, one at national level and another at            Study Tour team leader.
state level, were organized in India. Experiences from Algeria and
Spain were shared with a broader stakeholder group. The core
stakeholder group reached a consensus on specific elements from
the Algeria and Spain PPP models could best be adopted or
adapted for the India context.

The Result. Informed by the exchange, new service delivery
arrangements have been incorporated in the design of the
Karnataka project to enable 24/7 water supply with private
sector participation.

Team Leader. Vandana Bhatnagar, Senior Institutional
Development Specialist, The World Bank Group.
                                                                                            III
                                                                                        STEP

                                                                                            1

ANCHOR THE
STUDY TOUR
Before designing a Study Tour, you should work with clients to…
  üü Understand the broader development priorities which the Study
     Tour will support/contribute to,
  üü Define the challenge(s) that the Study Tour will help resolve,
  üü Consider what will change as a result of the Study Tour.

Study Tours and other types of knowledge exchanges can be used to a powerful effect as
part of a larger change process. At its best, a Study Tour generates relevant knowledge
and timely insights about what is possible. It can also help overcome obstacles stemming
from either lack of awareness or lack of consensus, support collaborations, and build
strong networks among partners. But for a Study Tour to work well, it should be anchored
in the larger development context and driven by stakeholder priorities.

The success of a Study Tour depends on having the right people involved,
knowing what knowledge seekers need to learn and do in order to lead or
influence change, and giving support through a systematically designed
series of activities that help these participants achieve their learning out-   TIPS FROM THE FIELD
comes. Another critical contributor to success is close collaboration with      “Study tours often address
knowledge providers to ensure that the activities included in the Study          a gap in an operation,
Tour, along with materials and messaging, address the intended goals and         where knowledge is
objectives (results).                                                            weak or something is not
                                                                                 working to fully realize
                                                                                 planned outcomes.”




                                                                                                1
STEP 1: ANCHOR THE STUDY TOUR



    STEP 1.1 UNDERSTAND THE DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
    Working closely with clients, sponsors, partners, and stakeholders, you should define the
    development objective for the Study Tour within the context of the overarching develop-
    ment priorities. Typically, priorities are at the institutional, community, or country level; the
    Study Tour should play a catalytic role in moving stakeholders closer to achieving their
    development priorities.

        STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 1.1
                                           — Development priority
        India, Algeria, and Spain exchange ­
        The development priority in Karnataka, India, was to ensure continuous 24/7
        water supply to its growing urban centers.


    STEP 1.2 DEFINE THE CHALLENGE(S) THE STUDY TOUR WILL
    HELP RESOLVE
    You can use Study Tours to address specific challenges or problems being faced by your
    client or participants to achieve their development priorities. Study Tours can be a strate-
    gic part of a longer-term program (for example, a policy-focused tour in year one, fol-
    lowed by technical tours in years two and three) or can be used as a just-in-time activity
    during project implementation (for example, visiting a neighboring country to learn how
    to implement imminent reforms).

    In all cases, you will want to work with your partners and stakeholders to clearly identify
    what challenges the Study Tour should help resolve. When the challenges are clearly de-
    fined, they help shape the scale and scope of your Study Tour(s).

    COMMON CHALLENGES
    Weak environment for change
     »» Stakeholders do not all agree on the challenge or on possible solutions; there is
        lack of consensus on the development priority among key stakeholders.
     »» Limited or no mechanism exists for stakeholders to voice their opinions.
     »» Information is either not accessible to, or not shared with, stakeholders.
     »» Stakeholders are skeptical about whether a particular solution will really work and
        whether it will have the intended impact.
    Inefficient policy instruments
       »» Ineffective policies fail to address ”real world” challenges.
       »» Institutions have insufficient technical capacity to implement a policy or ensure
          compliance.
       »» Weak administrative rules, laws, and regulations hinder implementation of policy
          solutions.
    Ineffective organizational arrangements
       »» Institutions struggle to successfully implement policy changes or reforms.
       »» Stakeholders are focused on “ideal solutions” rather than practical and relevant
          solutions that will work in their context.
       »» The “same old” solutions are not working. Innovation is required to get improved
          results. Stakeholders are struggling to think ”outside of the box” when trying to
          solve complex challenges.
       »» Institutions do not have the financing, staffing, incentives, and other resources to
          address the development priorities.

    Work with your clients and other stakeholders to identify the priority challenges that the
    Study Tour will address. What has to change in order to get results?



2
                                                     STEP 1: ANCHOR THE STUDY TOUR



    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 1.2
    India, Algeria, and Spain exchange sought to address two key challenges:
    Weak environment for change. Lack of consensus on models for effective
    engagement of the private sector, as well as lack of trust between public and
    private actors, to deliver on service delivery goals in the water supply sector.
    Ineffective organizational arrangements. Insufficient technical knowledge to
    be able to manage and maintain effective public–private partnerships.

You can use Study Tours for different outcomes throughout the lifecycle of a project:
  »» At the identification stage, it can build awareness of the range of possibilities and
     new directions, and increase the confidence of stakeholders to initiate practical
     changes and reforms.
  »» At the design stage, it can form the basis of customizing development solutions that
     have been tried and tested elsewhere; many lessons come from the experiences of
     others who have faced and overcome similar challenges.
  »» During implementation, it can build understanding and know-how on improving sys-
     tems and processes and help overcome implementation bottlenecks; for example:
      ›› Strengthening relations among agencies working together,
      ›› Accelerating decisions on a difficult project component,
      ›› Conducting a diagnostic or preparing a plan for a component,
      ›› Building capacity for a particular component.
  »» As part of evaluation, it can help to document what worked and why.

    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 1.2
    India, Algeria, and Spain exchange sought to address two key challenges:

     Institutional challenge                   Change objective

     Lack of consensus, trust, and under-       »» Understand different models for
     standing between public and private           public–private partnerships,
     sector officials.                          »» Increase trust and create stronger
                                                   relationships between public and
                                                   private sector officials.
     Insufficient technical knowledge           »» To set realistic performance
     in order to manage and maintain               standards for public–private
     effective public–private partnerships.        partnerships.


STEP 1.3 CONSIDER WHAT WILL CHANGE AS A RESULT OF THE
STUDY TOUR
You should work with your counterparts and stakeholders to answer the questions,
How will we know when we have achieved the desired change? What will be different?
The answers will shape the desired changes and ensure that the Study Tour targets
measurable results.

The desired changes resulting from the Study Tour should be:
  »» Relevant to your clients and other stakeholders;
  »» Timely, in that stakeholders are ready to make changes;
  »» Consistent with other changes or activities they are implementing;
  »» A good match with their social norms and values.




                                                                                             3
    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION:
    NIGER, KENYA, AND
    ETHIOPIA EXCHANGE
    SANITATION AND THE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS:
    DEFINING ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
    The Challenge. Niger, one of the world’s poorest countries, continues to face many
    challenges in providing access to sanitation, particularly in rural areas. With only 7
    percent of the population having any type of sanitation, Niger has the highest rates
    of open defecation globally. The Government, with support of its development
    partners, has implemented disparate and isolated actions that have been based on
    sparse or stand-alone intervention strategies and methodologies. Not seeing the
    desired results, the Government of Niger identified three key challenges:
      »» Lack of synergy among different actors due to fragmentation of roles
         within several line ministries;
      »» Ineffective guidance to policymakers to ensure inclusion of sanitation
         sector among government priorities; and
      »» Lack of a unified framework for action in the area of hygiene and sanitation.

    The Solution. The Government of Niger requested support from the World Bank’s
    Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) to learn from the experience of others who
    have solved similar challenges. The WSP identified Kenya and Ethiopia as countries
    that have achieved significant social indicators on access to hygiene and sanitation
    services. Working with a facilitator from WSP in Niger, the principal stakeholders
    from the three countries held initial discussions by videoconferencing through
    which they agreed on the take-away objectives of the knowledge exchange: Learn
    about approaches to (a) setting up transformative policy and legislation, (b) formal-
    izing institutional arrangements for strengthened delivery, and (c) creating behav-
    ioral change among citizens with the involvement of the private sector.

    Niger sent a multi-disciplinary delegation on a Study Tour to Kenya and Ethiopia to
    address the issue of fragmentation among responsible ministries and departments.
    The Study Tour participants included representatives from the Ministry of Water and
    Sanitation; Ministry of Public Health; Ministry of Primary Education, Literacy, Promo-
    tion of National Languages, and Civic Education; Ministry of Urban Development
    and Housing; and Association of Niger’s Municipalities. A journalist from the Jour-
    nalists Network for Water and Sanitation accompanied the delegation in order to
    document the Study Tour and write about it in the national press to keep the team
    accountable to commitments made on the Study Tour.

    The Results. Interaction continues with private sector players in Kenya to explore
    how to transport products into Niger or to set up a manufacturing plant in the West
    Africa region. For starters, products are now being imported from Kenya. The Gov-
    ernment of Niger has developed an action plan to accelerate the implementation of
    an operational strategy for sanitation based on the good practice approaches shared
    by Kenya.

    Team Leader: Taibou Adamou Maiga, Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist,
    The World Bank Group.



4
                                                                                   STEP

                                                                                          2

DEFINE THE
STUDY TOUR
In Step 1, you anchored the Study Tour by…
 üü Linking the Study Tour to development priorities of your stakeholders,
 üü Defining challenges that the Study Tour will address,
 üü Considering what will change as a result of the Study Tour.

In Step 2, you will…
  »» Identify groups of people needed to address the challenge and bring
     about the desired change,
  »» Identify intermediate outcomes for the Study Tour,
  »» Identify the most appropriate knowledge providers,
  »» Prepare participants,
  »» Organize the design and delivery team.

STEP 2.1 IDENTIFY KNOWLEDGE-SEEKING PARTICIPANTS
The success of a Study Tour depends upon having the right people involved. Talk to your
clients about possible groups of people who are in a position to make change happen.




                                                                                          5
STEP 2: DEFINE THE STUDY TOUR



    Change agents can belong to different stakeholder groups (government, civil society,
    private sector, academia). What they should have in common is the ability to lead, influ-
    ence, convene, or act on the challenges to achieving the priority development goal(s):
    Who will Lead?
      Who will champion the cause and make the envisioned changes happen?
    Who will Influence?
      Who are opinion leaders on the topic?
      Who has a broad professional network across the various stakeholders?
    Who will Convene?
      Who has the capacity to bring people together to discuss the topic?
    Who will Act?
      Who is in a position to apply what they learn?
      And will this help realize the desired change?

    The knowledge seekers should be selected based on the role they can play in achieving
    the desired changes. Sometimes the objectives may require focusing on technical staff or
    a mix of stakeholders, while at other times senior policy-makers may be your target audi-
    ence if the enabling environment needs to be influenced.
    Selecting participants is a juggling act. The list of knowledge exchange participants will
    often change again and again as your planning progresses. This is a natural part of the
    process so don’t get discouraged. Tailoring the exchange to the capacity needs of the
    participants is what is most important. At the same time, be careful not to lose sight of the
    change objective. It helps to have the knowledge-seeking participants complete the Pre-
    Study Tour Survey (Toolbox Sample page 51) to get a quick grasp of their learning objec-
    tives and the challenges they need to address.
    For more details see page 16 of the Art of Knowledge Exchange
    (http://hdl.handle.net/10986/17540).

        STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 2.1
        India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Knowledge-seeking participant profiles
           »» Senior officers from the Ministry of Urban Development and Planning
              Commission who have helped develop PPP programs in other states of India;
           »» Officers from the Department of Economic Affairs who guide PPP programs;
           »» Representatives from the Government of Karnataka who are involved in
              the scale-up of pilot 24/7 water projects in the three cities of Belgaum,
              Hubli-Dharwad, and Gulbarga;
           »» Representatives from the private sector.


    STEP 2.2 DETERMINE INTERMEDIATE OUTCOMES
    Intermediate outcomes are what you would most commonly expect to see, measure,
    and report after a Study Tour. They reflect what participants want to learn. Determine
    which intermediate outcomes would best assist your change agents in resolving the
    problem and accomplishing the development goal.
    It is helpful to identify concrete results indicators related to each selected intermediate
    outcome as these can be used as evidence to demonstrate achievement of results.
    The following table exemplifies intermediate outcomes and types of progress that can be
    made towards the outcomes. You can develop results indicators based on the types of
    progress the Study Tour seeks to generate.




6
                                                        STEP 2: DEFINE THE STUDY TOUR




                                              TYPE OF PROGRESS TOWARDS
INTERMEDIATE OUTCOME
                                              THE OUTCOMES
                                              Raised awareness, improved motivation/
New knowledge. A person is more likely
                                              attitude, greater confidence, increased
to act because of changed attitude,
                                              understanding, and acquisition of new
improved understanding, or learning.
                                              knowledge.
Enhanced skills. A person is more capable
of acting because of what they learned or Application of knowledge.
how they applied new knowledge or skills.
Improved consensus. A group with a
                                              Improved communication, stronger coor-
common interest or agenda is more likely
                                              dination, increased cohesion, stronger
or able to act because of new knowledge,
                                              agreement, and increased commitment
changed attitudes, shared understanding,
                                              to the group or agenda.
and improved collaboration.
Enhanced connectivity. A group is more        Increased membership, increased network
likely or able to act because of new or       density, increased sense of belonging,
improved relationships, greater affinity,     greater agreement and trust, faster com-
improved trust, and reduced isolation.        munications, and fewer isolated members.
New and improved actions. A person or
                                              Preparation for action, change in routine
group initiates or modifies its activity
                                              or working in new ways, and maintenance
because of what was learned, practiced,
                                              of change.
or realized.
For more details on results, including how to develop indicators of success, see pages
20-24 of the Art of Knowledge Exchange (http://hdl.handle.net/10986/17540).

    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 2.2
    India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Intermediate outcomes
     New knowledge. The Indian delegation will have an increased understanding
     of the value of PPP models established in Algiers, Algeria; and Alicante, Spain,
     and their application in the Indian context.
     Improved consensus. The Indian delegation will have greater agreement on
     which alternative PPP models should be considered for the water sector in
     Karnataka, India.


STEP 2.3 IDENTIFY THE MOST APPROPRIATE KNOWLEDGE PROVIDERS
Knowledge being shared during a Study Tour must match the learning needs of those
participating in the Study Tour. In your role as a broker or coordinator, you may be able to
connect your clients to the relevant knowledge and experience based on your own con-
nections and knowledge, or you may have to collaborate with others to find and share the
most transferable and useful knowledge.




                                                                                               7
STEP 2: DEFINE THE STUDY TOUR



    When selecting knowledge providers, consider whether their experience
    includes the following:
      »» Demonstrated success in effectively addressing similar develop-
         ment challenges;
      »» Relevant experience in providing this knowledge to people from          TIPS FROM THE FIELD
         different places, cultures, and learning backgrounds;                   “All information that
      »» Familiarity with the cultural and historical contexts of participant     could be compiled and
         groups;                                                                  delivered through print-
      »» Resources to plan and implement the knowledge exchange in the            ed materials or videos
         proposed timeframe;                                                      or any other multimedia
      »» Readiness to deliver, shown by confirmed commitment and under-           tools should be delivered
         standing of responsibilities;                                            before, during or after
      »» Prior relationship with the knowledge-receiving institutions,            the visit. This information
         groups, or individuals;                                                  should NOT be given
      »» Understanding of potential logistical complications and risks such       as a presentation by the
         as language issues or travel challenges.                                 hosts. The visit would
                                                                                  be used to enhance the
    Choose knowledge providers with diverse perspectives and                      experience and not to
    experiences
                                                                                  transfer information.”
    Try to find a good mix of knowledge providers who can share different
    perspectives on the issue. Consider knowledge providers from other
    regions; go to where the most relevant and applicable knowledge can be found.
    Remember knowledge flows in many directions
    Knowledge flows in many directions between receivers, providers, and other stakeholders.
    Take the opportunity to explain that the knowledge provider can equally learn from the
    knowledge seekers. Each group will learn from each other’s experience, and the Study
    Tour will assist each group in achieving their goals.
    Reach out early to providers
    Contact potential knowledge providers early in the process. Once they agree to partici-
    pate, you should share background information on the knowledge-seeking participants
    and what outcomes they are looking to achieve.

        STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 2.3
        India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Knowledge providers
           »» Algeria’s SEAAL (Algiers Water and Sanitation Company), including senior man-
              agement, operating staff field functionaries, and trade union representatives;
           »» Algeria’s ministry counterparts and government agencies;
           »» Spain’s AEAS (Spanish Association of Water Service Operators);
           »» Aguas Alicante (Water Utilities of Alicante) and Canal de Isabel II (Madrid),
              including senior executives and practitioners at operational facilities;
           »» Local government officials from Algeria and Spain who were selected for
              having implemented a range of successful public-private partnerships in their
              cities to improve urban water asset management and service delivery.

    STEP 2.4 PREPARE PARTICIPANTS
    Detailed preparation of both the knowledge providers and seekers is an essential
    prerequisite for a successful Study Tour.

    Preparing the knowledge providers
    The knowledge and experience providers must be prepared ahead of time. An otherwise
    well-designed Study Tour can end up being ineffective if the content is not aligned to the
    learning priorities of the knowledge seekers or is not well presented and organized.




8
                                                                         STEP 2: DEFINE THE STUDY TOUR



                While designing the Study Tour, you should keep the providers informed. With better
                understanding of the challenges and opportunities for the seekers and the intended out-
                comes, the providers can better customize the learning experience. And ask the providers
                as well about their desired outcomes from hosting the Study Tour. As already stated,
                providers will find many opportunities to learn from the knowledge seekers.

                You can also initiate any of the following ideas for preparing the knowledge provider for the
                Study Tour:
                   »» Seek input from knowledge providers on the Pre-Study Tour
                      Survey questions (see Toolbox page 51). They may want to include
                      some specific questions in the survey to customize the learning experience.
                   »» Share the Knowledge Providers Checklist (see Toolbox page 62) with providers early
                      in the planning process.
                   »» When feasible, use videoconferencing to begin building relationships with the knowl-
                      edge seekers and knowledge providers before the Study Tour.
                   »» Contact the providers well ahead of the Study Tour to review the itinerary and
                      materials, as well as the knowledge they will be sharing.

                Invest the time to do a pre-visit to the field sites along with the knowledge provider
                to customize the learning experience for the knowledge seekers. Discuss engaging and
                interactive ways for sharing experience.
                   »» Encourage knowledge providers to include practical information on how knowledge
                      seekers can apply the lessons they are sharing, what pitfalls to avoid, and what they
                      wish they had known earlier.
                   »» If possible, help providers prepare their presentations and documentation for sharing.
                   »» Discuss a plan to capture the knowledge-sharing activities.

                                A robust preparation phase will also help knowledge providers formulate
                                ideas for what they can learn from other Study Tour participants.

TIPS FROM THE FIELD             Preparing the knowledge seekers
                                Preparing knowledge seekers for the Study Tour should begin on the day
“Plan your Study Tour in-
                                they are selected. Understanding what they hope to learn and how they
 depth, not only in terms
                                will later use that knowledge will help you design an effective Study Tour
 of venue and logistics but
                                that gets results. All effort should be made to get seekers’ early input into
 also in terms of overall se-
                                the design of the Study Tour:
 quencing of activities and
                                  »» Email a Pre-Study Tour Survey to the participants as part of the design
 participant engagement
                                      process (see Toolbox Samples, page 51).
 before the actual visit.”
                                  »» Share the Checklist for Knowledge Seeker (see Toolbox Checklists,
“Select participants                  page 61) with knowledge-seeking participants a few weeks before the
 who will be able to                  Study Tour.
 apply what they learn
                                Operating environment of the providers and seekers
 in practical ways.”
                                In addition to learning from the provider’s experiences, it is critical to be
“Prepare knowledge              keenly aware of their operating environment. Work with providers to un-
 providers with the infor-      derstand:
 mation they require to            »» What can they learn from participants from other regions or countries?
 make the learning rele-           »» How is their situation similar to and different from the situations of
 vant to the participants.”           visiting participants?
                                   »» What, if any, constraints might exist in sharing information?

                Knowledge seekers in Study Tours often come from more than one institution or from dif-
                ferent departments of the same institution. These participants also have operating envi-
                ronments that shape their perspectives and their ability to bring about
                desired changes after the Study Tour. Work with the participants to understand:
                   »» How their organization does, or does not, support their work?
                   »» What is their mandate for bringing about change?
                   »» What constraints are present in their context?

                                                                                                                9
STEP 2: DEFINE THE STUDY TOUR



     STEP 2.5 ORGANIZE A DESIGN AND DELIVERY TEAM
     Since the Study Tour is typically a complex event to coordinate, you should organize a de-
     sign and delivery team to share in the responsibilities to the extent that your budget allows.
      Role of team members         Typical responsibilities for design and delivery

      Project leader               »» Plan, design, and deliver the knowledge exchange;
                                   »» Select or guide in selecting knowledge seekers and
                                      knowledge providers;
                                   »» Select, organize, and manage the design and delivery
                                      team;
                                   »» Prepare terms of reference for all team members;
                                   »» Engage participants, build relationships, guide their
                                      learning journey, and inspire them to act on lessons
                                      learned;
                                   »» Monitor and report results to different stakeholders.
      (Local) Delivery partner(s) »» Provide logistics and administrative support;
                                  »» Identify key local contacts and resource individuals;
                                  »» Support identification of appropriate target audiences;
                                  »» Prepare knowledge providers;
                                  »» Facilitate of logistics;
                                  »» Organize for translation of documents;
                                  »» Capture the learning journey and results for reporting.
      Professional facilitator     »» Develop a clear understanding of participant profiles,
                                      their goals, roles, and challenges;
                                   »» Engage and guide participants toward targeted learning
                                      outcomes;
                                   »» Facilitate discussions, knowledge and experience sharing,
                                      and create a dynamic learning and knowledge-sharing
                                      environment;
                                   »» Handle conflict management and resolution;
                                   »» Identify emerging learning needs;
                                   »» Facilitate exchange and agenda adaptation, as needed,
                                      working in close collaboration with team leader and
                                      instructional designer.
      Instructional designer       »» Support the planning, design, and delivery of the Study
                                      Tour, working in close collaboration with the team leader;
                                   »» Align the design and delivery with the results sought
                                      from the Study Tour;
                                   »» Plan for and support the preparation of knowledge seekers;
                                   »» Plan for and support the preparation of knowledge
                                      providers;
                                   »» Use participatory planning and design approaches;
                                   »» Facilitate instrument and activity selection, sequencing,
                                      and detailed design of the agenda with an objective to
                                      create a dynamic and engaging environment where
                                      learning and knowledge sharing can thrive.
      Communications               »» Pull together a communication plan for Study Tour in
      coordinator                     close collaboration with the team leader;
                                   »» Assure that communication plan includes strategies for
                                      communicating with all participants, partners, stakehold-
                                      ers, and media before, during, and after the exchange.



10
                                                 STEP 2: DEFINE THE STUDY TOUR



STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 2.5
India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Design and delivery team
  »» Task team leader,
  »» Project task team leader and co-task team leader,
  »» Local delivery partners in Algeria and Spain,
  »» Professional facilitator/synthesizer,
  »» Administrative coordinator.




                                                                             11
     STUDY TOUR IN ACTION:
     HONDURAS AND
     COLUMBIA EXCHANGE
     IMPROVING DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT IN HONDURAS:
     INCORPORATING RISK MANAGEMENT INTO LAND USE PLANNING
     The Challenge. Honduras is among the countries most affected by climate change
     and disasters triggered by natural events. Its vulnerability to hurricanes, floods, and
     landslides poses significant development challenges. In light of this, Honduras
     established a formal national disaster risk management (DRM) system (SINAGER)
     in 2009 to develop capacities for risk reduction, preparedness, response, and
     recovery from disasters. However, Honduran authorities lacked the institutional
     capacity for mainstreaming disaster risk considerations into development planning
     processes. Specifically, Honduras needed to find ways to better define institutional
     responsibilities and enhance technical assistance to municipalities to achieve
     resilient development planning.

     The Solution. Honduras requested help to learn how other countries have
     implemented strategies to integrate DRM considerations into territorial planning
     practices at all administrative levels. The World Bank Group brokered an exchange
     based on its long-standing engagement with disaster risk management in Colombia
     and Honduras. Colombia has more than 15 years of experience with consolidated
     policy and planning frameworks that mainstream DRM and environmental concerns
     across watershed and municipal boundaries. A Honduran delegation held
     preparatory workshops before embarking on a Study Tour to Colombia. The
     Honduran delegation included participants from the Honduran Disaster Risk
     Management Agency (COPECO), Ministry of Environment (SERNA), Ministry of
     Planning and External Cooperation (SEPLAN), and Honduran Association of
     Municipalities (AMHON). The delegates met with the Colombian entities that led
     the development of policy frameworks and instruments in land use planning for
     regional and municipal governments. They visited the municipalities of Bogota and
     Manizales, which have implemented the approach. After the Study Tour, a workshop
     in Honduras helped to systematize the learning experience. Attendees included
     officials of AMHON,COPECO, and SERNA; and the Ministry of Justice, Human
     Rights, Government, and Decentralization (SDHJGD) in its capacity for land use
     policies. This wide participation facilitated detailed discussion about lessons
     learned in Colombia and how these might apply to the Honduran context.

     The Results. Honduran authorities strengthened their institutional capacity for
     mainstreaming disaster risk considerations into development planning processes
     with a focus on land use planning at the municipal level. They improved inter-
     institutional communication, collaboration, and coordination among national
     entities responsible for disaster risk management, territorial planning, and environ-
     mental management. They subsequently agreed upon a Strategic Action Plan to
     continue refining disaster risk management in Honduras. This plan included recom-
     mendations to clarify institutional responsibilities, formulate guidelines and tools
     for resilient development planning, and implement a national strategy to enhance
     technical assistance to municipalities.

     Team Leader: Enrique Pantoja, Operations Advisor, The World Bank Group.



12
                                                                                      STEP

                                                                                             3

DESIGN THE
STUDY TOUR
In Step 2, you defined the Study Tour by…
  üü Identifying the groups of people needed to address the challenge
     and bring about the desired change,
  üü Identifying the intermediate outcomes for the Study Tour,
  üü Preparing knowledge providers and seekers,
  üü Organizing a design and delivery team.

In Step 3, you will…
  »»   Design for intermediate outcomes,
  »»   Support the selection of knowledge seeking participants,
  »»   Select the blend and sequence of activities,
  »»   Design each Study Tour activity,
  »»   Plan the logistics.

A Study Tour can achieve one or more intermediate outcomes for participants. Depending
on their development goals, you may design the tour to achieve numerous intermediate
outcomes, or you may use the Study Tour to achieve one specific intermediate outcome.
Your priority is to closely link the design of the Study Tour to the intermediate outcomes
sought by these participants so that it helps them overcome the challenges toward
achieving the priority development goals.




                                                                                             13
STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR



     STEP 3.1 DESIGN FOR INTERMEDIATE OUTCOMES
     Alignment across the goals is beneficial for all the stakeholders involved with the Study
     Tour, including the knowledge seekers, knowledge providers, funders, and brokers. Be
     sure that you don’t design a Study Tour that only supports the goals of one group.

     When possible, have the knowledge-seeking participants answer these questions in the
     preparation phase of the Study Tour:
       »» What new knowledge or skills do you want to gain from the Study Tour?
       »» How will you apply the new knowledge or skills gained?
       »» What benefits do you anticipate from applying this new knowledge or skills?
       »» What group of stakeholders do you hope to share your new knowledge with?
          Toward what outcomes?
       »» During the Study Tour, whom would you like to get to know better, and why?
       »» How would you like to continue your engagement with the other Study Tour
          participants?

         STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 3.1
         India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Verify objective and intermediate outcomes
         Selected participants for the knowledge exchange validated that the objectives
         and goals remained important.

     STEP 3.2 SUPPORT THE SELECTION OF KNOWLEDGE-SEEKING
     PARTICIPANTS
     In Step 2 you considered the participant profiles required for a successful Study Tour. Now
     it’s time to choose specifically who will join you on the Study Tour from the knowl-
     edge-seeking side.

     In this phase, you will want to:
        »» Work with your counterparts and any participants already identified as knowledge
           seekers.
        »» Work with your counterparts to identify participants who are leaders, conveners, key
           actors, or others who have the potential to take on these roles within their institution
           or government.
        »» Seek the champions—those who are open to reform and can drive the desired
           change; and don’t forget to look for the influencers, those in a position to secure
           stakeholder support.
        »» Use the development goal and change objective as a guide when selecting each
           participant.
        »» Ask your counterparts for a brief explanation why each potential knowledge seeker
           should be included and what they will contribute. You can use these explanations later
           to ensure that any substitute participants could still make the desired contributions.

         STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 3.2
         India and Algeria, and Spain exchange — Selected knowledge-seeking participants
         Participants from India included:
            »» Joint Secretary and Economic Advisor from the Ministry of Urban
               Development;
            »» Section Officers, Department of Economic Affairs;
            »» Advisor, Planning Commission;
            »» Managing Director, Deputy Project Director, Sanitation Engineer, and two
               Task Managers from Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Finance
               Corporation;
            »» Engineer, Gulbarga City Corporation.



14
                                                                      STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR



              STEP 3.3 SELECT THE BLEND AND SEQUENCE OF ACTIVITIES
              Activities are the essential building blocks of a Study Tour. There should be a clear results
              chain that links the activities to the outcomes sought by the Study Tour. Therefore, the
              blend and sequence of activities will be guided by the outcomes sought from the Study
              Tour. Also keep in mind the participant profile, group size, timeframe, logistical
              constraints, and resources.

                             When selecting the blend and sequence of activities for your Study Tour,
                             consider the following:
                               »» Development priorities that the Study Tour will contribute to,
TIPS FROM THE FIELD            »» Intermediate outcomes that the Study Tour will help achieve,
                               »» Good practices that participants want to learn from,
“Make good use of all          »» Operational environment that could have significant impact on
 the tools and technol-           the potential and limitation of a Study Tour,
 ogies, including social       »» Opportunities for providers to best engage and share with
 media, that allow us to          knowledge seekers,
 collaborate, capture,         »» A mix of interactive, engaging, and reflective activities to
 communicate, and share           stimulate learning for all participants.
 the learning experience
 before, during, and         Since operating environment can have a significant impact on the design
 after the study tour.“      and implementation of a Study Tour, keep in mind the list of consider-
                             ations below.

              Consider the operating environment
              The potential and the limits of a knowledge exchange initiative are most often deter-
              mined by budget, people (knowledge seekers and providers, and brokers), timeframe,
              technology and guidance tools, and context. In each case, try to turn constraints into
              opportunities:
              Budget
                »» Look for cost-efficient ways to achieve results. Bring people together virtually
                   instead of flying them around the world.
                »» Build Study Tours into larger operations. You might include it in the capacity-
                   building component of a new loan or grant.

              People
                »» Convene participants on their terms. Ministers tend to prefer to meet in person
                   or in a private videoconference.
                »» Make preparation a requirement of participation.
                »» Ask partners and sector/country experts to help identify the best-suited people
                   for participation.

              Timeframe
                »» Divide tasks (design, logistics, facilitation, etc.) among team members and local
                   partners.
                »» Consider whether the exchange is part of a longer-term initiative or if it needs to
                   meet immediate learning needs. You might be able to delay or trim down some
                   parts of the Study Tour to make it timely and relevant.

              Technology
                »» Use the Study Tour to build participant capacity and motivation to use technology
                   that facilitates future sharing of knowledge.
                »» Meet participants at their technological comfort level. Start with technologies
                   and communication methods with which they are most familiar (such as email,
                   Facebook, Twitter).




                                                                                                              15
STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR



         STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 3.3
         India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Operating environment
            »» Budget: US$70,000.
            »» Seekers: Government departments (senior officials and practitioners).
            »» Providers: Senior executives, government officials, and practitioners.
            »» Broker for the exchange: The World Bank.
            »» Timeframe: Three-months planning phase for a week-long Study Tour
               that took place during the first quarter of 2013.
            »» Technology and resources: Mostly audio-conferencing.
            »» Operating environment: With no local World Bank presence in Algeria
               and Spain, the design and delivery team worked closely with the local
               knowledge provider in Algiers and coordinated all logistical details for
               exchange. Similarly, the team worked closely with contacts at Agbar in
               Spain to structure the program in Alicante.

     Explore varied types of interactions
     Not all activities have to be structured technical learning events; objectives related to
     creating professional networks and building relationships can be achieved through fun
     social activities throughout the Study Tour as well.

     When trying to decide which activities to select and how they should be sequenced,
     consider the type of communication and interaction the participants need to engage in.
     The activities can fall in one of the four categories:
     Presentation activities primarily consist of a one-way flow of information and also
     require use of creative techniques to engage and involve the audiences. These activities
     include demonstration, expert panel, lightning talks, poster session, and storytelling.

     Discussion activities consist of multi-directional knowledge sharing, require group par-
     ticipation, and are often used after presentation-type activities. These activities include
     brainstorming, buzz session, e-discussion, knowledge café, peer assists, and anecdote
     circle. Experiential activities move the participants beyond knowledge sharing and dis-
     cussion and allow them to experience something new, reflect on the experience, and
     translate the knowledge into action. These activities include action planning, field visit,
     fishbowl, role play, secondment, and simulation.

     Analytical activities enable participants to examine and make sense of topics or situa-
     tions from a prospective and/or retrospective lens. These activities include after-action
     review, focus group, interview, self-assessment, survey, and SWOT analysis.

     Descriptions of 14 activities that are especially useful for Study Tours are provided in the
     Toolbox, pages 34-48.

     Select activities that engage participants
     Well-designed activities should allow participants to:
       »» Experience something new;
       »» Internalize the significance of the new experience;
       »» Observe, question, reflect on, and contribute to the pool of experience;
       »» Interact with experts and other participants, and consider new ideas;
       »» Develop a collective understanding based on shared experience;
       »» Translate the knowledge into action plans;
       »» Summarize new knowledge in written and audiovisual formats and make
          these available for other stakeholders.




16
                                                        STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR



Sample design for an Awareness-Raising Study Tour
It is useful to group activities around three phases: planning, delivery, and follow-up.
For example, a Study Tour of policy-makers who want to see how several new agricultural
innovations are being implemented, may have the following sequence of activities:

 PLANNING
   »» Brainstorming and action planning meeting to agree on key change objectives;
   »» e-Discussion to identify participants, key speakers, and partners and to decide on
      implementation team.

 DELIVERY
  »» Field visit to observe how programs are being implemented;
  »» Expert panel to discuss trends and challenges, followed by a Q&A session;
  »» Demonstrations face-to-face with visiting experts and implementing agencies to
     share how similar solutions have worked in another context;
  »» Informal presentations by participants after dinner each evening;
  »» Knowledge café to enable creative sharing of ideas around common interests among
     those in attendance.

 FOLLOW-UP
  »» Survey to assess impact and usefulness of Study Tour;
  »» Action planning to prioritize key findings and follow-up actions.

Sample design for a Building Consensus and Networking Study Tour
For example, a Study Tour of private and public sector officials who are considering
several options for improving utilities in rural areas may have the following sequence of
activities:

 PLANNING
   »» Action planning, face-to-face and virtual, with key stakeholders to define scope of
      Study Tour, agree on participants, and select facilitator;
   »» Storytelling to share how implementation actually gets done.

 DELIVERY
  »» Buzz session to engage every participant early in the tour;
  »» Expert panel to get multiple perspectives on a topic of focus;
  »» Field visit to meet with those running rural utilities;
  »» Anecdote circle during coffee/tea to engage the group in sharing their experiences;
  »» Role play to take on the perspectives of others and prepare to advocate for behavior
     change;
  »» Action planning to determine next steps and how to implement.

 FOLLOW-UP
  »» e-Discussions via video-conference to keep up momentum;
  »» Report to share learning and agreements from the Study Tour with a wider
     stakeholder group.

Sample design for a Knowledge/Skills Development Study Tour
For example, a Study Tour of ministry staff who will have to implement new privacy
standards for health records would benefit from the following sequence:

 PLANNING
   »» Action planning with participants and host(s) to prepare a strategy for the Study Tour;
   »» Discussions with key partners and participants to discuss agenda and scope of
      Study Tour.




                                                                                                17
STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR



     DELIVERY
       »» Presentations from both knowledge providers and tour participants to share
          experiences,
       »» Field visits to see firsthand what is possible and interact with project
          implementers and beneficiaries,
       »» Peer assist sessions to gain input on specific challenges from peers and
          practitioners from knowledge-providing country,
       »» Storytelling to share how implementation actually gets done,
       »» Interviews with key decision-makers, practitioners, and beneficiaries and to
          record feedback from participants.

     FOLLOW-UP
       »» Poster sessions to share findings and lessons learned with a larger stakeholder
          group,
       »» Surveys and interviews to gain feedback from participants,
       »» After-action review to determine future learning requirements.

         STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 3.3
         India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Activity selection and sequencing

          Workshop      Planning     Brainstorming         Brainstorming enabled key
                                                           stakeholders who participated
                                                           in the Study Tour to come to an
                                                           agreement on scope of work-
                                                           shop.
                                     Action Planning       After the brainstorming, key
                                                           stakeholders determined that it
                                                           was important to conduct two
                                                           workshops, one focusing on
                                                           participants at the national level
                                                           and the other targeted at the
                                                           state level.
                        Delivery     Reports               Reports and presentations
                                     Presentations         focused on learning from the
                                                           experiences of the Study Tour.
                                     Group discussions     Discussion-based activities
                                                           yielded consensus for follow-up
                                     Action Planning
                                                           action planning.
                        Follow-up    Report                Reporting was designed to
                                                           share knowledge that emerged
                                                           from the workshops.


     From Study Tour to Action
     Study Tours typically end with follow-up activities that help knowledge seekers identify
     practical strategies for applying what they have learned. Don’t wait until after the Study
     Tour to define how lessons will be applied and sustained and what on-going support
     may be required to bring about desired results.

     Knowledge seekers should be encouraged and supported to do after-action reviews (see
     page 53) and action planning (see page 52) during the Study Tour to develop clear plans
     for how they will implement what they have learned. Follow-up support can be provided
     through expert visits, video conferences, peer networks, twinning arrangements, or other
     activities to ensure that knowledge sharing continues and leads to results.


18
                                                        STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR



  Your Study Tour design will also be influenced by the types of participant groups:
  Design considerations for policy-makers
   »» Be aware of rank and prestige when identifying knowledge providers.
   »» Include adequate time for asking questions of knowledge providers.
   »» Share background profiles for both knowledge seekers and knowledge providers.
   »» Raise awareness so that everyone is “on the same page”.
   »» Building consensus with the group is often an important intermediate outcome.

  Design considerations for groups of technical staff
   »» Survey knowledge-seeking participants before the tour to identify specifics of
      the knowledge/skills required.
   »» Learn as much as you can about the skill levels of knowledge providers and
      seekers to ensure good matches.
   »» Include adequate time for“hands-on” learning.

  Design considerations for mixed stakeholder groups
   »» If participants have diverse backgrounds and interests, consider forming smaller
      groups for some tour activities. The whole group does not have to experience
      all of the same activities.
   »» New and improved actions (such as pilot programs) often come from having
      diverse groups working together. Consider action planning for a pilot program
      as a potential activity for a mixed stakeholder group.
   »» Mixed groups frequently offer excellent opportunities for building relationships
      among Study Tour participants. Include informal networking opportunities in
      your design. Many important relationships are built during tea/coffee breaks.

What Influences Study Tour Activity Selection
When selecting the blend and sequence of activities for your Study Tour, consider:
 »» The results the Study Tour should accomplish for the project/program in which it is
    being used;
 »» The intermediate outcomes you want to achieve;
 »» What the participants want to learn;
 »» The operational environment (budget, people, time, technology, political context, etc.);
 »» How providers can best engage and share knowledge with participants;
 »» How participants can be active, rather than passive, in the learning.

STEP 3.4 DESIGN EACH STUDY TOUR ACTIVITY
There are numerous, activities that you can consider for inclusion in a Study Tour. For a
week-long Study Tour, you might include more than 15 distinct activities. The participants
will be more engaged if you use a variety of activities rather than the same formula each
day. Once selected, each activity must be effectively designed.

The Study Tour Toolbox ( beginning on page 32) is your resource to plan for and select an
appropriate mix of activities for your Study Tour. It includes brief descriptions, and
practical how-tos on a range of frequently used activities for Study Tours.

       Action Planning - Page 35                   Field Visit - Page 42
       After Action Review - Page 36               Fish Bowl - Page 43
       Anecdote Circle - Page 37                   Focus Group - Page 44
       Brainstorming - Page 38                     Interview - Page 45
       Demonstration - Page 39                     Survey - Page 46
       e-Discussion - Page 40                      Knowledge Café - Page 47
       Expert Panel - Page 41                      SWOT Analysis - Page 48
                                                                                               19
STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR



         STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 3.4
         India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Designing and delivering the activities
         Much of the design and delivery of the activities was done by local partners,
         including representatives from the public and private sectors. They also
         coordinated logistical support.

     Design Tips for other Study Tour activities are available in the Art of Knowledge Exchange
     toolbox (http://hdl.handle.net/10986/17540). Liberating Structures website also offers a
     range of activities that you can choose from to design an engaging and results-focused
     Study Tour (http://www.liberatingstructures.com/).

     STEP 3.5 PLAN FOR LOGISTICS
     There are many logistics that must be arranged for any Study Tour and planning for them
     starts early in the design phase. Work with the local delivery partner to prepare a checklist;
     you can start with these:
       üü Detailed budget. Develop early in the design process so you do not over
           (or under) spend.
       üü Dates and locations. Determine early since these will impact everything from
           available knowledge providers and Study Tour participants to travel arrangements
           and costs.
       üü Travel visas. Once Study Tour participants are selected begin the process of
           arranging for travel visas.
       üü Invitations should be sent to participants at least 3 weeks prior to the Study Tour,
           along with information on travel, dining, and hotel arrangements.
       üü Background information on knowledge-seeking participants and their goals
           should be shared with knowledge providers at least 2 weeks prior to the Study Tour.
       üü Transportation (including airport pick-up, hotel-to-field transport, etc.) requires
           careful planning and should be considered throughout the design process. Take
           into account local traffic patterns and delays.

     Cultural differences and practices should be identified and considered
     when planning the logistics of the Study Tour. Work with your local deliv-
     ery partner to plan accordingly for any religious practices, holidays, or
     events during the time period of the Study Tour. Sometimes, but not
     always, consideration of these cultural and religious practices can be           TIPS FROM THE FIELD
     quite important to the success of the Study Tour. If appropriate, you           “Create a social space
     should brief participants about local practices and sensitivities of the host    for participants to net-
     country (or community) and what behaviors possibly to avoid. Knowledge           work and explore ways
     providers should also be aware of any important cultural practices of            to adapt lessons learned
     participants.                                                                    to their own context.”
     You should ask all participants about personal food allergies, dietary          “Plan to document les-
     restrictions, special accommodations with regard to disabilities, and            sons learned and dis-
     other issues that might need advanced arrangements. Make sure that you           seminate them among
     have emergency contact information for all participants.                         participants within one
                                                                                      month of visit. A followup
     A useful communication tool prior to the Study Tour is to distribute             workshop can also be
     welcome packets to participants. Packets could include information on            considered to check how
     local cuisine, cultural sites, and customs; area maps; transportation            participants are taking
     options; local shopping; and other information. If local shopping is an          forward their learning.”
     attraction, consider building time into the Study Tour agenda for
     shopping so participants do not have to skip sessions.




20
STEP 3: DESIGN THE STUDY TOUR




                            21
     STUDY TOUR IN ACTION:
     INDIA AND MEXICO EXCHANGE
     SHARING EXPERIENCE IN PROMOTING INCLUSIVE
     GREEN GROWTH
     The Challenge. As one of India’s main sources of clean energy through hydropower,
     the state of Himachal Pradesh in India’s Himalayas is of major environmental
     importance to its neighboring states. The three rivers that flow through Himachal
     Pradesh join the river Indus, bringing water to more than 200 million people. The
     state‘s development goal was to promote inclusive green growth that benefits
     everybody while respecting the environment and transforming different areas of
     the economy, including energy, watershed management, industry, and tourism.
     However, the State Government had inefficient policy instruments, and its officials
     lacked the skills to design new policies and to finalize and implement the develop-
     ment strategy. Additionally, there was lack of coordination across different sectors
     and an inability to inspire stakeholders to cooperate.

     The Solution. The Government of India recognized the shortfall and decided that
     a Study Tour would be of value for the state of Himachal Pradesh. Mexico was
     chosen as knowledge provider due to the progress it had made in stimulating
     green economic growth across different sectors of its economy. Specifically select-
     ed for successful green growth promotion were the state of Oaxaca, one the most
     biodiverse states of Mexico and home to a number of indigenous cultures; and the
     state of Quintana Roo, known for its tourism opportunities.

     An internet-based platform was established to enable the Indian and Mexican
     officials to share documents and their expectations prior to face-to-face meetings.
     The Indian officials also met with World Bank staff who would effectively engage in
     the role of knowledge brokers. The Indian officials then visited Mexican counter-
     parts at the federal level as well as in Oaxaca and Quintana Roo. They discussed
     Mexico’s experience and challenges in making urban and rural development more
     environment-friendly, efficient, and resilient to climate change while being inclusive
     to all social groups.

     A video documenting the Indian officials’ visit was a visual reminder of the lessons
     learned in Mexico and two newsletters helped to disseminate the lessons to a wider
     audience. The officials of Himachal Pradesh incorporated what they had learned
     in Mexico in a presentation delivered at the India Climate Policy and Business
     Conclave meeting.

     The Results. The Study Tour and exchange enhanced the knowledge and skills of
     Himachal Pradesh officials in designing green growth policies that now include a
     benefit-sharing mechanism in hydr power development and payment for ecosys-
     tem services. It also led to stronger coalition building and network coordination
     among different stakeholders involved in design and implementation of green
     growth policies, including civil society and academia. The improved consensus
     among different stakeholders resulted in the amendment of existing legislation
     and the adoption of the Sustainable Tourism Development Policy.

     Team Leader: Pyush Dogra, Senior Environmental Specialist, The World Bank
     Group.



22
                                                                                        STEP

                                                                                               4

IMPLEMENT THE
STUDY TOUR
In Step 3, you designed a Study Tour by…
  üü Preparing for intermediate outcomes,
  üü Selecting the participants,
  üü Selecting and sequencing a blend of results-focused activities,
  üü Preparing the design of activities,
  üü Planning the logistics.

In Step 4 you will…
  »» Guide participants along their learning journey, orchestrate
     engagement, and build relationships;
  »» Help participants in achieving learning outcomes and support
     their action plans;
  »» Document and track results.

STEP 4.1 GUIDE PARTICIPANTS ALONG THEIR LEARNING JOURNEY
As the Study Tour draws near, your role changes from that of a designer to that of a guide.
As a Study Tour guide, you will provide opportunities for knowledge-seeking participants
to assume leadership over their own learning journey, help these participants overcome
any obstacles they might have in achieving their desired learning outcomes, reflect on
and internalize their learning and document their experience, and coalesce around action
plans to achieve change.

Close engagement with the knowledge providers and seekers is integral to a successful
Study Tour. During implementation, this becomes especially significant:
   »» Solicit input early. This helps participants get involved and stay involved.
   »» Do your homework. Verify that knowledge providers are well prepared and that
      materials and messaging are clear; a ”dry run” will help to ensure that the Study Tour
      proceeds smoothly.
                                                                                               23
STEP 4: IMPLEMENT THE STUDY TOUR



       »» Build trust. The more participants are involved and the more you listen, the more
          they will trust you.
       »» Show gratitude. Acknowledge active participation by all participants. Publicly
          acknowledge the good work of knowledge providers and delivery partners.
       »» Be a model host. Encourage respectful and friendly behavior from your delivery
          team that will be appreciated and reciprocated by the participants.
       »» Be a team builder. Make sure this is a consultative process. Your participants are
          your best allies in making a Study Tour successful.
       »» Be personable. Get to know all participants, know their work, be cognizant of their
          primary learning objectives, and ask them to share their experiences with the group.
       »» Be a networker. Build in ample time for participant networking, socializing, and
          group collaboration. These networks may endure and perhaps become the most
          significant driver of change in the longer term.

         STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 4.1
         India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Engaging the knowledge-seeking
         participants
         Debriefing sessions were organized throughout the Study Tour so that partici-
         pants had a chance to reflect on what they were learning and to consider their
         next steps. Participants were also encouraged to take notes, photos, and vid-
         eos to capture their learning.

     Share contact information
     Study Tours frequently lead to many intended and unintended professional relationships.
     It is valuable to share the contact information of knowledge providers and seekers. Make
     sure that everyone is agreeable with having their information shared beforehand. You can
     also use social media (Facebook, WeChat, or WhatsApp) to help the participants stay in
     touch during and after the Study Tour.

     STEP 4.2 HELP PARTICIPANTS ACHIEVE LEARNING
     OUTCOMES AND SUPPORT THEIR ACTION PLANS
     Another aim of the implementation journey is to bring the participants           TIPS FROM THE FIELD
     together around their action plans, keeping in mind the outcomes they           “Verify the languages
     seek. The action plans can range from drafting a simple roadmap of next          spoken and read by both
     steps at individual level or group action plans involving teams and diverse      the participants and the
     stakeholders.                                                                    knowledge providers.”
     It helps to recognize that participants process new ideas and react at          “Decide on how to dis-
     different speeds. Some will recognize a potential solution right away and        tribute per diems (up
     “hit the ground running“. Others will wait before making any commit-             front, daily, in cash, etc.).”
     ments. Find a pace that is acceptable to all, even if it is not perfect for
     everyone.                                                                       “Check with local banks
                                                                                      for cash limits.”
     Discuss possible course corrections with participants whenever possible.
     Make sure you have majority support before proceeding too far with the          “Know the level of each
     changes.                                                                         participant in the delega-
                                                                                      tion. Protocols may differ
     Focus on facilitating an experience that allows participants to:                 depending on seniority.”
       »» Plan and prepare for what they will see, learn, and do;
       »» Try something new;
       »» Internalize the significance of what they do and reflect on its application in their
          own contexts;
       »» Observe, ask questions, share thoughts, and contribute their own experiences;
       »» Interact with experts, other participants, and new products and approaches;
       »» Develop a collective understanding with other participants;
       »» Take action on what they learn.

24
                                                   STEP 4: IMPLEMENT THE STUDY TOUR



    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 4.2
    India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Action plans for change
    A technical expert conducted a session at the end of the Study Tour to help
    participants identify and synthesize the key takeaways that could help inform
    decision-making on the project design and that could also be shared with
    others upon their return.

STEP 4.3 DOCUMENT IMPLEMENTATION AND TRACK RESULTS
As you navigate the implementation terrain, Study Tour objectives may shift (especially in
more complex situations). Unexpected results may also emerge. That is why it is critical to
capture results as they happen. Doing so will help you and your participants know whether
you’re on the right path or need to take another route. Find simple ways to document
milestones, highlights, and lessons.

Before you start documenting and capturing, answer these questions to help with your
planning:
   »» Is the effort to capture more than the value of what you can get?
   »» How will you use this information once you’ve collected it?
   »» What decisions can be made based on this information?

During the Study Tour, use some of these ideas to get feedback on how things are going:
  »» Get together over an evening meal with the group. This is the simplest (and tastiest)
     way to capture participants’ impressions. It also builds relationships and trust.
  »» Encourage participants to keep a journal (written, photo, audio, or video). A simple
     notebook and a pen is a great enabler. Go the extra mile and print the Study Tour
     title and date on the cover. People will use it, keep it, and refer back to it!
  »» Record your own impressions, including key decisions, in a simple journal or blog.
  »» Allocate reflection time at the end of each day. Ask participants to use this time to
     journal and share with the group.
  »» Ask participants to share photos and videos after each activity. Lead by example.
     Create a group distribution list or community page to facilitate sharing.
  »» Include a documented after-action review process.
  »» Capture group reflections on flip charts or, even better, on post-it notes that you can
     stick to a wall.

At the end or immediately after the Study Tour, use these ideas to sustain learning, scale
up activities, and share ideas with stakeholder groups:
   »» Set up an online group space and ask participants to post content, questions, and
      thoughts from the day. Monitor it and regularly refer to it to increase participant
      engagement.
   »» Collect presentations, handouts, training guides, policy guidelines, technology
      manuals, and other materials from knowledge providers and put them on a shared
      cloud drive.
   »» Create a detailed action plan to guide the next steps in applying what participants
      learned.
   »» Routinely share information with participants, especially examples of what other
      participants have been able to achieve since the Study Tour.

    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 4.4
    India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Documenting the implementation journey
    The implementation journey was documented through:
      »» Individual participant notes,
      »» Joint report by the knowledge facilitators,
      »» Notes from debriefing sessions,
      »» Interviews with staff in the utilities,
      »» Expert interviews.
                                                                                               25
     STUDY TOUR IN ACTION:
     VIETNAM, BULGARIA, LATVIA,
     AND TURKEY EXCHANGE
     The Challenge. The Government of Vietnam (GOV) wanted to reform its inade-
     quate and inefficient social security administration in favor of a modern, fair, and
     transparent system. Although the government had outlined a strategy, it felt that
     its institutional capacity was limited.

     The Solution. The GOV requested World Bank support in learning how Latvia,
     Turkey, and Bulgaria had modernized their systems of old age pensions and health
     insurance. Before the exchange, World Bank staff in each participant country
     worked together to identify the right sources of knowledge. After reaching a
     consensus, country representatives shared information and key documents by
     e-mail to prepare participants for a Study Tour.

     Staff from Vietnam’s Social Security (VSS) headquarters and from three provincial
     offices then visited Latvia, Turkey, and Bulgaria to learn about their social security
     reform experiences. The World Bank distributed a report on lessons learned from
     each visit and recommendations for Vietnam. The Vietnamese government team
     also shared their thoughts and takeaways after each trip through back-to-office
     reports.

     After the Study Tours, Vietnamese officials held a workshop for VSS staff from all
     related technical departments as well as a wider audience, including the Ministry
     of Labor and Social Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, representatives from civil
     society, and think tank personnel. At the workshop Latvian, Turkish, and Bulgarian
     officials presented on their successes and best practices in project management
     and VSS officials spoke about lessons learned from the Study Tours. Participants
     also viewed videos on other countries and other social security systems that could
     provide more insight.

     Results. Vietnam learned how Latvia’s, Turkey’s, and Bulgaria’s Social Security
     Agencies (SSA) managed business process re-engineering and implemented ICT
     upgrades. “It was interesting that lessons could also be learned from mistakes…
     [This was] the first time [Vietnamese] officials learned about the importance of
     business processes re-engineering. Before the trip, [they] always thought of social
     security reform as development and application of ICT,” says Nga Nguyet Nguyen,
     who helped broker this exchange. Vietnam also learned how each SSA had
     managed human resources and learned procedures for overseeing and managing
     social insurance reserves. Perhaps most important, the GOV acquired the analyti-
     cal tools to strengthen its administrative management capacity. It improved its
     understanding and capacity to document, analyze, and develop a vision for
     re-engineering Vietnam’s social security business processes. As an immediate
     policy outcome of the exchange, the GOV is assessing whether to integrate tax
     and social security revenue collection.

     Team Leader: Nga Nguyet Nguyen, Senior Economist, The World Bank Group.




26
                                                                                       STEP

                                                                                              5

EVALUATE THE
STUDY TOUR
In Step 4, you implemented a Study Tour that…
  üü Guides the participants on their learning journey,
  üü Keeps participants engaged and helps them achieve valuable
     learning outcomes,
  üü Documents implementation and tracks results.

In Step 5, you will…
  »» Measure the success of the Study Tour,
  »» Report on and share the results of the Study Tour.

STEP 5.1 MEASURE THE SUCCESS OF STUDY TOUR
A well-designed and well-implemented Study Tour achieves many results. Some results
can be directly attributable to what the participants experienced and learned. For other
results, the Study Tour may have just contributed to one of many factors that lead to
change. Some results occur only after the participants go home (literally or figuratively)
and apply what they have learned.

The following table lists a variety of ways to measure results at the end of the Study Tour
in the context of achieving intermediate outcomes:




                                                                                              27
STEP 5: EVALUATE THE STUDY TOUR



     INTERMEDIATE OUTCOME WAYS TO MEASURE RESULTS

     New knowledge              »» Ask participants to give presentations on the last day
                                   of the Study Tour.
                                »» Interview participants in person at the end of the
                                   Study Tour.
                                »» E-mail participant survey 6 weeks after the Study Tour.
                                »» Use a knowledge-based pre-test and post-test with
                                   participants.
     Enhanced skills            »» Review monthly application of skills (e.g., error logs,
                                   number of reports) at 1-, 2-, and 3-month intervals af-
                                   ter the Study Tour.
                                »» Use a skills-based pre-test and post-test of participants.
                                »» Directly observe participant performance 6 months
                                   after the Study Tour.
                                »» Survey participants about the application of skills 9
                                   months after the Study Tour.
     Improved consensus         »» Attend weekly team meetings to observe collaboration.
                                »» Review meeting minutes to determine if the group
                                   has been able to reach consensus on key issues.
                                »» Follow-up with group members to assess progress
                                   toward change objective.
                                »» Send email survey to team members at 3-, 6-, and
                                   9-month intervals after the exchange to self-assess
                                   effectiveness of collaborations.
     Enhanced connectivity      »» Review documentation of group to determine if it is
                                   growing (e.g., more individuals, strategic partners,
                                   member organizations) at 3-, 6-, and 9-month intervals
                                   after the Study Tour.
                                »» Interview members about their experience with group
                                   (e.g., numbers of conversations with other members,
                                   trust in peers, satisfaction with peer responses) before
                                   and then again 6 months later.
                                »» Track data from quarterly surveys of group member
                                   activity (e.g., conversations with group members),
                                   satisfaction (e.g., useful guidance), and results
                                   (e.g., what came from conversations).
     New and improved actions   »» Document participants’ agreement on an action plan
                                   at the end of the Study Tour.
                                »» Call (or e-mail) participants 3 months later to learn if
                                   they have started new (or improved) processes within
                                   their organizations.




28
                                                     STEP 5: EVALUATE THE STUDY TOUR



    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 5.1
    India to Algeria and Spain exchange — Intermediate outcomes and results
    New Knowledge. Alternate models for service delivery arrangements based
    on public-private partnership arrangements are being explored for implemen-
    tation of 24/7 water supply projects within the India context. In particular, this
    helped inform thinking among the project counterparts at the state level.
    Improved Consensus. There was improved agreement among various state/
    local counterparts on the model for engagement of private sector under the
    Karnataka Urban Water Supply Modernization Project. This included provision-
    ing for a municipal company model to enable improved coordination and
    accountability vis-à-vis the private operator.

Surveys
Participant surveys are one way to get feedback on what worked and didn’t work in the
Study Tour.

As you design the surveys, focus the questions being asked of participants that will be
meaningful for your next steps in follow-up or for reporting to stakeholders. Ask yourself,
how will I use the answer that I get from this question? If you do not have a clear answer,
do not ask that question.

Survey Study Tour participants before they go home
Conduct a short survey at the end of the Study Tour before participants leave for home
while their experiences are fresh on their minds. See sample questions for Participant
Survey (Toolbox Samples, page 58). In the end-of-tour survey, include results-focused
questions like:
  »» Did the Study Tour meet your learning expectations?
  »» Were you able to make valuable connections with others (either other knowledge
     seekers or knowledge providers)?
  »» Which activities were most useful to you?
  »» How do you plan to apply what you learned?
  »» What else would you have liked to learn, but didn’t from this Study Tour?
  »» Describe any meaningful professional relationships you developed during the tour.
  »» What specific changes (new policy, revised processes, etc.) do you anticipate coming
     from this Study Tour?
  »» Were the logistics (transportation, hotel, meals, etc.) adequate to support your
     learning during the tour?

Survey Study Tour participants after they return home
A short, follow-up survey with participants 6 or 9 months after the Study Tour can answer
how they have been able to apply lessons learned. The follow-up survey can provide excel-
lent information for designing future exchanges. In a follow-up survey, you may want to ask:
   »» Since the Study Tour, how have you been able to apply what you learned?
   »» What specific changes (new policy, revised processes, etc.) have been realized since
      the Study Tour?
   »» Have you applied what you learned with other Study Tour participants or knowledge
      providers since the tour?
   »» What barriers have you encountered in applying what you learned on the Study Tour?
   »» What else could you have liked to learn on the Study Tour that would now be useful?




                                                                                               29
STEP 5: EVALUATE THE STUDY TOUR



     Follow-up with knowledge providers
     Knowledge providers have a valuable perspective on what worked during the Study Tour.
     Following up with them after the tour can provide insights for designing future tour
     activities and building relationships with knowledge providers for use in other Study Tours.
     In a short, email survey, you can ask knowledge providers the following questions:
        »» Were you adequately prepared with background information in preparing for the
           recent visitors during their Study Tour?
        »» Did you perceive that the participants gained valuable knowledge from the event?
        »» What knowledge, connections and experience did you gain from this experience?
           How will you use it?
        »» What barriers do you believe may have kept participants from gaining the most
           knowledge during the event?
        »» Were the logistics of the event adequately managed?
        »» Have any participants from the Study Tour been in touch with you since the event?
        »» Would you be interested in meeting with future Study Tour groups to share your
           knowledge?
        »» What would you do differently when hosting a Study Tour in the future?

         STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 5.1
         India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Direct results and influence achieved in India

          Knowledge exchange       Direct results                 Influenced results
          instrument(s)            (Intermediate outcomes)

          Study Tour               Participants gained a
                                   better understanding of
                                   the different models as
                                   well as how public and
                                   private engagement
                                   works.

                                   It became apparent to the
                                   Indian delegation how a
                                   municipal company can be
                                   helpful in enabling alter-
                                   nate structures of pub-
                                   lic-private partnerships.
          Workshop                 A broader audience             Ongoing discussion and
                                   increased awareness of         knowledge sharing about
                                   models through sharing of      public-private partnership
                                   Study Tour results. National   models that would be
                                   -level workshop focused        applicable in the Indian
                                   on innovation and policy.      context.
                                   State-level workshop
                                   focused on the regulatory
                                   processes and the role of
                                   the public counterpart.
                                   At the city level, results
                                   focused on the technical
                                   steps needed to move
                                   forward.




30
                                                   STEP 5: EVALUATE THE STUDY TOUR



STEP 5.2 REPORT AND SHARE RESULTS
As you come to the end phase of the Study Tour, it is time to report on the results,
both expected and unexpected. More than just reporting on who participated and which
activities they participated in, it is important to describe the changes and intermediate
outcomes achieved through the results-focused Study Tour. You should consider these
questions as you prepare your report:
   »» Who has been able to apply what they learned?
   »» What factors in their enabling environment helped them apply what they learned?
   »» What have they been able to achieve?
   »» Where have they been able to bring about change?
   »» Why are the changes/results important (i.e., to the change objective and/or
      development goal)?
   »» How did the knowledge exchange enable these results?
   »» If they have not been able to achieve results, what were the constraints?

Your audience and your goals will dictate the approach and format you use for reporting
results but would typically include the following sections:
1. Identify the audience. Typical audiences include key stakeholders: management,
sponsors, participants, decision-makers (e.g., parliamentarians, policy-makers), civil
society groups, design and delivery team members, and others interested in learning
more about Study Tour.

2. Define goals. What do you want to communicate to your target group(s)? Your aim
might be to raise awareness of outcomes achieved, influence behavior of mid-level
management, advocate for reform among policy-makers, inform sponsors about next
steps, or inform the full design and delivery team so they can learn from the experience.
Your communication and learning goals will shape what, how, and when you connect with
each target audience.

3. Develop a plan. Results can be conveyed in many different ways. It bears repeating
— the right plan depends on your audience and goals. Determine what each audience
would need to know to meet the goal(s) for that group, and how often they should be
updated. Then decide on the minimal information needed to meet those requirements.

4. Share the results. In many situations, sharing the results requires more than just
announcing that the results are available. Beyond sending a final report to the client or
sponsor, you will want to share the results with Study Tour knowledge recipients and
knowledge providers. In some situations, it may also be appropriate to share the results
with influential stakeholders such as bloggers, funding agencies, or leading academics.

    STUDY TOUR IN ACTION: STEP 5.1
    India to Algeria and Spain exchange — Reporting results
    The results from the exchange were shared with key stakeholders (internal unit
    and management) via email. In addition, a report of the results, including all
    technical presentations as well as documents and other materials, were shared
    with the government agencies that participated in the exchange.




                                                                                            31
STUDY TOUR
TOOLBOX
ACTIVITY DESCRIPTIONS AND
TIPS FROM THE FIELD




                            33
                       ACTIVITIES

 ACTION    AFTER-ACTION   ANECDOTE   BRAINSTORMING DEMONSTRATION   E-DISCUSSION   EXPERT
PLANNING      REVIEW       CIRCLE                                                 PANEL




 FIELD      FISHBOWL       FOCUS       INTERVIEW    KNOWLEDGE        SURVEY        SWOT
 VISIT                     GROUP                       CAFÉ                       ANALYSIS
                        1. ACTION PLANNING


A strategic exercise that results in a personal or group roadmap or timetable
describing the specific steps that need to be taken to achieve a single or
multiple objectives.

Action planning may be organized…
  »» As a facilitated activity that guides participants through action planning.
  »» At national, regional, community, institutional, and/or individual levels.

Use action planning to…
  »» Apply and/or localize knowledge.
  »» Create a tangible output and roadmap for follow-up action.
  »» Encourage ownership of follow-up actions.
  »» Enable knowledge transfer.




        TIPS FROM THE FIELD
        üüThe facilitator of action planning should provide clear guidelines to
          participants about how to create an action plan; most importantly,
          the facilitator should guide the participants in writing a realistic plan.

        üüFor effective action planning, participants should consider using the
          following steps:
              »» Define what needs to be accomplished.
              »» Assign roles and responsibilities. Also identify key stakeholders,
                 as successful implementation depends on buy in from relevant
                 stakeholders.
              »» Prepare a list of activities, decide what is feasible (consider
                 cost and resources), and prioritize.
              »» Break activities into discrete, measurable steps. It helps to
                 write the projected actions as separate tasks that are both
                 realistic and attainable. Make sure to identify the individual
                 and or organization responsible for each task.
              »» Create a timeline with major milestones.




                                                                                       35
     2. AFTER-ACTION REVIEW


     A structured review process for project teams to analyze what happened, why
     it happened, and what can be done better or differently in the future.

     During an after-action review, participants answer the following questions:
       »» What were the anticipated results?
       »» What were the actual results?
       »» What produced the actual results?
       »» What will the team sustain or enhance?
       »» What are some future opportunities to apply what was learned?

     After-action review may be organized…
       »» As a formal or informal review process.
       »» With an external facilitator or with the team lead as facilitator.

     Use after-action review to…
       »» Capture good practice approaches and identify lessons to be learned from
          implementation experience.
       »» Express multiple perspectives of what happened and why.
       »» Encourage feedback for improved performance.
       »» Enable knowledge transfer.




              TIPS FROM THE FIELD
              üüKeep in mind the following if you are the team leader and are
                facilitating an after-action review:
                   »» Remain unbiased.
                   »» Do not permit personal attacks among team members.
                   »» Engage all team members in providing feedback and
                      solutions.
                   »» Within a knowledge exchange initiative, after-action reviews
                      can be conducted at various times (after an event, activity,
                      task, etc.).
                   »» Create and maintain an open and trusting environment during
                      an after-action review so that participants may speak freely.
                      This is important to achieve best results.




36
                           3. ANECDOTE CIRCLE


An exercise that involves the use of story themes and anecdote-eliciting
questions to engage a group in sharing their experiences.

Anecdote circle may be organized…
  »» Around themes using anecdote-eliciting questions.
  »» For settings with a group of 4 to 12 participants: often the participants are peers
     or have worked on the same project.
  »» With participants sitting in a circle or at a round table.
  »» With a facilitator experienced in anecdotal questioning techniques and with
     blending with the group.

Use anecdote circles to…
  »» Support process change such as team and relationship building.
  »» Resolve conflicts.
  »» Collect stories to evaluate complex projects.
  »» Enable knowledge sharing.




        TIPS FROM THE FIELD
              »» Record what is being said during the anecdote circle. This way
                 you can harvest stories from the transcript.
              »» Make sure that you engage a facilitator who is experienced
                 in guiding and not leading. The group members should be
                 sharing with each other, not telling their stories to the facilitator.




                                                                                           37
     4. BRAINSTORMING


     The generation of ideas or solutions about a specific topic by tapping into the
     wisdom of the group in a non-judgmental environment which encourages
     creativity and innovation.

     Brainstorming may be organized…
       »» As a facilitated activity that motivates participants to contribute ideas
          or solutions.
       »» At the initial stages of a project or process.
       »» Virtual or face-to-face.

     Use brainstorming to…
       »» Generate new and creative ideas.
       »» Generate lists/checklists.
       »» Facilitate problem solving, consensus building, and teamwork.
       »» Motivate participants to invest in an idea or solution.
       »» Enable knowledge sharing.




             TIPS FROM THE FIELD
             üüSince the key goal of brainstorming is to generate as many ideas as
               possible—original ideas or ideas that build from each other—select
               a brainstorming topic that is relevant to participants.

             üüQuantity is what counts during brainstorming, not quality. It is im-
               portant that participants be aware that “no idea is a bad idea.”

             üüOrganize the session well. Make sure the brainstorming questions
               and guidelines are clear and that all participants understand the
               question and the process.

             üüEncourage solutions from all participants; no individual(s) should
               dominate the conversation.

             üüA successful brainstorm should result in many bold and unique
               ideas that can then be analyzed, prioritized, and applied in relevant
               contexts.




38
                           5. DEMONSTRATION


An expert showing how to use a product or perform a procedure; also used to
showcase a new product or process in order to market and spread innovations.

Demonstration may be organized…
  »» At the implementation stages of a project.
  »» For small or large groups.

Use a demonstration to…
  »» Apply knowledge or master a process.
  »» Have a high level of participant involvement.
  »» Share practical experience or process steps.
  »» Share innovations and good practice.
  »» Enable knowledge transfer within one’s own context.




        TIPS FROM THE FIELD
             »» Ensure that the expert has good pedagogical skills and adapts
                the demonstration for the needs of the audience.
             »» Make follow-up discussion, practice, and/ or performance
                support available to help with practical application in the
                participant context.
             »» It helps to have two people running a demonstration activity
                — one to run the demonstration and the other to speak about
                what is being demonstrated.
             »» Encourage the presenter(s) to embrace questions and
                concerns, delve deeper to clarify, and involve the rest of the
                participants in answering questions.
             »» Make sure that participants have an opportunity to practice
                what was demonstrated




                                                                                 39
     6. E-DISCUSSION


     A discussion that takes place online either synchronously or asynchronously.

     When planning e-discussion, consider the following questions:
       »» Are the expected outcomes of the e-discussion clear?
       »» Have you decided how to conduct the e-discussion?
       »» How involved should the moderator be in the e-discussion?
       »» Have you ensured that all participants can access the e-discussion?
       »» Will the selected tool accommodate the number of people wanting
          to participate?
       »» How will you capture the results of the e-discussion?

     e-Discussion may be organized…
       »» As an open, informal discussion.
       »» As a moderated discussion.

     Use e-discussion to…
       »» Engage members of a community of practice.
       »» Sustain learning and engagement both before and after face-to-face
          knowledge exchange initiatives.
       »» Examine topics in-depth and allow for deeper reflection.
       »» Crowdsource ideas from diverse stakeholder groups.
       »» Support coaching/mentoring.
       »» Enable planning and collaboration at any stage of a project or program —
          especially among geographically dispersed teams.
       »» Plan agendas with key stakeholder groups, including participants.




             TIPS FROM THE FIELD
             üüConsider using an asynchronous e-discussion when you need
               scheduling flexibility.

             üüParticipants do not need to be available at a fixed time to discuss a
               topic; they may engage at their convenience within the established
               parameters of the e-discussion.

             üüProvide moderator and participants with information on how to use
               the e-discussion tool/environment.

             üüProvide clear instructions on how participants can ask questions and
               provide feedback.

             üüEncourage participants to propose and lead discussion topics.

             üüEngage participants in capturing and summarizing the discussions.




40
                                      7. EXPERT PANEL


A moderated set of presentations on the same topic addressed from various
angles by a group of people with specialized knowledge.

Expert panel may be organized…
  »» Virtual or face-to-face.
  »» As a moderated activity.
  »» At the delivery stage of a project.

Use expert panel to…
  »» Provide multiple perspectives on a topic.
  »» Raise awareness about a topic or an issue.
  »» Lend credibility to a topic by providing an expert perspective.
  »» Enable knowledge sharing.




        TIPS FROM THE FIELD
        üüChoose panelists for their knowledge, communication skills, and
          effectiveness as speakers.

        üüProvide panelists with background information about participants
          and the relevance of the topic area for them.

        üüHold a briefing (virtual or face-to-face) with panelists at least two
          weeks before the event to familiarize the moderator and all the pan-
          elists with the content of the presentations.

        üüEncourage participants to learn about the topic before the event;
          provide or suggest appropriate background documents. This
          communication can be done virtually.

        üüGood moderation is critical to the success of an expert panel.

        üüWhen planning the activity, consider what you will do if:
              »» You are running out of time.
              »» There are too many, or not enough, participants.
              »» Your desired panelists require compensation -- do you have an
                 adequate budget?
              »» You can’t get enough panelists to participate.
              »» One or more panelists can’t participate at the last minute.
              »» The equipment has a malfunction.




                                                                                  41
     8. FIELD VISIT


     Physically going to a location that enables participants to experience project
     realities directly and meet with implementation teams and beneficiaries.

     Field visit may be organized to…
       »» Last for one or several days.
       »» Include one or more demonstrations or hands-on learning opportunities.
       »» Include a team consisting of a team leader, who works closely with organizers
          on the field visit program and is the point of contact during the visit.
       »» Attract participants who contribute to field visit conversations and report back
          based on their expertise.
       »» Welcome observers who participate in field visit but do not have any reporting
          responsibilities.

     Use field visits to…
       »» Gain new knowledge and/or learn directly from a project or program.
       »» Establish direct contact with beneficiaries, community members,
          and/or key stakeholders.
       »» Identify good practices.
       »» Build networks and partnerships.
       »» Support decision-making.



              TIPS FROM THE FIELD
              üüAssign a field visit lead from both the seeker-side and provider-side
                to finalize the logistics for the visit.
              üüInvest the time to do a pre-visit to the field sites along with the
                knowledge provider to prepare the field visit hosts and to customize
                the learning experience for the knowledge seekers. Discuss
                engaging and interactive ways for sharing experience.
              üüEncourage the field visit hosts to share not only their good practices
                but also their challenges, what pitfalls to avoid, and what they wish
                they had known earlier.
              üüSince many field visits include a delegation of visitors, it is important
                to make sure that all members are prepared. Depending on the
                purpose and formality of the visit, it may be important to prepare a
                field visit guide that outlines roles and responsibilities and includes
                all relevant background information and documentation.
              üüSchedule a pre-visit briefing for the visitors to review documents,
                clarify any questions, and also agree on the desired outcomes from
                the visit.
              üüConsider providing a reporting template for visitors/participants to
                record their reflections.
              üüConsider having a daily debrief for the participants to share and
                capture key take-aways and reflections.
              üüEnsure that the field visit report (detailing the outcomes and next
                steps) is prepared and shared with relevant stakeholders in an
                interactive and engaging format/forum.
42
                                                  9. FISHBOWL


A small group conversation or a dialogue process held in a setting that includes
a larger group of observers/listeners.

This experiential exercise enables active participation through discussion by those
“inside the fishbowl” and active observation by those “outside the fishbowl.” Think
of the fishbowl as a center stage with observers sitting around it. A typical fishbowl
setup has an inner circle of chairs for about five to eight people with more chairs for
observers set around the inner circle.

Fishbowl activity may be organized… 	
  »» As an open session, which allows anyone in the audience to join the fishbowl
     during the discussion.
  »» As a closed session that engages participants in the fishbowl as an intact group,
     joining and leaving the fishbowl as one.

Use fishbowl to…
  »» Increase understanding of difficult or controversial topics.
  »» Support multiple perspectives and debate.
  »» Support problem solving, especially for complex problems that might have no
     single-answer solutions.
  »» Encourage active listening and reflection.
  »» Enable knowledge transfer.




         TIPS FROM THE FIELD
              »» Fishbowl requires an experienced coach who, in addition to
                 good coaching skills, is knowledgeable about the subject
                 matter.
              »» Identify and work with the coach to decide on the structure of
                 the activity.
              »» You need a facilitator in addition to the coach to ensure a
                 smooth transition as members of the audience enter and leave
                 the fishbowl.
              »» Select a venue that allows you to set up for a fishbowl conver-
                 sation that also offers good visibility for those observing.
              »» Based on your expected results, prepare an observers’
                 checklist: What should observers pay attention to?
              »» At the end of each fishbowl, be sure to provide a summary of
                 the key points, using the observer’s checklist as a guide.




                                                                                          43
     10. FOCUS GROUP


     A structured discussion protocol that brings together a group of people,
     typically unfamiliar with each other but with a common interest, to give their
     opinions on a particular topic or area.

     Focus group is organized…
       »» Generally, for groups of 6 to 12.
       »» With a facilitator experienced in focus-group processes.
       »» As a facilitated, interview-based interaction that also allows for group discussion.
       »» To be brief but to last at least one hour.
       »» To record the discussion and its outcomes.

     Use focus group to…
       »» Test assumptions for improved decision-making.
       »» Test target audience response/reaction (to products or services or campaigns)
          before they are launched.
       »» Support development of a strategic focus.
       »» Encourage participants to build on each other’s perspectives.
       »» Create a safe space for sharing opinions and deeper reflections.




             TIPS FROM THE FIELD
             Find an experienced facilitator who can:
                   »» Be objective.
                   »» Listen well.
                   »» Draw people into conversations in a group environment.
                   »» Foster an atmosphere that enables information sharing.

             Prepare an introduction script that:
                   »» Explains the purpose.
                   »» Explains how the focus group will be conducted.
                   »» Describes the facilitator’s role.
                   »» Make sure you explain to participants how you will capture
                      their opinions.
                   »» Consider using consent forms, especially if the focus group is
                      to be audio or video recorded.
                   »» Select a room that is conducive to discussion.
                   »» Prepare minutes or a summary document in a timely fashion
                      (within three to five days after the focus group session is
                      completed); review carefully before making decisions about
                      next steps.
                   »» Plan well ahead of the focus group discussion. Planning is key!



44
                                              11. INTERVIEW


A question-and-answer engagement with an individual about a specific topic,
usually following a pre-determined set of questions.

Interview may be organized…
    »» With well-known experts and practitioners.
    »» Following a formal, semi-formal, or informal protocol.
    »» In real-time, virtual or face-to-face.
    »» To be captured and shared.

Use interview to…
    »» Raise awareness about a topic, issue, or cause.
    »» Capture tacit knowledge.
    »» Lend credibility to a topic by providing an expert perspective.
    »» Share practical experience.
    »» Enable knowledge sharing.
    »» Replace a presentation.




          TIPS FROM THE FIELD
          üüBefore conducting the interview, prepare questions and a clear
            protocol and share these with the interviewee ahead of time.

          üüBe ready to dig deeper into the topic with follow-up and
            clarification questions.

          üüMake sure you capture the interview in print, or as an audio or video
            recording.

          üüIf you plan to broadcast the interview, consider if it is going to be
            live or pre-recorded and edited.

          üüDecide how you plan to promote and share the interview. Depending
            on your audience, you may select one or more ways to disseminate
            the interview such as print, radio, podcast, video blog, television, or
            other media



.




                                                                                      45
     12. KNOWLEDGE CAFÉ


     Open, creative, facilitator-led conversations to surface collective knowledge,
     share ideas, and encourage collaborative dialogue in a relaxed, café-type
     environment.

     Knowledge café may be organized…
       »» Virtual or face-to-face.
       »» As a part of large conferences, workshops, and knowledge fairs.

     Use a knowledge café to…
       »» Provide multiple perspectives on a topic.
       »» Surface and collect tacit knowledge and experience from a large group
          of participants.
       »» Support collective learning and build networks.
       »» Identify good practice approaches.




             TIPS FROM THE FIELD
             üüEstablish café etiquette and environment to enable open dialogue
               through conversations.

             üüRules might include “Listen carefully”, “Take turns in the
               conversation”, and “Contribute any and all thoughts”.

             üüRemember a knowledge café is only as good as the questions you
               ask. So spend time in crafting the right questions and keep the
               following in mind when preparing the questions:
                  »» Use open-ended questions that do not have just a yes/no
                     answer.
                  »» Use questions that encourage inquiry instead of advocacy.
                  »» Test the questions ahead of time with key individuals to ensure
                     that they are easy to understand.
                  »» Consider organizing your questions in idea/issue clusters for
                     easier linking of conversation results to the core ideas/issues.
                  »» An experienced facilitator is key to the success of a knowledge
                     café. Also consider including scribes and note-takers to
                     harvest the knowledge being shared.




46
                                                     13. SURVEY


The gathering of data or opinions from participants using a structured set
of questions.

Survey may be organized…
  »» Virtual and/or face-to-face.
  »» In real-time with immediate feedback.
  »» Over a set period of time.
  »» At any stage of a project.

Use survey to…
  »» Monitor progress or evaluate results.
  »» Capture participants’ perspectives and opinions or surface areas of consensus.
  »» Conduct a needs assessment or prioritize areas of action.
  »» Enable knowledge sharing.




        TIPS FROM THE FIELD
        üüUse surveys before, during, or after a Study Tour to make learning
          more relevant, interactive, and useful for the participants.

        üüSurveys are effective polling tools to prompt discussions, surface
          areas for consensus, or stakeholder ownership; and to prioritize
          important next steps or action items and outputs from Study Tours.

        üüInclude simple instructions for completing the survey.

        üüDetermine the right questions for your context, keeping in mind the
          following:
             »» Check that questions are written clearly and concisely — keep
                brief, focused, and on one subject.
             »» Check that the questions are not general, ambiguous, or lead-
                ing. Use close-ended questions when appropriate and if you
                plan to aggregate responses. Developing the right questions
                is more time-consuming up front but makes analysis of results
                simpler.
             »» Use open-ended questions when you require a narrative
                response, and limit the number of response options. Carefully
                consider your capacity to process open-ended responses and
                how you will use them; narrative responses require more
                intensive data analysis for interpreting the results.
             »» Use balanced rating scales and label each option on the scale to
                increase the likelihood that respondents understand the scale.
             »» Pretest your survey before distribution—ideally, with individuals
                similar to your respondents.
             »» Follow good practice in designing the response options.
                                                                                      47
     14. SWOT ANALYSIS


     Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threat Analysis: A structured
     examination to identify a program or organization’s internal strengths and
     weaknesses as well as any external/internal opportunities and threats.

     SWOT analysis may be organized to…
       »» Manage and eliminate weaknesses.
       »» Help increase awareness.
       »» Serve as prelude to strategy formation.
       »» Stimulate new ideas and uncover opportunities.
       »» Enable knowledge transfer.




             TIPS FROM THE FIELD
             »» Create a worksheet to help participants document their answers to
                these key questions:
               üüStrengths
                  »» What do you do well?
                  »» What unique resources can you draw on?
                  »» What do others see as your strengths?

               üüWeaknesses
                 »» What could you improve?
                 »» Where do you have fewer resources than others?
                 »» What are others likely to see as weaknesses?

               üüOpportunities
                  »» What opportunities are open to you?
                  »» What trends could you take advantage of?
                  »» How can you turn your strengths into opportunities?

               üüThreats
                  »» What threats could harm you?
                  »» What is your competition doing?
                  »» What threats do your weaknesses expose you to?

             »» Ask participants to identify the relative importance of SWOT in the
                context of the knowledge exchange.

             »» Consider options for how you will analyze answers and debrief
                participants:
               üüCreate a SWOT chart that shows the results visually.
               üüInvolve the participants in consensus building.
               üüUse the final SWOT analysis matrix to identify additional
                 knowledge exchange needs or build a roadmap of next steps.



48
49
SAMPLES & CHECKLISTS
                                               STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




1. SAMPLE: PRE-STUDY TOUR SURVEY QUESTIONS FOR
   KNOWLEDGE SEEKERS
  Name of organization:
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  Contact Person Name: (Surname, First Name, Position in Organization):
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  Email:
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  Mailing address:
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  Location of organization (City, State, Country)
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  What are the key development priorities of your organization?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  Describe the challenges that you and your peers are currently facing in achieving the
  development priorities?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  What, in your perspective, would help to address the challenge(s)?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  What are your knowledge and learning goals for this Study Tour?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  What would success look like to you at the end of the Study Tour?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  What group of stakeholders do you hope to share your new knowledge with? Toward
  what outcomes?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  During the Study Tour, whom would you like to get to know better, and why?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  How would you like to continue your engagement with the other Study Tour
  participants?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  From your perspective, what might the knowledge brokers and providers learn from
  your experience?
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  ______________________________________________________________________________
  Please indicate below the group you belong to:
  [ ] Policy-makers;	                   [ ] Others (please specify):
  [ ] Senior management;	                   __________________________________________
  [ ] Mid-management;	                      __________________________________________
  [ ] Technical specialists;
  [ ] Academics (faculty and students);


                                                                                          51
STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




     2. SAMPLE: ACTION PLANNING SESSION
       DURATION   PROCEDURE                                               MATERIALS

       5 min.     Session introduction.
                  üüFacilitator explains structure and goal of session
                    and assigns resource persons.
       30 min.    Large group discussion and brainstorming.               üüFlip chart
                  üüFacilitator leads a discussion on what they have      üüMarkers
                    learned so far, what they could apply within
                    their own context, and what actions do they
                    foresee taking in the short and medium term.
                    Note: Allow time for individual reflection, review
                    of Study Tour journal and other materials and
                    engagement with other participants in the room
                    to cross-pollinate ideas.

       45 min.    Action plan development either with intact              üüAction planning
                  teams, small groups of different stakeholders,            worksheet
                  or individually.
                  Facilitator hands out action planning worksheet.
                  The worksheet should include a focus on: action
                  steps, responsibilities, timeline, resources /
                  support / opportunities, potential barriers and
                  risks, and communication plan.
                  Facilitator explains the group structure, which
                  will depend on what makes sense given the
                  participant profile and their working affiliation
                  with each other.
                  Facilitator indicates that resource person is there
                  to offer guidance as needed for their action
                  planning work.	
       30 min.    Documenting/sharing/feedback in a                       üüFlip Charts
                  large group.                                            üüMarkers
                  üüParticipants briefly share their draft action plans
                    with the larger group and invite feedback from
                    their peers and resource persons on one or two
                    specific challenges.
       5 min.     Wrap up.
                  üüFacilitator wraps up the session with a focus on
                    next steps.




52
                                                   STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




3. SAMPLE: AFTER-ACTION REVIEW ACTIVITY
  DURATION   PROCEDURE                                                  MATERIALS

  5 min.     Session introduction.
             Facilitator explains the goal of the session and that
             the session is organized to address the following
             four questions:
               1.	What was expected to happen?
               2.	What actually happened?
               3.	What went well and why?
               4.	What can be improved and how?
  10 min.    Review: What was expected to happen?                 üüSummary
             Facilitator asks participants to review the prepared   (describing initial
             summary describing the following:                      plan for Study Tour)
               »» Purpose and objectives of Study Tour,
               »» Knowledge provider,
               »» Knowledge recipients,
               »» Initial timeline and agenda,
               »» Intended outcomes and outputs,
               »» Expected operational barriers.
  20 min.    Discussion: What actually happened?                üüProjector
             Facilitator engages participants in discussion and üüComputer
             documents what actually happened. Facilitator üüFile: Initial agenda
             modifies the initial Study Tour agenda as partici-
             pants share what took place during the Study Tour.
               Note: It is important that all participants contribute
               and confirm the modified agenda.	
  30 min.    Discussion: What went well and why?                  üüMarkers
             Facilitator explains that this discussion is to help üüFlipchart
             identify successful strategies to ensure that good
             practices are built into future work and repeated.
             To start the discussion, the facilitator can ask,
             “What went well and why?”
               Note: Depending on the participants, this part of the
               session could include a smaller group discussion
               before sharing with all.	

  30 min.    Reflection & Sharing: What can be improved            üüReflection
             and how?                                                Worksheet
             Facilitator asks participants to complete the üüMarkers
             Reflection Worksheet to generate answers to the üüFlipchart
             question, what can be improved and how?
             Facilitator asks participants to share one or two key
             points and notes the suggestions on the flipchart
             until the group has exhausted all points. 	
  5 min.     Wrap up.
             Facilitator collects the worksheets/notes. Facilitator
             will draft the summary from the session and email
             summary to participants for further refinement.
               Note: This process can be used for an after action
               review only with the core design and implementation
               team members.



                                                                                           53
STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




     4. SAMPLE: BRAINSTORMING ACTIVITY TO PLAN THE
        STUDY TOUR
       DURATION   PROCEDURE                                             MATERIALS

       5 min.     Session introduction.
                  Facilitator/leader explains goals of the
                  brainstorming session:
                    »» Generate an inventory of sites to visit during
                       the Study Tour and appropriate contacts for
                       these sites, and
                    »» Identify a list of relevant topics to address.
                    Note: The open brainstorming session has certain
                    ground rules; the facilitator/leader will remind
                    participants.
                    »» No idea is a bad idea.
                    »» No immediate discussion, simply state
                       the idea.
                    »» Round-robin format with the option to pass.
       10 min.    Idea generation.                                      üüPost-it notes
                  Facilitator/leader asks participants to take a few    üüPens
                  minutes to write down their ideas in order to
                  speed up the sharing process. Facilitator/leader
                  provides participants with a stack of Post-it pads
                  for them to write down one idea per note.
       10 min.    Idea sharing.                                         üüFlipchart
                  Participants share one idea and stick their Post-it     (organized per
                  note in the appropriate location on the flipchart.	     session goals)

       20 min.    Building on the original ideas.                       üüFlip Charts
                  When all ideas are accounted for, the facilitator     üüMarkers
                  leads a discussion building on the original ideas.
       15 min.    Wrap up.
                  Facilitator categorizes, prioritizes and/or
                  summarizes the list of ideas for further refinement
                  or action




54
                                                    STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




5. SAMPLE: AGENDA FOR A WORKSHOP
 (which laid the ground work for a Study Tour)
  Arrival: Thursday

  Day One: Friday

            8:00 - 9:00 BREAKFAST.
           9:00 - 10:00 Protocol.
         10:00 - 11:00 Plenary Session: Community Building and Peer-to-Peer Basics.
         11:00 - 12:00 Networking Session: Getting to Know Each Other, Social Mapping.
         12:00 - 13:00 Negotiating rules (including mobile phones).
                       Peer-to-peer dynamic/Speed dating.
                       World Cafe. Key questions.
         13:00 - 14:15 LUNCH.
         14:30 - 15:00 Transportation to field visit site.
                       Arrival and registration.
                       (Tea and snacks at registration table)
         15:00 - 18:00 Track 1 field visit.       Track 2 field visit.    Track 3 field visit.
         18:00 - 18:30 Transportation back to hotel.
         18:30 - 20:30 Cocktails and light appetizers.
        20:30 - onward DINNER AND SOCIAL ACTIVITY.
  Day Two: Saturday

            8:00 - 9:00 BREAKFAST.
           9:00 - 11:00 Plenary Session debrief and a panel discussion with Experts.
         11:00 - 13:00 Track 1:                   Track 2:                Track 3:
                       Exchange most              Exchange most           Exchange most
                       significant story.         significant story.      significant story.
                       Problem solving.           Problem solving.        Problem solving.
                       Key take-aways.            Key take-aways.         Key take-aways.
                       Lessons learned.           Lessons learned.        Lessons learned.
         13:00 - 14:15 LUNCH
         14:15 - 15:15 Harvesting: Where to Go, How to Get Organized, how to learn from
                       additional good practices of their peers.
         15:15 - 16:30 Fishbowl Plenary: Setting the Vision, Principles, and Practices for the
                       Community and follow up Study Tours related to different tracks/
                       themes.
         16:30 - 17:15 Evaluation and Wrap-Up.
         17:15 - 17:45 CLOSING CEREMONY.
        17:45 - onward Light refreshments and conversations.




                                                                                                 55
STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




     6. SAMPLE: FIELD VISIT AGENDA
       (adapted from the Global Environment Facility-led Knowledge Day)

       DURATION     PROCEDURE

       45 min.      Before departing for field visit:
                    The field visit coordinator leads a pre-field visit debriefing session where
                    the agenda and learning objectives are reviewed with the participants
                    and the following materials are distributed:
                       »» Project summary.
                       »» Learning station roadmap. Learning stations are set up at each proj-
                          ect site where project stakeholders display and discuss a completed
                          project (or a project well into implementation), highlighting lessons
                          and good practices.
                       »» Knowledge passport. This is a customized field visit template that all
                          participants need to complete and get stamped at each learning
                          station so that they can enter in an attractive raffle at the end of the
                          field visit.

                    Coordinator assigns people to learning groups and also assigns a
                    group lead.

                    Coordinator explains his/her role in documenting the visit with photos
                    and encourages the group to take photos/videos and share them after
                    the visit and suggests the group can prepare a post-field visit
                    documentary for broader dissemination.
       TBC          Depart in buses based on pre-assigned learning groups along with as-
                    signed group leaders.
       75 min.      During the field visit
                    Participants receive a plenary debriefing on the project from the field visit
                    host and then divide into their learning groups and begin their tour of
                    the project, moving from learning station to learning station. They spend
                    about 15 minutes at each learning station. The activities at each learning
                    station can include: listening to project presentations, participating in
                    hands-on demonstration, touring the site, talking with project beneficia-
                    ries, and engaging in discussion with different stakeholders. They contin-
                    ue to record their notes and reflections in their passports.
       45 min.      End of the field visit
                    The participants come together for a plenary debriefing session, share
                    their key takeaways from the learning stations, participate in the passport
                    raffle for a fun activity, fill out the exit survey, and the field visit concludes
                    with a luncheon.
       TBC          Luncheon get together and departure for hotels/workshop/
                    conference venue for follow-up activities as needed.




56
                                                STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




7. SAMPLE: PARTICIPANT TEMPLATE FOR FIELD VISIT
  QUESTIONS                               YOUR ANSWERS

  What did I expect from this visit?




  What struck me most? Why?




  What are the questions that came
  up from the visit?



  What do I consider to have been
  the success factors of the initiative
  we observed?


  What ideas can contribute to im-
  prove or enhance the initiative we
  observed?


  What obstacles and challenges
  came up in the process of
  developing this initiative?


  What new challenges are there
  today and how are they being
  addressed?


  What aspects of this experience
  would be replicable in my city/
  country?


  What aspect/part would or would
  not be? Why?



  How I can put what I learned into
  practice in my city/country?



  What lessons can I take from this
  experience?




                                                                                57
STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




     8. SAMPLE: PARTICIPANT SURVEY
       This survey is conducted at the end of the Study Tour.

       Feedback on Study Tour
        Questions:
         »» How would you rate the overall quality of the Study Tour?
            (Range: Very low to Very high)

         »» How would you rate the overall usefulness of the Study Tour?
            (Range: Very low to Very high)

         »» How would you rate the overall relevance of the Study Tour to your work?
            (Range: Very low to Very high)

         »» To what degree did the Study Tour achieve the intended objectives?
            (Range: Very low to Very high)

         »» How would you rate the facilitators? (excellent, very good, good, fair)

         »» How would you rate the knowledge providers?
            (excellent, very good, good, fair)

         »» Was the knowledge gained useful?
            FF Yes (Please explain)
            FF No (Please explain)

         »» How will you apply the knowledge gained from the Study Tour in your organization?

         »» Were the resources provided to you during the Study Tour adequate?
            FF Yes
            FF No (Please explain)

         »» Was the time allocated to different sessions/field visits adequate?
            FF Yes
            FF No (Please indicate how timing could be improved. Which sessions needed
               more time.)


       Note: Include a question here on logistics. This question should be broken down to include more
       specific aspects of logistics you are looking to get feedback on (for example: accommodations,
       meeting rooms, transportation, translation services, meals, free time).

         »» What worked best during the Study Tour?

         »» What would you recommend to improve the Study Tour?

         »» What are the key messages you are taking away from the Study Tour?




58
                                                STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




9. SAMPLE: STUDY TOUR AGENDA
 Adapted from the MEDELLIN LAB/Study Tour focusing on Medellín as an Inclusive,
 (
 Safe and Resilient City)
  TIME                 DAY 1 ACTIVITIES

          9:00 - 10:00 Activity: “Introduction and meeting the participants”.

         10:00 - 12:00 Tour of the city, traveling by Medellin Metro.

         12:00 - 13:00 At hotel.

         13:00 - 14:30 Luncheon.

         14:30 - 17:00 Activity: “Café Mundial” (Global Café).

         17:00 - 18:00 Context Setting, Agenda, and Outcomes for Medillin Lab Week,
                       including presentations.
         18:00 - 19:00 Welcome remarks and cocktail party
                       (hosted by Medellin’s Resilience Office).
                       A moment with members of the press.


  TIME                 DAY 2 ACTIVITIES

           8:00 - 9:00 Plenary: Feedback and reflections from Day 1.

          9:45 - 11:40 Tour of sports facilities led by INDER.

         11:40 - 13:40 Tour of Outdoor Electric Escalators and Integrated Urban Project.

         13:40 - 14:00 Transportation to San Javier Library Park.

         14:00 - 15:00 Luncheon.

         15:00 - 16:00 Presentation by Mayor of Medellin.

         16:00 - 17:00 Signing of Agreements between local authorities and
                       international agencies and donors.


  TIME                 DAY 3 ACTIVITIES

           8:00 - 9:00 Plenary: Feedback and reflections from Day 2.

           9:00 - 9:40 Transportation to Centro Cultural de Moravia.

          9:40 - 12:00 Participants divide into 3 subgroups and alternate visiting the 3
                       field visit sites to accommodate space-related constraints at
                       each site. At Centro Cultural de Moravia, the director explains
                       the historical and cultural value of the neighborhood and the
                       role played by the center in creating protection and inclusion.
                       At the Buen Comienzo Kindergarten, group learns about the
                       protection strategy for 0 to 5 year-olds. At the Moravia Hill site,
                       the group is greeted by a community leader who explains the
                       environmental, urban, and social transformation of the sector.
         12:00 - 13:30 Luncheon (picnic at the Botanical Garden).

         13:30 - 14:00 Transportation for the afternoon tour.

         14:00 - 17:30 Two groups alternate visiting the two sites: CEPAR followed by
                       Casa de la Memoria Museum.



                                                                                             59
STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




     9. SAMPLE: STUDY TOUR AGENDA
      (Adapted from the MEDELLIN LAB/Study Tour focusing on Medellín as an Inclusive,
      Safe and Resilient City)

       TIME                  DAY 4 ACTIVITIES

                8:00 - 9:00 Feedback and reflections from Day 3.

                9:00 - 9:30 Transportation to the Secretary of Security.

               9:30 - 12:00 Panel discussion: Participants include representatives of the
                             Secretary of Security, academia, and an international agency.

                             A guided tour on the integrated emergency system where the
                             group learns about strategies such as 123 Mujer.
              12:00 - 13:00 Transportation to San Cristobal (Medellin Rural Área).

              13:00 - 14:00 Luncheon with the community.

              14:00 - 14:30 Transportation for the afternoon tour.

              15:00 - 17:15 Participants divide into 4 small groups to facilitate their visit to
                             different locations. The participants directly experience the
                             empowerment of the community and engage in discussions
                             with other organizations.


       TIME                  DAY 5 ACTIVITIES

               9:00 - 12:00 Activity: “Open Space” to prepare action plans and next steps.

              12:00 - 13:00 Evaluation/Feedback and closing protocols.




60
                                                      STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




10. KNOWLEDGE SEEKER’S CHECKLIST: TO PREPARE
    FOR THE STUDY TOUR
   Preparing for the Study Tour
       FF Send in your Pre-Study Tour Survey.
             If you have not received any kind of survey, try to reach out to the knowl-
             edge broker to request a survey. The information you provide will help
             inform the design of the Study Tour.
       FF Review the Study Tour Agenda.
       FF Write a list of things you would like to learn during the Study Tour.
       FF Collect information on the places you will be visiting.

   Managing logistics
       FF Verify passport and visa requirements.
       FF Communicate any food allergies, health concerns, or religious requirements that
          organizers should be aware of.
       FF Let organizers know about any challenges you may have with the language or
          customs of the places you are visiting.
       FF Pack appropriate clothing and supplies (e.g., bug spray) for the places you are
          visiting on the Study Tour.

   Making the most of the Study Tour
       FF Find opportunities to engage with other participants, facilitators, and
          knowledge providers as much as possible
       FF Keep a journal about what you learn, experience, and observe and what you
          can apply in your own context.
       FF Ask questions and share your reflections and experiences.
       FF Take pictures and videos. Also use networking and communication tools to
          share your experience with a wider group of peers and stakeholders who can
          benefit from your learning.

   Putting your experience to work
       FF Prepare an action plan with specific milestones and make note of things you
          plan to do differently after the Study Tour.
       FF Share what you learned with your peers and other key stakeholders through
          appropriate knowledge-sharing platforms.
       FF Acknowledge the work of organizers and knowledge providers and establish
         ongoing relationships to build on the Study Tour experience.




                                                                                            61
STUDY TOUR: EXAMPLES & CHECKLISTS




11. KNOWLEDGE PROVIDERS CHECKLIST: TO PREPARE
    FOR THE STUDY TOUR
     Study Tour preparation
         FF Review the Pre-Study Tour Survey of knowledge seekers. This is your critical
            resource to understand the knowledge-seeker profiles, their knowledge and
            learning needs, and the challenges they need to address.

         FF Prepare the Study Tour Agenda working closely with the knowledge broker to
            support the targeted knowledge and learning outcomes.

         FF Clearly identify the relevant knowledge and experience that you would like to
            share with the knowledge seekers.

         FF Have a plan to share the knowledge in an engaging format. If the knowledge
            you want to share is still not fully captured, plan to document it in an appropri-
            ate format (presentations, posters, videos) well ahead of time. Also, prepare
            your presenters/resource experts who will be participating from your side.

         FF Identify any questions you may have for, or about, the knowledge seekers and
            communicate those to the knowledge broker or Study Tour coordinator.

         FF Identify ways to link your knowledge to the contexts of the knowledge seekers.

         FF Identify what you might be able to learn from the knowledge-seeking
            participants.

         FF Share both the successes and failures of your experience.

         FF Plan to involve visiting participants in conversation rather than just one-way
            lecture.

         FF Use graphics, images, or other media to help explain and illustrate what was
            done and what was achieved.

         FF When appropriate, give knowledge seekers the opportunities to
            “learn by doing”.

         FF Manage logistics.

         FF Verify the number of participating knowledge seekers.

         FF Ensure that there is enough space in the meeting room.

         FF Ask the knowledge broker about any translating services that will be needed
            during the event.

         FF Prepare any handouts or supporting documents that you may want to provide
            to the knowledge seekers.

         FF Plan for extra time during the sessions to allow for any delays related to travel
            and other logistics.

         FF Discuss backup plans with the knowledge broker.

         FF When appropriate, share your contact information with knowledge seekers so
            they continue to ask questions or share information in the future.




62
THE ART OF DESIGNING
AND IMPLEMENTING
STUDY TOURS
A Guide Based on
The Art of Knowledge Exchange Methodology
Shobha Kumar & Ryan Watkins
