                                                         MARCH, 2017




        Analysis of Arrears of Public
        Prosecutors Offices in Serbia




Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia, World Bank
Acknowledgements



This report was prepared by Milos Markovic (Consultant). Valuable guidance was provided by
Georgia Harley (Justice Reform Specialist, Task Team Leader of the Multi Donor Trust Fund for
Justice Sector Reform), Srdjan Svircev (Public Sector Specialist) and Marina Matic Boskovic
(Justice Reform Advisor). Great support was received from Svetlana Nenadic (Member of the
State Prosecutorial Council) and Tamara Smrkulj and Anela Grbovic from the financial
department of the SPC, as well as chief accountants and prosecutors from the PPOs that were
included in this report. List of interviewed persons is provided Annex 3 of this report.
Abbreviations

 SPC            State Prosecutorial Council
 PPO            Public Prosecutor Office
 APPO           Appellate Public Prosecutor Office
 HPPO           Higher Public Prosecutor Office
 BPPO           Basic Public Prosecutor Office
 FMIS           Financial Management Information System
 FINPLAN        Financial Planning System for budget users
 MoF            Ministry of Finance
 MoJ            Ministry of Justice
 ZUP            Accounting system of the prosecutor’s offices
 BSL            Budget System Law
 PFMRP          Public Financial Management Reform
                Program
Table of Contents
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................ 1
1.     Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 3
     1.2.    Overall context ................................................................................................................. 3
     1.3.    Objectives and approach .................................................................................................. 4
2.     Expenditure of selected PPOs.................................................................................................. 5
3.     Commitment assumption practice ........................................................................................... 8
4.     Arrears in the PPOs system – level, trend and structure ....................................................... 15
5.     Main findings ......................................................................................................................... 20
Recommendations ......................................................................................................................... 21
ANNEX 1...................................................................................................................................... 23
ANNEX 2...................................................................................................................................... 25
ANNEX 3...................................................................................................................................... 27


List of Tables

Table 1. Total expenditure for investigation and postal services for selected PPOs ...................... 6
Table 2. Total expenditure for investigation and postal services for selected PPOs, per active case
and per prosecutor ........................................................................................................................... 8
Table 3. Commitments for investigation and postal services in selected PPOs (annual data) ..... 12
Table 4. Structure of arrears in selected PPOs as of June 2016 .................................................... 17
Table 5. Structure of arrears per prosecutor in selected PPOs as of June 2016 ............................ 17
Table 6. Largest creditors as of November 2016 .......................................................................... 19
List of Figures

Figure 1.Process of assuming commitments (generic) ................................................................. 10
Figure 2.Commitments for investigation in BPPOs Novi Sad and Smederevo (monthly data) ... 13
Figure 3.Commitments for postal services in BPPOs Novi Sad and Smederevo (monthly data) 14
Figure 4.Structure of investigation related commitments in BPPOs Novi Sad and Smederevo .. 15
Figure 5. Term structure of arrears in PPOs ................................................................................. 16
Figure 6.Quarterly arrears level and structure in BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo .......... 18
Executive Summary

  1. This report represents the output of the analysis of arrears of Public Prosecutor’s
     Offices in the Republic of Serbia. The analysis was conducted on a sample of five PPOs
     during November and December 2016. The sample was selected based on the needs
     expressed by the State Prosecutorial Council that reflected the necessity to capture
     different PPO instances as well as PPOs with arrear levels at both extremes of the spectrum.
     The final sample included: HPPO Belgrade, HPPO Valjevo, BPPO Smederevo, BPPO
     Prokuplje and BPPO Novi Sad. The primary focus of the analysis was to address the two
     key sources of arrears accumulation – investigation and postal related expenditure.

  2. We focused on a set of questions (i.e. research items) which are designed to provide
     comprehensive insight in the issue of arrears accumulation. These include: assessment
     of the budgetary status and the overall financial management practice in sample PPOs,
     assessment of the expenditure levels for investigation and postal services across the sample,
     assessment of the process of expenditure verification and assumption of financial
     commitments regarding these two types of expenditures, assessment of the accounting and
     reporting practice around these commitments, analysis of the process of arrears
     management and reporting, and finally the assessment of enforced collection volumes and
     associated expenditures.

  3. We found substantial differences in the process of commitment assumption regarding
     investigation expenditure. Apart from the lack of clarity and guidance in expenditure
     verification and improper financial management IT infrastructure in place, this reflect
     heavily on the observed levels and the differences in levels of arrears across the PPOs. For
     instance, some PPOs have arrangements with courts which enable them to transfer large
     portions of their investigation expenditure to them after an indictment is issued. This gives
     them the opportunity to clear their arrears much faster than the PPOs which do not enjoy
     this privilege.

  4. Another important finding of our analysis is that the investigation related
     expenditure levels per case vary significantly across PPOs. We found large discrepancy
     in cost per case both across the whole sample and across the PPOs from the same category
     (i.e. instance). We found some offices paying consistently two or even three times more
     per case than their counterparts from the same category. These differences cannot be
     explained by the increase in case load and the level of complexity of cases managed by
     PPOs.




                                               1
5. Our recommendations are formulated to increase transparency, protect integrity and
   increase financial and overall performance of Serbian PPOs. They include: creation of
   a list of appropriated services and ranges of acceptable costs per case to prevent
   discrepancies in costs per case; enhancing provisions of the Rulebook on Charges in
   Judicial Proceedings to enhance investigation related expenditure verification process;
   establishing standardized practice of commitment assumption regarding investigation
   expenditure; ensuring that commitments are recorded and reported adequately to the SPC;
   increasing/modifying the budgets of PPOs to reflect implementation of the above reforms
   while regularly monitoring and analyzing arrears accumulation.




                                          2
1.      Introduction

1.2.    Overall context

1.      Serbia has suffered significant output shock following the breakout of the Global
Financial Crisis (GFC). After negative 3.1 percent growth recorded in 2009, the average real
growth was just above zero in the period from 2010 until 2015. As a consequence of
countercyclical fiscal measures undertaken by the GoS and inherent combination of the increasing
public expenditure and output stagnation, fiscal deficit figures exploded reaching 5.9, 5.2 and 6.3
percent in the period from 2012 until 2014. Considering the period from the beginning of the crisis,
public debt almost doubled relative to GDP going from 34 percent in 2008 to 71 percent in 2014.

2.       In an effort to tackle the challenges imposed by the worsening fiscal conditions that
came as a consequence of GFC, Serbia has undertaken substantial consolidation measures
supported by a three-year Standby Arrangement with the IMF. In the short term, the program
focused on the control of aggregate wage and pension expenditures, improvements in tax
administration, and reductions in subsidies to state owned enterprises. The Government has also
begun to address longer term structural problems in the administration of the public sector,
focusing on functional reviews and restructuring to create opportunities for efficiency gains. The
latest review of the arrangement performed in Q3 of last year showed that Serbia remains “broadly
on track” with the arrangements criteria and with most of the structural benchmarks met.

3.      The effects of the consolidation actions have been encouraging. All of the key indicators
are showing signs of significant recovery from the positions in the first years of the crisis. GDP
growth has shifted to the positive region recording 1.1 percent growth at the end of 2015 and it is
expected to sustain at similar levels in the medium term. However, Serbia’s path towards better
fiscal health will depend on how much it manages its public spending to bring down its high deficit
– 2017 budget comes with 69 billion RSD deficit (1.6 percent of GDP) and if offset by higher GDP
growth will bring the public debt level down for the first time in past several decades.

4.       One of the SBA program priorities in the coming period includes elimination of
domestic arrears1. The arrears management remains one of the key challenges as the only
quantitative target that was missed under September 2016 review was the ceiling on accumulation
of domestic arrears, primarily because of the arrears accumulated by the judicial sector. The set of
priorities defined in the last review includes also continued reform of public administration and
wage system as well as public investment management.

5.     Criminal Procedure Code that was introduced in 2013 transferred the responsibility
for conducting criminal investigations from courts to prosecutor’s offices. As a result, the

1
 Arrears represent overdue payments for which associated financial commitments are assumed by a budget
beneficiary

                                                     3
PPOs took over a large number of cases from the courts . Rough estimate is that around 100,000
investigation cases were transferred. The transfer of responsibilities was not adequately followed
by readjustments in the budget for judiciary and an increase in budget appropriations for
prosecution services. As a result, in the period from 2013 until September 2016 prosecution offices
accumulated arrears in the total of RSD 572 million. This figure constitutes around , which
represents 15% of the total budget for prosecution services for FY 2017 .

1.3.     Objectives and approach

6.      This report provides analysis of the arrears in a sample of PPOs in Serbia2. More
specifically, it looks at the investigation (i.e. mandatory representation and expert witness
service) as well as postal service related expenditure as the main sources of arrears3. At the
more technical level, it aims at providing more solid understanding of the financial management
practice across the sample PPOs which we hope will deliver better insight in how arrears actually
come about and explain differences in arrears levels between PPOs. The primary objective of this
exercise is to present a coherent and concise argument which would be utilized to increase
transparency in the arrears management, improve financial management through strengthened
internal financial control and more reliable accounting records, and most importantly enhance the
budget planning process. Main questions that we aim to answer are the following:

    a)   What is the level of expenditure related to investigation and postal services?
    b)   How does the expenditure compare across PPOs?
    c)   What is the process of assuming and recording financial commitments?
    d)   What are the differences in assuming commitments, if any?
    e)   What are the effects of divergent practice in assuming financial commitments?
    f)   How arrears are accumulated?
    g)   Are proper internal financial control mechanisms in place?
    h)   Are the arrears properly recorded and reported?
    i)   What share of arrears end up in enforced collection?
    j)   What is the damage born by the budget because of the arrears, in financial terms?


7.     The sample selection criteria were built around client’s requirements and the
necessity to capture the different instances of the PPOs as well as “good” and “bad” examples
across the whole network of PPOs in terms of the most recent level of arrears. The final
sample analyzed included HPPO Belgrade, HPPO Valjevo, BPPO Smederevo, BPPO Prokuplje
and BPPO Novi Sad. The initial requirement was to include two of the higher PPOs versus three
BPPOs. Joint decision was made to include the HPPO Belgrade as the largest among the HPPOs

2
  Final list of PPOs to be included in this analysis was finalized in cooperation with the State Prosecutorial Council.
3
  Other reasons for incurrence of arrears include late payments for utility bills, telecommunications, urgent repairs,
stationery, etc.

                                                           4
and the one with the highest level of arrears in the whole network 4 in absolute terms. HPPO
Valjevo was included as an example of an institution with presumably sound financial
management practice. Among the BPPOs the selection was made based on the ratio of arrears per
prosecutor5 and the size of the office. Final sample of BPPO included Novi Sad as the office with
relatively large number of prosecutors (i.e. 26 versus the average of 7) and low level of arrears, as
well as BPPO Prokuplje and BPPO Smederevo as mid-size offices with relatively high level of
arrears per prosecutor.6 Relevant data were collected from the SPC and the sample PPOs through
emails and interviews. Total arrears accumulated as of September 2016 for all (basic and higher)
PPOs are shown in Annex 1.

8.      The rest of the report is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the expenditure of
selected PPOs and provides a general context of PFM in terms of arrears. Section 3 discusses the
differences in commitment assumption among the sample PPOs. Section 4 analyzes the level, trend
and structure of arrears. Section 5 summarizes the main findings while Section 6 lists
recommendations for improving current financial management function of the PPOs in Serbia.


    2. Expenditure of selected PPOs


9.      Budgetary status of PPOs is somewhat undefined given that they act as a direct
budget beneficiaries while at the same time they rely on the SPC and MoJ for appropriation
management and control. PPOs are independent in terms of budget execution (i.e. entering
payment orders in FMIS), however the SPC and MoJ acts as an intermediary between the central
budget authority – Budget Sector of the MoF and PPOs in terms of determining initial
appropriations, their in-year virement and control. Financial planning function is also combined
with the SPC such that PPOs prepare their three month rolling spending plans and enter it into
FINPLAN whereas SPC aggregates these plans and works together with Treasury Administration
in determining the monthly spending quotas.

10.     Based on the Treasury Administration plan for reduction of IBBs the PPOs along
with courts were included in the first phase of the FMIS roll out to indirect budget
beneficiaries. Recently developed PFMRF envisages gradual extension of the FMIS coverage to
IBBs by including all of them in the budgetary accounting and reporting framework. In the next
stage of the process which is scheduled to be completed by the end of 2018, the rest of the IBBs

4
  Its reported arrears as of September 2016 were RSD 158.6 million
5
  Number of prosecutors were decided based on the Decision on the number of deputy public prosecutors (Official
Gazette, 106/2013, 94/2015, 114/2015 and 80/2016) and reflects the size of the population living on the territory
covered by the respective PO.
6
  When sorted strictly based on the criteria of arrears-to-prosecutor ratio, all BPPOs from Belgrade (all three of them)
turned most successful – they have zero arrears. However, we wanted to avoid having HPPO and BPPO from the same
city. Also, the least successful were BPPOs Ruma and Brus, but these offices were not considered representative
because they were too small - with one and four prosecutors, respectively.

                                                           5
which were previously subordinate budget beneficiaries of the Ministry of Justice (mainly prisons)
will be included in the FMIS.

11.      It is not possible to track the flow of commitments and impose strict expenditure
controls over budget beneficiaries that are out of the scope of FMIS.. Previously, holding a
status of anIBB, PPOs were regularly transferred money to their own transactional accounts held
at the Treasury and were making payments without any in-year budgetary control. There were also
no technical prerequisites to control for financial commitments made by PPOs. It was only at the
end of the fiscal year when the expenditure of PPOs, as of any other IBB, was checked against
their financial plans through self-made budget execution reports sent to the TRE and Ministry of
Justice7. The quality of these reports was largely dependent on accounting practices which were
seldom unique and standardized across different offices. These circumstances imposed large fiscal
risks as there was no mechanism in place to control the in-year expenditure and financial
commitments made by them which made it possible for them to incur arrears.

12.      Investigation and postal service related costs vary significantly across the sample.
Table 1 below shows the aggregate expenditure levels for the two types of costs analyzed in this
report, in the period between January 2014 and June 2016. The differences between different PPOs
seem to be in line with the variation in size of the territories they cover (e.g. BPPO Novi Sad versus
BPPO Prokuplje). In additions, there is a correlation between the costs of procedures in different
levels of PPOs where the complexity of cases handled by an HPPO is much higher than that of the
BPPO, as prescribed by the Criminal Procedure Code (e.g. HPPO Belgrade versus BPPO Novi
Sad).


Table 1.Total expenditure for investigation and postal services for selected PPOs

                                                                 2014                           2015                         2016
                                                      investigation                  investigation                investigation
PO                                                        costs
                                                                      postal costs
                                                                                         costs
                                                                                                     postal costs
                                                                                                                      costs
                                                                                                                                  postal costs

HPO Belgrade                                          43,296,560   594,383 79,599,907 428,219 22,841,416                              341,079
HPO Valjevo                                            3,144,844   145,355 4,190,793 194,384 1,493,915                                103,569
BPO Novi Sad                                           8,613,905 1,373,983 8,102,941 1,587,581 4,278,171                              654,194
BPO Prokuplje                                          3,803,320   565,700 4,346,439 540,951 2,272,961                                201,880
BPO Smederevo                                          3,279,224   300,569 5,444,388 588,697 1,363,635                                189,399
source: Budget execution Reports and WB calculation




7
 Before introduction of the SPC, their “superior” direct budget beneficiary in charge of managing their budget
matters

                                                                           6
13.     Expenditure levels are increasing from the introduction of the prosecutor led
investigations in 20138. This trend is a result of the following: On one hand, there is a load of
cases which was taken over from courts once the investigation process started being managed by
the PPOs. For instance, BPPO in Novi Sad took over around 9,000 cases at the beginning of 2014,
while this figure stood at around 1,500 for BPPO in Smederevo. On the other hand, there is an
increasing trend in new cases coming in. Official data collected by the SPC show that for instance
HPPO Belgrade had 13,380 new cases in 2015 versus 12,411 in 2014 (increase of 7.8%)9. With
previous year cases being rolled over to the next year going up because of the initial load and the
increasing number of new ones, the number of active cases is reaching higher and higher figures
every year.

14.    Increase in the investigation and postal service related expenditure level cannot be
attributed only to increased number of active cases. The rate of increase in the number of open
cases going from 2014 to 2015 is 13.2% (i.e. 53,547 versus 47,320 active cases) while the
aggregate increase in investigation and postal service related expenditure is as much as 61.3%
(RSD 105 mil versus RSD 65.1 mil). Highest increase of 83.4% was seen in HPPO Belgrade (RSD
80 mil versus RSD 44.9 mil). But even if HPPO Belgrade was left out, the percentage change of
the expenditure is still higher than the increase in the number of active cases – 17.8% more
expenditure against 13.2% of more cases handled. This indicates that the budgets are increasing
every year so the debts (i.e. arrears) accumulated in the years when the budget was not sufficient
can be settled.

15.     Expenditure differences are striking when observing costs per active case and costs
per prosecutor. Table 2 below is a reformulation of the aggregate expenditure shown in Table 1,
only normalized to reflect case load and number of prosecutors to ensure comparability. There are
differences both across and within different categories of PPOs (i.e. higher versus basic). HPPO
Belgrade recorded 2.5 to almost 3 times higher expenditure level than HPPO Valjevo.

16.    One reason for such a stark difference in can be attributed to complexity of cases
managed by the HPPO in Belgrade. The HPPO Belgrade is managing relatively more
complicated cases that require more time to complete and involve more complex and thus more
expensive expert witness services and larger volume of mandatory representation by lawyers,
compared to those managed by HPPO Valjevo.

17.    The same pattern is observed with the BPPOs. Within this group, BPPO Prokuplje is a
frontrunner with more than RSD 953 costs per case10 compared to RSD 409 and RSD 519 seen in

8
  Data for 2016 cover only the period from January until June
9
  HPPO Valjevo had a sharp increase of almost 42% in 2015 (2,483 versus 1,755 cases) while BPPO Novi Sad and
BPPO Smederevo experienced a less dramatic upswing of 7% and 1.5% respectively. BPPO Prokuplje retained
roughly the same number of cases in 2015 compared to 2014 (2,637 versus 2,665 cases)
10
   Number of active cases includes large share of cases which are dropped at the beginning with zero direct costs

                                                        7
Novi Sad and Smederevo, in 2014. The difference persists through the entire observed period, and
ranges from 132% to 143%, when compared to BPPO Novi Sad. When looking at the costs per
prosecutors the disparity is even more pronounced. The extent of the difference between BPPO
Prokuplje and BPPO Novi Sad reaches almost 300%, while when compared to BPPO Smederevo
the maximum difference is reached in 2015 at the level of 60%. It is important to note that the
difference between BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo are just as outstanding as when
comparing Novi Sad and Prokuplje, with the latter having much higher expenditure levels based
on both criteria.

Table 2.Total expenditure for investigation and postal services for selected PPOs, per active
case and per prosecutor
                                                               2014                        2015                        2016*
                                                      costs per   cost per         costs per     cost per   costs per   cost per
PO
                                                     active case prosecutor       active case   prosecutor active case prosecutor

HPO Belgrade                                               3,063      1,082,414         4,879     1,851,161        1,181       531,196
HPO Valjevo                                                1,723      1,048,281         1,638     1,396,931          592       497,972
BPO Novi Sad                                                 409        374,518           366       368,316          205       178,257
BPO Prokuplje                                                953      1,267,773           940     1,448,813          498       757,654
BPO Smederevo                                                519        819,806           690       907,398          173       227,273
source: Budget execution Reports and WB calculation
*Budget execution data for 2016 are for period Jan-Jun, while data on caseload per PO are estimates based on earlier years




3.         Commitment assumption practice


18.     Arrears are a consequence of accumulation of financial commitments which exceed
financial capacity of the budgetary user as defined by its budget appropriations. Commitment
control is a core financial management function and most countries exercise automatic controls
over assumption of commitments which exceed the financial limits set by the budget. This is done
by either imposing a requirement of performing an encumbrance (i.e. appropriation reserve) prior
to assuming the commitment, or at least at the very moment of assuming the commitment.

19.     In the past three years there has been significant legislative effort by the Government
to bring arrears under control through increased control of commitments. The Law on
Deadlines for Payments in Commercial Transactions provided a schedule for reduction of arrears.
It included only transactions involving commercial entities in 2012 but has been amended to
include the public entity-to-public entity transactions as well in 2015. The law enabled legal
repercussions for failing to meet financial obligations of public entities. The implementation of the
law required creation of an electronic Registry of Settlements of Pecuniary Commitments (RINO)


                                                                         8
in order to improve the quality of information on commitments IBBs, while FMIS would collect
this information for the DBBs.

20.     However, commitment control remains a major challenge imposing high risk of
arrear accumulation. While completeness of the commitment information collected through
FMIS and RINO is unclear, both systems record only the commitments which are already assumed
as the legislative framework does not allow for any form ex-ante control over this process.
Specifically, the budgetary users are not automatically prevented from assuming commitments
over the limits prescribed by their approved budgets, as no pre-approval of any form is required
from budget authorities in order to assume that commitment (i.e. enter into a contractual obligation
with financial repercussions).

21.    Current systems are not geared towards preventing arrears accumulation. RINO
system works with no direct link to the budget management as it does not prevent assuming
commitments which are not supported by sufficient budget funds nor does it perform encumbrance
once a commitment is entered into the system. Although FMIS as the budget execution system
operates with budget appropriations, the commitments entered into the system also do not trigger
encumbrance. One of the obvious reasons is that commitments often have multi-year perspective
and FMIS does not support multi-year commitment control as it works only with current year
appropriations.

22.     In case of PPOs, commitments are recorded in several parallel ways while the FMIS
is not of them. In terms of the commitment control PPOs can be considered DBBs as they process
their payment orders directly through FMIS. However, as confirmed by all of the interviewed chief
accountants from the five PPOs, FMIS is not used for recording the commitments at all. The most
complete record is kept in the notebooks of the accountants. In most cases, this evidence is
supported by a spreadsheet for easier analytical interventions. And finally, commitments are kept
as “accounts payable” in the accounting records of PPOs supported by ZUP (i.e. the accounting
software), but it remained unknown to which extent the completeness of this type of record
compares to the first two ones in all of the sample PPOs.

23.     The only formal way for recording commitments is ZUP, however it does not seem to
be able to provide enough analytical tools for effective monitoring of commitments. For
instance, the software does not support the option of tracking commitments by the type of
associated expenditure and provide immediate breakdown into those incurred by expert witnesses
and lawyers. Also, it is not integrated with the FMIS at all which implies that each payment order
has to be generated directly in the FMIS and then manually recorded in the accounting software (
ZUP ) to remove the commitment from the list of accounts payable.




                                                 9
24.     The commitment for investigation related and postal services are assumed once a pre-
order from a prosecutor managing a particular case reaches the accounting department of
the PPO. Figure 1 below presents map for this procedure. The beginning of procedure is marked
with the delivery of services by an expert witness or a lawyer11. Upon delivery of services, both
entities submit an invoice12 with detailed breakdown of incurred expenditures and associated fees
which are determined by the Rulebook on Charges in Judicial Proceedings and the Lawyers’ Tariff.
The process continues with the prosecutor managing the case verifying these expenditures by
checking whether they comply with the provisions of the above mentioned pieces of regulation
and whether they fit to what could be called “experience-based” expectation in terms of the
particular service. The prosecutor then issues the pre-order13 with all payment details (name of the
entity/person, bank account number, amount of net fee, taxes and contributions, etc.) which serves
as a basis for creating a payment order in the FMIS by the financial department.



Figure 1.Process of assuming commitments (generic)


                                               -Lawyers
        Start of        Investigation           - Expert
     investigation        activities           witnesses                             Prosecutor
                                                - Others           invoice
                                                                       invoice
                                                                           Invoice


                                                                                     Verification




                                              PO Accounting Dpt                       Pre-order




25.      Lack of clear guidance and existence of different practices in accepting commitments
results in significant variations between the PPOs. Considering the lifetime of a criminal case
(i.e. from when the crime is committed, to arrest and investigation, eventual indictment and trial),
the point when the pre-order from deputy prosecutor for payment of used services reaches the
accounting department varies significantly going between the PPOs.. In BPPO Smederevo, the
pre-order is sent to the accounting department immediately after the verification of the invoice in
the investigation process. On the other hand, the BPPO in Novi Sad the same process is more

11
   Or any other entity providing support services in the investigation process. Such as: Ministry of Interior, different
Public Utility Companies, translators, etc.
12
   The invoice contains usual elements: names of the parties involved (PPO and the name of the lawyer/expert witness,
amount due broken down by types of services, associated social contributions and taxes, bank account details, date
and location.
13
   Starting from January 2015, HPPO Belgrade is issuing an accompanying act (i.e. decision) which, by their
interpretation, has legal power in the eventual enforced collection process as opposed to the pre-order alone.

                                                                  10
complex and selective. Namely, in case when there is no indictment, all of the commitments
coming from expenses incurred in the process are assumed only at the end of the investigation. If
an indictment is issued, commitments are assumed at the end of the trial. If a person is found guilty,
the commitments are assumed by the court managing the trial procedure. Recently, when found
guilty, the person is required to compensate both the PPO and the court for all the expenses in
cases when the financial status of the person allows it.

26.    However there are instances when certain commitments are assumed regardless of
how investigation process will end. This is primarily for services of expert witnesses which are
scarce and with complex types of expertise. Although there is subjectivity and selectiveness in
payments, this practice could be justified considering that these expert witnesses would avoid
providing their services since they would have to wait for the whole process (including the trial)
to end which can take several years in some cases. Further, in case of HPPO Belgrade, the
commitments coming from the invoices sent by expert witnesses are assumed just as in case of
BPPO Smederevo – immediately after they are verified. While the invoices sent by lawyers for
mandatory representation are processed at the end of the investigation process and commitments
are then assumed regardless of whether an indictment is issued or not. Finally, the situation in
HPPO Valjevo and BPPO Prokuplje was not sufficiently clarified, but the level of arrears of this
PPO suggests that the practice could be the same as in BPPO Smederevo with the pace of assuming
commitments being higher than in Novi Sad and Belgrade.

27.     The process of assuming commitments is governed by the article 261 of the Criminal
Procedure Code. This article regulates the area of expenses incurred in the investigation and trial
process, but with insufficient clarity. First paragraph of this article lists all possible types of
expenditure including the “award” prescribed for expert witnesses and lawyers along with other
expenditure such as travel costs, material cost and similar. The “award” is the main source of
expenditure in the investigation process and constitutes 90 to 100 percent of total expenditure as
expert witnesses and lawyers in most cases do not even ask for the travel expenses and material
costs if they are not significantly large. Second paragraph of this article says that other costs are
paid in advance (i.e. before the end of the process) by the “institution managing the process”, while
it does not say that the “award” should be paid up front leaving unnecessary room for different
interpretation. While it is unclear who is the “managing institution” in case when the process end
up in trial (i.e. when indictment is issued), it is also unclear whether the advance payment should
be made in advance of the end of investigation or the whole process – including trial.

28.     Differences in assumption of commitments among PPOs are a consequence of diverse
interpretation of the article 261 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Interpretation of BPPO Novi
Sad which is agreed with the Basic Court in Novi Sad is that there should be no advance payments
of the “awards” to expert witnesses and lawyers, while the “managing institution” (and thus the
obligor) is the PPO in cases when no indictment is issued, while the “managing institution” is the


                                                 11
court in cases when indictment is issued. This interpretation is supported by decisions of the
Supreme Court number 1030/2015 from 08.12.2015 and 729/2014 from 22.10.2014 resolving the
dispute between public attorney and expert witnesses and lawyers on who is responsible for
settling expenditures in legal processes. BPPO Novi Sad thus manages to transfer very large
portion of its investigation expenses to the Basic Court Novi Sad and at the same time postpone
its commitments until the end of the investigation process. On the other end, BPPO Smederevo
which assumes commitments much faster than BPPO Novi Sad, interprets this article in
completely opposite way so the commitments coming from invoices containing “awards” for
expert witnesses and lawyers are assumed “as-they-come” - much before the end of the prosecution
process and regardless of whether indictment is issued or not. If some of the investigation related
expenses are not paid before indictment reaches the court, the court rules that those should be
settled by the BPPO Smederevo. Detailed commitment assumption process flowcharts for BPPO
Smederevo, BPPO Novi Sad and HPPO Belgrade are given in Annex 2 of the report.

29.     This is causing much variation in the level of investigation related commitments
assumed by PPOs, while postal service commitments seem to reflect the difference in size of
the offices. Table 3 below shows the level of commitments for investigation and postal service
related expenditure for the period starting from January 2014 until June 2016 for those BPPO that
made these data available - BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo. We can see that the level of
commitments for these two offices are very much similar through the entire period, while the
difference in their case load and number of prosecutors is very significant – BPPO Novi Sad
manages on average 21,300 cases per year and has 24 prosecutors while BPPO Smederevo
manages almost three times less cases and has six times less prosecutors – 6 prosecutors are
managing 7,300 cases on average annually.


Table 3. Commitments for investigation and postal services in selected PPOs (annual data)

                                    2014                       2015                       2016
                                           Postal                     Postal                     Postal
         PO               Investigation    service   Investigation    service   Investigation    service

         Novi Sad           8,262,992 1,308,746       10,086,092 1,352,444        8,400,366      651,033

         Smederevo          6,354,864      300,569    10,263,104      571,228     8,172,842      244,077
         source: budget execution reports and author's calculation

30.     It seems that the commitment practice observed is unique for every PPO and does not
apply to other PPOs from the territory under authority of the same APPO. Since commitment
data were only available for the sample PPOs, we analyzed the level of arrears (which should
efficiently proxy for the level of commitments) of BPPOs on the territory of APPO Novi Sad (to
which BPPO Novi Sad belongs) and compared it those from the territory of APPO Belgrade (to
which BPPO Smederevo belongs). We found no significant overall difference – average arrears

                                                      12
per prosecutor among BPPOs of APPO Novi Sad (excluding BPPO Novi Sad) were RSD 1.12
million while those of BPPOs on the territory of APPO Belgrade (excluding BPPO Belgrade and
BPPO Smederevo) were RSD 1.18 million. It follows that the commitment assumption practice is
a consequence of arrangements a particular BPPO has with the responsible court (Basic Court in
Novi Sad and Basic Court in Smederevo in our case).

31.      There is very high positive correlation in the trend of incurring commitments related
to investigation expenses in BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo, while no seasonality is
observed. Figures 2 and 3 below show the trend in investigation and postal service commitments
for the two BPPOs. We can see that the two lines move together for most of the time with BPPO
Novi Sad having higher commitments for postal services for the entire period while the situation
varies with regard to investigation expenses – Novi Sad currently has slightly higher commitment
level while for the most of 2015 they were kept below those of Smederevo. End of 2014 was
marked with very high levels of assumed commitments in both PPOs, and while it was stabilized
at the level of about RSD 1 mil during 2015, it started accelerating in the first half of 2016.


Figure 2.Commitments for investigation in BPPOs Novi Sad and Smederevo (monthly data)




                                              13
Figure 3.Commitments for postal services in BPPOs Novi Sad and Smederevo (monthly data)




32.     Increase in the overall level of investigation commitments is mostly the consequence
of increasing commitments related to mandatory representation in BPPO Novi Sad and
Smederevo. Figure 4 below reveals the structure of investigation commitments for these two
BPPOs. While the “other costs” and “expert witness” categories share is kept relatively stable with
some variations throughout the period, mandatory representation commitments (marked with blue)
are increasing significantly. Although we have seen that the practice of assuming commitments
varies significantly it still applies to an average (general) case. This process is still not fully
automatized in the sense that service providers (i.e. expert witnesses and lawyers) know exactly
the point in time when their invoice will become payable. Together with the lack of internal (ex
ante) and budgetary inspection (ex post) controls and the opportunity to make case to case
exceptions (primarily for scarce expert witnesses), this leaves room for individual lawyers and
expert witnesses and their respective associations to apply pressure on PPOs to assume financial
obligations so they can get paid. Hence, the observed increasing trend may be explained by
increasing pressure from Lawyers association on PPOs to assume these financial obligations. This
intuition somewhat suits the data observed in Novi Sad as the PPO with “tight” commitment
assumption practice and Smederevo as much less strict in this sense – the share of mandatory
representation in investigation related commitments in Novi Sad was on average 16% in 2014 and
then it went up by 20% both in 2015 and 2016 reaching 35% and 56% in these years, while the
rate of increase in Smederevo was not so high – the share was 26% in 2014, went up to 40% in
2015 and reached 43% in June 2016.




                                                14
Figure 4.Structure of investigation related commitments in BPPOs Novi Sad and Smederevo




33.     The observed differences in commitment assumption practice across PPOs do not
only reflect on the level of commitments but naturally also on the expenditure levels and
arrears, thus distorting the entire financial landscape of the PPO network. As we could see
above, there is a high disproportion in size between BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo (on
average 3 times more cases and 4 times more prosecutors in Novi Sad) but this is not reflected in
their expenditure levels. Smederevo has consistently higher expenditure level both per case and
per prosecutor (Table 2), while it has similar level of commitments related to investigation (Figure
2). While Smederevo has the same level of commitments as Novi Sad, its level of expenditure in
absolute terms although disproportionate is not quite as high as in Novi Sad (Table 1). This is
explained by much higher level of arrears (unsettled commitments) observed in BPPO Smederevo
versus those of BPPO Novi Sad, as we will see in the next section.




4.     Arrears in the PPOs system – level, trend and structure

34.     Arrears in the whole PPOs system (including basic, higher and appellate PPOs) were
RSD 572 million as of September 2016. While APPOs barely have any arrears, HPPOs had RSD
284 million while BPPOs had RSD 286 million in arrears. Term structure of the arrears is such
that a very large portion (68%) of arrears is older than 90 days, while the remaining portion is
equally split to those bills which are overdue for less than 30 days, between 30 and 60 and between
60 and 90. Figure 5 below shows the details of the structure. This data is collected on a quarterly
basis by the SPC. However, the query based on which data is collected is not structured to capture
type of expenditure behind the arrears, but only the overall figures and the term structure of arrears.


                                                  15
                         Figure 5. Term structure of arrears in PPOs




35.     Arrears observed in the sample PPOs reflect the differences in their commitment
assumption procedures. Tables 4 and 5 below show the overall level of arrears and arrears per
prosecutor for the five sample PPOs. We can see that BPPO Novi Sad has by far the lowest level
of arrears per prosecutor, while BPPO Prokuplje, for which detailed data was not made available,
has almost RSD 3.5 million of arrears per prosecutor. At the same time BPPO Smederevo
maintained the level of RSD 2 million of arrears per prosecutor. Almost 28% (158 out of 572
million) of total arrears are made by HPPO Belgrade. Its arrears are dominated by the category of
“other investigation costs”.

36.     Current arrears for investigation significantly exceed annual budgets for these
expenditures. When comparing the average expenditure incurred in 2014 and 2015 shown in
Figure 1 above with arrears data, we can see that the ratio of annual expenditure for investigation
and its current arrears for HPPO Belgrade is 2.61, in case of BPPO Smederevo it is 2.58, in case
in case of BPPO Prokuplje it is 2.55, while in HPPO Valjevo the ratio is at 1.18. BPPO Novi Sad
is the only office with the ratio lower than 1. At the level of the whole sample, this ratio is 2.28
which means that, assuming no further arrears, there has to be a 230% increase in the annual budget
for investigation to settle the arrears of these PPOs.

37.     There is a difference between arrears incurred for mandatory representation and
expert witness services among PPOs of the same category. For instance, HPPO Valjevo has
almost twice as much arrears for expert witness service compared to mandatory representation
(RSD 3 million compared to RSD 1.6 million), while this ratio is reverse in case of HPPO Belgrade
(RSD 7.6 million versus RSD 17.9 million). Assuming that the nature of cases of these HPPOs is
similar, it seems reasonable to expect at least comparable level of arrears for these types of
investigation related expenditures.


                                                16
38.     This may point to some subjectivity in the order of settling arrears. Previously it has
been mentioned that some PPOs rationalize when paying their bills in order to maintain good
relationships with certain expert witnesses whose expertise is scarce and needed frequently by the
prosecutors.



Table 4. Arrears in selected PPOs as of June 2016
                                                     Other
                 Mandatory          Expert       investigation Postal service
PO             representation      witnesses         costs         costs          Total
Beograd            17,933,505     7,603,995 133,051,515                    0    158,589,015
Valjevo             1,567,500     3,058,408     329,610                    0      4,955,518
Novi Sad            2,792,625     2,377,346     757,443                    0      5,927,414
Prokuplje                     10,272,566                              77,353     10,349,919
Smederevo           4,754,615     5,428,441 1,399,376                 54,678     11,637,110
source: POs quarterly arrears report

Table 5. Arrears per prosecutor in selected PPOs as of June 2016
                                                                  Other
                 Number of        Mandatory       Expert      investigation Postal service
PO              prosecutors     representation   witnesses        costs         costs
Beograd                   43           417,058     176,837       3,094,221               0
Valjevo                    4           391,875     764,602          82,403               0
Novi Sad                  24           116,359      99,056          31,560               0
Prokuplje                  3                   3,424,189                            25,784
Smederevo                  6           792,436     904,740         233,229           9,113
source: POs quarterly arrears report



39.      Trend in arrears accumulation is increasing rapidly in the first two quarters of 2016.
Figure 6. below reveals trends in the level of arrears for BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo.
While it seems that arrears are accumulated evenly for all types of investigation expenditure, they
more than doubled in first half of 2016 when compared to the figures observed at the end of 2015.
They went from RSD 2.5 million to RSD 5.9 million in case of BPPO Novi Sad, while in case of
BPPO Smederevo the increase was from RSD 4.8 million to RSD 11.6 million. When compared
to the trend in commitments from Figure 4, we can see that patterns are similar with exception of
the last quarter of 2014 when we assume there was a one-off allowance for settlement of arrears.




                                                       17
Figure 6.Quarterly arrears level and structure in BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo




40.     The list of largest creditors per PPO shown in Table 6 adds to the impression of
prioritization and selectivity in payment execution which is imposed by the scarcity of funds
available. This is supported by the structure of five largest creditors of HPPO Belgrade, HPPO
Valjevo and HPPO Smederevo shown below. While HPPO Belgrade’s and HPPO Valjevo’s
largest creditors are public institutions (mainly Forensics Institute and Military Medical
Academy), those of BPPO Smederevo are mainly expert witnesses. Also it is interesting to note
that the largest creditor of HPPO Valjevo is an expert witness with RSD 740,000 of accumulated
arrears 14. Hence, while there is an evident lack of funds available, there does not seem to be a
standardized approach in paying the bills and settling arrears, for that matter. Instead accounting
departments are somewhat forced into prioritizing when making payments to ensure normal
functioning of their offices.




14
  This is the total amount due. Usual expert witness fees for individual cases range from RSD 10,000 to RSD
25,000. This can of course vary much depending on the complexity of their expertise and services rendered.

                                                       18
Table 6. Largest creditors as of November 2016

HPO Belgrade
Number    Creditor                            Amount
    1     Forensic Institute                  53,817,171
    2     Military Medical Academy            30,279,822
    3     Faculty of Biology                  21,754,553
    4     Lawyers                             17,933,505
    5     DNA tests                           15,516,200
BPO Smederevo
Number    Creditor                            Amount
    1     City of Smederevo (PUCs)             1,964,800
    2     expert witness                       1,738,172
    3     expert witness                         974,887
    4     expert witness                         834,344
   5      Ministry of Interior                       659,268
HPO Valjevo
Number        Creditor                    Amount
    1         expert witness                739,211
    2         City of Valjevo (PUCs)        638,378
    3         Security Information Agency   614,400
    4         Ministry of Interior          611,040
    5         Faculty of Biology            472,951
source: internal database and author's calculation



41.     In total there has been only RSD 3.4 million arrears settled through enforced
collection in the observed period15 and all of the enforced collection was initiated by lawyers,
while there was zero enforced collection from expert witnesses. BPPO Prokuplje sticks out
with RSD 2.2 million, while HPPO Belgrade and HPPO Valjevo had RSD 860,000 and RSD
333,000 of bills settled through enforced collection. BPPO Novi Sad and BPPO Smederevo have
not had any enforced collection so far.

42.      Enforced collection could become a major issue in the future. Although data was not
complete, the cost incurred by PPOs through enforced collection which exceeds the original debt
is in the range of 25-30% of the original debt. Hypothetically, this means that if all creditors went
immediately to collect their debts through enforced collection there would be an additional RSD
143 – 171 million of additional costs incurred on top of the RSD 572 million of original debt.



15
  This number excludes RSD 4.3 million of compensation enforced by the prosecutors which were not re-elected in
2010.

                                                        19
5.     Main findings


43.     Expenditure levels are increasing every year and there is much variation in
investigation related expenditure per case across the sample PPOs. Combination of the
increasing new cases and large number of cases transferred from the courts in 2013 is causing
current caseload to increase every year. However, the increase in expenditure is much higher than
the rate of increase in the number of cases. Variation in the expenditure is striking – while HPPO
Belgrade has on average 2.5 to 3 times higher expenses per case than HPPO Valjevo, in the BPPO
category, BPPO Prokuplje is paying on average twice as much per case compared to BPPOs in
Novi Sad and Smederevo.

44.    Expenditure verification process is subject to interpretation and lacks clear guidance.
The Rulebook on Charges in Judicial Proceedings is unclear and expert witnesses may arrive at
amounts which can vary significantly. For instance, charges are based on the number of working
hours which can be manipulated. Also charges may be doubled if services are rendered in “bad
conditions (at night, at very bad weather conditions, etc.)”. This enables prosecutors to somewhat
negotiate and rationalize as to whom and how much to pay which has adverse effect on their
professional integrity and may have long –term implications on PPO performance.

45.    Systems used for commitment control are inappropriate as they magnify the risk of
arrear accumulation. The FMIS does not support encumbrance (i.e. reservation of appropriation)
once commitments are entered in the system. PPOs do not use FMIS at all for recording
commitments. Instead, they use their accounting software (ZUP) which is very rigid and does not
allow effective data analysis. ZUP is also not integrated with FMIS. Most accurate evidence of
commitments is, however, kept in notebooks of chief accountants and spreadsheets for easier data
manipulation.

46.       There are substantial differences in the process of commitment assumption among
PPOs. This stems from different interpretation of the article 261 of the Criminal Procedure Code
which is insufficiently clear as to whether the “award” of the lawyers and expert witnesses (which
is the largest share of investigation expenditure) should be paid before the end of the investigation
process or not. Also, the provisions of the article mention that expenses should be borne by the
“institution managing the process” which some PPOs interpret as a possibility to transfer their
expenditure to courts in cases when indictment is issued. This has caused PPOs that are three to
four times larger both in terms of the number of prosecutors and their caseload to have comparable
level of commitments as their smaller counterparts.

47.     The unstandardized practice in commitment assumption creates large potential for
corruption and threatens to jeopardize integrity of the PPOs. Although differences exist, the
practice of each PPO can easily be modified to suit the current needs of a prosecutor or a PPO.

                                                 20
Invoices of expert witnesses with expertise which is scarce or particularly important for
investigation are treated with priority. Current FMIS framework which does not support
commitment control allows for this as commitments recording takes place in a parallel system
which is not functionally linked with it. Payment orders are created directly in the FMIS with no
reference to the order in which commitments are assumed.

48.     Arrears reflect differences in commitment procedures and they are on average 2.3
times higher than the annual budget for investigation services . Those PPOs with more “loose”
practice of commitment assumption and the possibility to transfer their costs to courts have
expectedly lower level of arrears than those who immediately assume commitments once invoices
of lawyers and expert witnesses come in. Settling all the investigation related arrears in one go,
would require average annual budget for investigation to increase by 230%.

49.     Enforced collection is currently relatively low but could represent a large issue in the
future. Total amount of money that was collected by creditors through enforced collection was a
modest RSD 3.4 million in the period from January 2014 until June 2016. At the same time, two
out of five PPOs from the sample had zero enforced collection. Finally, when enforced collection
procedure is applied, the expenses that go beyond original debt are around 25-30%. This means
that if all creditors would reach out for it, additional RSD 143-171 million of costs would be
incurred on top of the original debt of RSD 572 million (current level of arrears).



Recommendations


50.     Better management of commitment control aligned with appropriate utilization of
services provided which have been analyzed in this report is a prerequisite for improvement
of financial management of SPC and PPOs. Based on the available information, the team is of
the opinion that any budget increase earmarked for settling arrears, which could happen prior to
significant improvements of the financial management function in the SPC and PPOs, will
practically endorse current bad practice. In addition this would seriously undermine the integrity
and performance of the public prosecution and judiciary in general.

51.      The straightforward way to deal with the accumulated arrears is to simply settle them
with higher budget appropriations in the coming years. However, the box bellow presents a
list of recommendations which would be implemented before any budgetary increase is to take
place. These interventions are designed to protect integrity and increase financial and overall
performance of PPOs.




                                               21
   Recommendation 1: Create a list of appropriated services, together with a
    range of acceptable costs per case, aimed to enhance transparency of budget
    planning and execution and prevent discrepancies in cost per case observed
    across PO network. This would be done by the SPC and RPPO with support
    of MoJ.

   Recommendation 2: Enhance the provisions of the Rulebook on Charges in
    Judicial Proceedings in order to exclude favoritism from cost setting. The
    prosecutors will have less problems to verify costs if a list of prices per
    different expertise which would be adjusted annually is introduced. This
    would be done by the SPC, RPPO.

   Recommendation 3: Ensure that commitments are recorded in ZUP and that
    these records are available to SPC in real time. In order to make this uniform
    provide training program for all accounting officers in PPOs on how to enter
    this information in the system. This would serve as an interim solution until
    full commitment control function is supported by the FMIS. This would be
    done by the SPC, RPPO and Judicial Academy.

   Recommendation 4: Establish standardized practice for assuming
    commitments by ensuring common interpretation of the article 261 of the
    Criminal Procedure Code. This would be doen by the SPC and RPPO.

   Recommendation 5: Gradually increase budgets of PPOs to better reflect
    their needs as the above reforms are advancing in implementation. This has
    to be paired with regular monitoring and analysis of arrears. Based on this,
    the SPC will engage in dialogue with the MoF on how to eliminate arrears
    through appropriate budget planning.




                                      22
ANNEX 1


Total arrears accumulated per BPPO, end of September 2016

                     Arrears from Arrears from                    Number of     Arrears per
       BPO                                        Total Arrears
                     before 2016      2016                        prosecutors   prosecutor
Beograd 1                       0             0               0            43              0
Beograd 2                       0             0               0            25              0
Beograd 3                       0             0               0            21              0
Kosovska Mitrovica              0        68,762          68,762            14          4,912
Despotovac                      0       180,644         180,644             3         60,215
Lebane                          0       205,047         205,047             1        205,047
Leskovac                        0     2,228,383       2,228,383             9        247,598
Prijepolje                      0     1,512,181       1,512,181             5        302,436
Negotin                   127,716     1,420,340       1,548,056             5        309,611
Backa Palanka                   0       633,481         633,481             2        316,741
Novi Sad                1,197,842     7,183,578       8,381,420            26        322,362
Cacak                           0     3,465,081       3,465,081            10        346,508
Valjevo                         0     4,622,156       4,622,156            11        420,196
Vrsac                      30,756     3,215,659       3,246,415             7        463,774
Krusevac                        0     3,416,766       3,416,766             7        488,109
Mionica                         0       987,062         987,062             2        493,531
Vrbas                   1,338,319     1,131,287       2,469,606             5        493,921
Novi Pazar              1,364,501     2,160,051       3,524,552             7        503,507
Kraljevo                        0     5,226,116       5,226,116            10        522,612
Pozarevac                       0     1,075,830       1,075,830             2        537,915
Gornji Milanovac                0       562,000         562,000             1        562,000
Uzice                           0     3,451,844       3,451,844             6        575,307
Petrovac na Mlavi               0       576,372         576,372             1        576,372
Raska                           0       585,022         585,022             1        585,022
Sabac                           0     4,702,402       4,702,402             8        587,800
Veliko Gradiste                 0       628,681         628,681             1        628,681
Pozega                    577,030     2,231,091       2,808,121             4        702,030
Nis                             0    13,574,320      13,574,320            19        714,438
Sombor                          0     5,072,261       5,072,261             7        724,609
Becej                      50,520     1,423,927       1,474,447             2        737,223




                                             23
                    Arrears from Arrears from                    Number of     Arrears per
       BPO                                       Total Arrears
                    before 2016      2016                        prosecutors   prosecutor
Loznica                        0     5,260,000       5,260,000             7        751,429
Kursumlija                     0     1,588,576       1,588,576             2        794,288
Trstenik                       0     1,896,617       1,896,617             2        948,309
Sremska Mitrovica        230,500     6,581,072       6,811,572             7        973,082
Kragujevac             1,615,000    14,856,400      16,471,400            16      1,029,463
Arandjelovac             203,927     2,924,887       3,128,814             3      1,042,938
Bor                      677,162     3,683,263       4,360,424             4      1,090,106
Mladenovac             1,707,134     3,831,754       5,538,888             5      1,107,778
Vladicin Han             167,656     3,288,456       3,456,112             3      1,152,037
Lazarevac              2,297,334     2,553,767       4,851,101             4      1,212,775
Vranje                 2,999,670     9,363,707      12,363,377            10      1,236,338
Aleksinac                297,259     3,617,946       3,915,205             3      1,305,068
Obrenovac              2,333,836     4,410,168       6,744,004             5      1,348,801
Pirot                          0     5,575,143       5,575,143             4      1,393,786
Jagodina               2,544,215     7,553,071      10,097,286             7      1,442,469
Pancevo                2,600,836     9,560,808      12,161,644             8      1,520,206
Stara Pazova           3,288,098     4,410,155       7,698,253             5      1,539,651
Subotica                 139,780    12,183,304      12,323,084             8      1,540,386
Zajecar                   24,910    12,341,804      12,366,714             8      1,545,839
Ub                       532,925     2,661,159       3,194,084             2      1,597,042
Paracin                  611,214     2,633,955       3,245,169             2      1,622,585
Kikinda                        0     6,586,994       6,586,994             4      1,646,749
Velika Plana           1,236,882     5,444,388       6,681,270             4      1,670,318
Zrenjanin                593,112     7,764,694       8,357,806             5      1,671,561
Senta                  1,968,000     5,311,646       7,279,646             3      2,426,549
Smederevo              2,832,535    14,308,021      17,140,556             7      2,448,651
Prokuplje              2,234,481     9,490,302      11,724,783             4      2,931,196
Ruma                     937,429     8,014,780       8,952,209             3      2,984,070
Brus                           0       644,607         644,607             0              0




                                            24
ANNEX 2


Process of assuming financial commitments in selected PPOs – process flowchart

BPPO Smederevo

                                                       -Lawyers
     Start of             Investigation                 - Expert                                                                                   End of
  investigation             activities                 witnesses                                     Prosecutor
                                                                                invoice                                                         Investigation
                                                        - Others
                                                                                    invoice
                                                                                        Invoice




                                                                                                     Verification




                                                                                                      Payment
                                                      PO Accounting Dpt                                order




HPPO Belgrade

                                                                                                                                         NO         - Lawyers




                                           - Expert
     Start of        Investigation                                                                           End of
  investigation        activities
                                          witnesses                                   Prosecutor          investigation
                                                                                                                                 Indictment?
                                          - Others           Invoice
                                                                 Invoice                                                                           Invoice
                                                                      Invoice                                                                          Invoice
                                                              YES                                                                                           Invoice


                                                                                                           If some of the
                                                                                                        expenditure incurred
                                                                                                       at PO is unpaid at this
                                                                                                                                                 Prosecutor
Beginning of trial                                                                                     point, Court orders PO
                                                                                                          to pay for those
                                                                                                                                 End of trial



                                                                                                       Decision on                                Verification
                                                                                      Verification
                                                                                                       expenditure                 Judge

                                                                                                                                                    Decision



                                                                                        Decision
                                                                                                                                                 PO Accounting Dpt




                                                                                 25
BPPO Novi Sad

                                                                                                                          NO
                                     - Lawyers
     Start of        Investigation    - Expert                                             End of
  investigation        activities    witnesses                       Prosecutor         investigation
                                                                                                            Indictment?        Prosecutor
                                      - Others   Invoice
                                                     Invoice
                                                          Invoice


                                                      YES
                                                                                                                                  Verification

Beginning of trial                                                                                      End of trial



                                                                                       Decision on                                Payment
                                                                    Court Accounting
                                                                           Dpt         expenditure        Judge                    order




                                                                                                                               PO Accounting Dpt




                                                                    26
ANNEX 3


List of interviewed people

    1.    Svetlana Nenadic, member of the State Prosecutorial Council
    2.    Tamara Smrkulj, Head of Financial Department of the SPC
    3.    Anela Grbovic, Senior Advisor at the Financial Department of the SPC
    4.    Natalija Vukasinovic, Head of the Financial Department of BPO Smederevo
    5.    Tanja Hinic, Head of the Financial Department of BPO Prokuplje
    6.    Jelena Boskovic, Public Prosecutor in BPO Prokuplje
    7.    Snezana Pavicic, Head of the Financial Department of BPO Novi Sad
    8.    Radivoj Kacanski, First Deputy Public Prosecutor in BPO Novi Sad
    9.    Zlata Ilic, Head of the Financial Department of HPO Valjevo
    10.   Mila Maksimovic, Deputy Public Prosecutor in HPO Valjevo
    11.   Sladjana Bogdanovic, Advisor in the Financial Department of HPO Belgrade
    12.   Svetlana Bogdanovic, General Secretary of HPO Belgrade




                                                   27
