                                                                MAY 1, 2016




18_10_2017_12_36_49_TrainingPlanSerbianStateProsecutorialCou
                              ncilAdministrativeOfficeEN.docx




     Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia, World Bank



                                                                     [Company address]
Contents
TRAINING PLAN ............................................................................................................................................. 2
SERBIAN STATE PROSECUTORIAL COUNCIL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE......................................................... 2
   I. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................... 2
   II. APPROACH ............................................................................................................................................ 3
   III. TRAINING RECOMMENDATIONS: ........................................................................................................ 4
       A.      TRAINING SPECIFIC TO EXPANDED DUTIES OF SPC AO................................................................. 4
            1. Strategic Planning ......................................................................................................................... 4
            2. Performance Management and Budgeting................................................................................... 5
            3. Budget Negotiations ..................................................................................................................... 6
            4. Enhancing Organizational Effectiveness and Performance .......................................................... 6
            5. Budget and Finance Fundamentals............................................................................................... 6
            6. Leadership and Human Resources Management ......................................................................... 8
            7. International Project Development and Management................................................................. 9
            8. Situational Understanding of Sector Operations ........................................................................ 10
            9. Performance Evaluation of Public Prosecutors and Deputy Prosecutors ................................... 10
       B.      TRAINING TO ENHANCE GENERAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNICAL SKILLS .............................. 11
            1. External Communications ........................................................................................................... 11
            2. English Skills Related to Justice Sector Operations ..................................................................... 11
            3. Computer Literacy ....................................................................................................................... 12
   IV.         TRAINING PROVIDERS ................................................................................................................. 12
   RELATED RECOMMENDATIONS TO STRENGTHEN SPC CAPACITY .......................................................... 15




                                                                              1
                                            TRAINING PLAN

    SERBIAN STATE PROSECUTORIAL COUNCIL ADMINISTRATIVE
                          OFFICE


I. INTRODUCTION


The Serbian State Prosecutorial Council (SPC) Administrative Office (AO) has requested that the
World Bank assess its staff training needs in light of its significantly expanded responsibilities
envisioned in the National Justice Reform Strategy Action Plan, Chapter 23 Accession Action
Plan and in legislation. Surveys of the professional public, justice sector users and the general
public also highlight their expectations for improved performance and increased transparency
from the justice sector, including prosecutorial services.1

The scope of the changes envisioned requires an organizational and managerial approach more
than a legal one. To that end, the IPA 2013 Twinning Project,2 IPA 20123 Project, OSCE and the
Council of Europe are providing essential capacity-building assistance to the SPC AO in strategic
and human resource planning; budget execution and auditing; project and organizational
management; selecting, evaluating, promoting, enhancing ethical understanding by and
disciplining prosecutors; enhancing active participation in the judicial reform by target groups;
and assessment of judiciary infrastructure, including ICT.

To be effective, organizational capacity building needs to be paired with enhancing the
capacities of individual employees. Training is thus an important element in the change process.
As discussed in the World Bank’s 2014 Functional Review, many council staff see their roles in
narrow, administrative terms; this view is reflected in SPC AO’s systematization, where there is
no mention in any of the SPC AO’s 25 approved positions4 of skills and abilities in strategic
planning, budgetary, legislative or policy analysis, organizational assessment, or advisory




1
  Multi-Stakeholder Justice Survey, World Bank, 2014.
2
  IPA 2013, Twinning Contract, “Strengthening Capacities of the High Judicial Council and the State Prosecutorial
Council?
3
  IPA 2012 “Justice Infrastructure Assessment."
4
  The SPC AO currently employs 19 staff against an approved complement of 25 full time staff positions. See
Attachments A and B.

                                                         2
services to Public Prosecutors’ Offices (PPOs). Each of these skills is central to the SPC AO
playing its intended role. 5

In addition, recent and planned SPC AO staff additions focused in the areas of area of budget
and financial affairs, normative affairs, and status issues of prosecutors are changing the
complement of employees and their needed knowledge, skills and abilities to effectively lead
prosecutorial services in the next decade.6

To date, no continuing education has been offered to SPC AO staff, except in highly technical
and targeted areas.7 The Judicial Academy does not offer ongoing training for justice sector
staff8 and the executive Human Resources Agency9 does not provide training to the justice
sector as it is a separate branch of government.



II. APPROACH


An assessment of training needs was created for each major area of SPC AO operations, using
instruments adapted from the National Association for Court Management (NACM) Core
Competencies10 to meet the specific needs of the SPC AO. The training implications of critical
issues identified in the 2014 World Bank Functional Review and the IPA 2013 Twinning Contract
were key inputs to the training assessment. SPC AO management was interviewed and the staff
of the SPC AO asked to provide their feedback in advance of individual interviews. Interviews
focused on the primary responsibilities of each position, training received to date (if any) and
suggestions for training for each position.11


5
  The SPC is one of many bodies with a role in prosecutorial performance. Notably, the Republican Public
Prosecutors’ Office plays a vital role in performance enhancement.
6
  The council has submitted a revised systematization to further increase it total staff from 25 approved positions
to 32.
7
  Two examples were training on Ethics and Conflicts of Interest for the Prosecutor for Disciplinary Issues and in
use of the Treasury system and subsystem by the Ministry of Finance (MOF).
8
  One time training for Prosecutorial Managers and limited training in general use of technology were offered by
the Judicial Academy.
9
  Sluzba za upravljanje kadrovima or SUK.
10
   See https://nacmnet.org/CCCG/cccg_CoreCompetencies.html. NACM is the world’s largest organization of
justice management professionals, with over 1,700 members from the United States, Canada, Australia, and other
countries. Over the last twenty years, NACM has developed and refined professional development and self-
improvement materials for justice sector professionals in ten core competencies (Purposes and Responsibilities of
Courts; Caseflow Management; Leadership; Visioning and Strategic Planning; Resources, Budget and Finance;
Human Resources Management; Information Technology Management; Essential Components; Court/Community
Communication; and Education and Training),
11 Questions included those about the interviewees’ personal training needs and the question “if someone new
were to fill your position, what training would they need?"

                                                         3
III. TRAINING RECOMMENDATIONS:
Recommended SPC AO staff training is organized in two groups: that needed to allow the SPC
AO to effectively exercise its expanded duties and training to enhance general management
and technical skills needed by any complex organization. The staff to receive each area of
training are detailed below and summarized in Attachment C. To the extent possible, we also
recommend participation in training by SPC members. Trainings are detailed in priority order.

     A.      TRAINING SPECIFIC TO EXPANDED DUTIES OF SPC AO


1. Strategic Planning


The SPC is working to develop a strategic vision for Serbia’s prosecutorial services and the role
the SPC and its AO should play in improving prosecutorial performance, both at the individual
prosecutor and institutional office level. The SPC’s annual report focuses on quantitative
measures of workload and details of administrative activities with little linkage to goals.12 At a
minimum, because of its key role in the budgetary process, the SPC is called upon to develop a
set of mid- and long-term goals and to set priorities against which competing demands for
prosecutorial resources and efforts can be evaluated. A strategic plan would help the SPC
properly address its new responsibilities as a council and prepare AO staff to assist it in doing so
and should include an implementation plan, including timelines, a new systematization,
monitoring, evaluation and reporting mechanisms, and financial needs. The SPC also provides
input to the Judicial Reform Strategy Implementation Commission and the Ministry of Justice
(MOJ). These activities all require specific and rigorous training in the principles and
implementation of strategic planning.

          Target Recipients: The President and members of the SPC and six staff in the SPC AO
          should receive this training, namely the Chief of Cabinet, the Secretary General, the
          Assistant to the Secretary General (currently vacant), the Senior Advisor/International
          Cooperation and Projects, and the Senior Advisors for Planning and Execution of PPO
          Budgets and for Finance and Accounting.

          In addition to providing invaluable content to Council members, offering this training
          jointly with senior staff will encourage team building and improved communication
          between Council members and staff. The Senior Advisors in the Sector for Statutory



12
  Examples of goals include increased efficiency in case processing (e.g., the extent of resources required to
dispose of cases), improvements in the time to complete cases and access and quality measures. The 2014
Functional Review provides a list of relevant performance indicators.

                                                          4
         Issues of Deputy and Public Prosecutors would benefit from participating in an overview
         of the content.

2. Performance Management and Budgeting

The government and Ministry of Finance (MOF) increasingly link performance and budgeting. It
is incumbent on the SPC to evaluate the operational effectiveness of PPOs and to use the
budget as a vehicle to improve performance. To date, Public and Deputy Public Prosecutors and
allied costs have been added incrementally to prior funding levels, rather than based on
objective demand (such as caseloads) or changing case mixes.13 Staffing complements should
also be with reference to an overall resource rationalization plan. This requires AO staff to
analyze how productivity or other aspects of performance are affected by significant
organizational variations and how Serbia’s performance compares with that in other countries.
Training in this area will also assist staff in preparing regulatory and legislative impact
assessments.14 Effective management of the Serbian judicial system is also hindered by
difficulties in measuring system performance.15 Tying budgeting to performance requires that
SPC AO employees be trained in data collection16 and analysis and in creating systems for
monitoring performance.

         Target Recipients: Training should be provided to the Council members and six key
         managers above as well as the two advisors for analytics and planning and the senior
         advisor for internal auditing. Training in development of regulatory and legislative
         impact assessments is needed by the Senior Advisor for Normative Affairs.

         Since the quality of the budget prepared by the SPC relies on consistent and accurate
         information being provided as budget inputs from the PPOs, once the management
         team at the SPC AO has been trained in performance budgeting, the SPC AO could
         consider providing this training to Public Prosecutors and heads of accounting
         operations of the larger PPOs.



13
   The 2014 Functional Review clarifies that “Useful projections go beyond a simple extrapolation of past trends,
requiring anticipation of how these trends will change.?
14
   Skills in the mechanics of legislative drafting are evident at the SPC AO. Training here would focus on the analysis
of the financial and operational impacts of proposed statutes impacting PPOs, both those proposed by the
judiciary and those proposed by Parliament.
15
   The Functional Review details how “Data are scattered across fragmented systems with gaps, overlaps, and
inconsistencies. Existing reports are not always tailored to management needs and data calculation tends to be
manual. This absorbs disproportionate amounts of staff effort and is prone to errors. The empirical foundation for
management decisions therefore remains weak?.
16
   Including financial, statistical and survey data.

                                                          5
3. Budget Negotiations
The SPC has taken on a greater role in representing the prosecutorial service before funding
and authorizing bodies. Training in negotiation skills is needed.

           Target Recipients: Overview training should be provided to members of the Council.
           Detailed training should be provided to the Secretary General, the Assistant to the
           Secretary General, and the Senior Advisors for Planning and Execution of PPO Budgets
           and Finance and Accounting.

4. Enhancing Organizational Effectiveness and Performance

Training in mapping internal procedures, developing procedure manuals (which are currently
largely absent) and the fundamentals of process reengineering is critical. These skills are useful
both for the internal operations of the SPC and in considering how to effectively budget and
reallocate resources between PPOs to improve operational effectiveness and efficiency. The
Strategic Action Plan (section 1.3.1) foresees the establishment of ‘working bodies’ in the
Councils to analyze organizational performance. The level of work entailed will require staff
support. AO staff need targeted trained in the basics of process reengineering and the specifics
of how to review the potential for procedural simplification, removal of procedural bottlenecks,
rectifying inconsistencies in practice, or considering specialization of functions. AO staff also
needs to know more about PPO operations in order to effectuate this.

           Target Recipients: The Senior Advisors for Planning and Execution of PPO Budgets and
           Finance and Accounting, the Advisors for Monitoring/Analysis of Work in PPOs, the
           Associates for Analytics/Planning, the Senior Advisor for Normative Affairs,the Assistant
           to the Secretary General (once filled) and the Independent Advisor for General and
           Personnel Issues should receive external training assistance to discuss the principles of
           process reengineering. This would be followed by trainings organized on-the-job with
           live examples of issues to be examined. The on-the-job training could, at the AO’s
           option, include other staff. The AO should also consider seconding AO staff to a PPO for
           a brief period to improve their knowledge of the organization and operations of PPOs.

5. Budget and Finance Fundamentals
           Financial Projections

Treatment of PPOs as direct budget users by MOF/Treasury17 since the beginning of 2016 has
altered the SPC AO’s budget and finance staff’s role from making payments to assessing the
effectiveness and appropriateness of spending patterns by PPOs post facto. The SPC is now



17
     Officially, PPOS remain indirect budget users.

                                                      6
authorized to independently reallocate funds within objects across PPOs at the same level18 and
to make and adjust monthly allotments as the year progresses. If done properly, reallocations
would allow better use of funding, reduce the incidences of forced collections against PPOs and
reduce year-end arrears. However, as discussed in the 2014 Functional Review, resource
allocation to the prosecutors’ offices suffers from excessive rigidity. The SPC AO allocates
funding evenly throughout the year and makes adjustments as needed, rather than considering
differences in spending patterns19 or changes in allocations based on workload projections.

Effectively carrying out these functions requires training in proactive budget monitoring,
making effective tradeoffs between uses of funds20 and project planning. Staff also needs to be
able to effectively communicate results to the SPC and provide instructions and advice to PPOs.
Training in 360 degree communications would allow the SPC to incorporate consultations with
prosecutors and other stakeholders in its planning. Thus, training should also focus on drafting
instructions and communication and advisory skills. In addition, while responsibility for
budgeting for PPO civil servants and public employees currently resides with the Ministry of
Justice (MOJ), the law calls for the SPC to absorb this responsibility in the future. This transition
will only exacerbate the need for enhanced budget training.

         Target Recipients: The Senior Advisors for Budget Planning and Execution and for
         Finance and Accounting, the Advisors for Analytics and Planning, the Advisor for Public
         Procurement and, once filled, the two internal audit positions are the target audience of
         the training in financial projections. SPC AO staff could help develop and deliver training
         in financial projections to PPO accountants once its own staff is trained. An overview of
         financial projections should be provided to SPC members and the Chief of Cabinet.

         Related Training in Data Analysis Tools

Technical skill training in use of analysis tools and creating management reports using common
databases and approaches to data analysis is needed as well. We observed home-grown and
sometimes ineffective and duplicative uses of IT which effect SPC efficiency during the site visit.
SPC AO Staff knowledge of what is possible in the Treasury system and in the small privately-
provided “treasury? subsystem varies widely. Budget and finance staff need ongoing training in
use of MOF’s systems,21 as well as periodic updates on new procedures and codes (e.g. for the


18
   At a maximum of 10% across categories. Salaries may only be reallocated to salaries for offices at the same level
(e.g., excess salaries for deputy prosecutors in one office may be transferred to another PPO’s salary budget).
19
   For example, insurance and maintenance contracts are purchased only once annually.
20
   Budget analysts must consider not only immediate costs (e.g., the price of software design and installation) but
also related costs (e.g., equipment, space, training, and maintenance requirements) and be able to identify
alternative mixes of different inputs and their cost-benefit ratios to allow for greater flexibility in resourcing.
21
   Treasury did provide two initial trainings in the mechanics of the new Treasury system but more is needed.

                                                         7
employee registry). No Excel training has been provided by the AO to staff,22 even though the
Treasury program relies on Excel. While some staff download information from Treasury into
Excel and create reports, other report not knowing how to do so. Financial plans for each PPO
come to SPC in paper form and must be reentered, rather than being concatenated; staff is not
aware of how to do so. Staff consistently report an absence of knowledge of EXCEL analysis
tools.

Finally, both SPC AO staff and Public Prosecutors would like PPO accountants, who continue to
be very reliant on the SPC AO and vary significantly in their skills, to receive more training.

           Target Recipients: All staff in the Groups for Finance and Accounting and for Planning
           and Execution of PPO Budgets, including the clerks who provide data entry, should be
           provided with basic Excel training. It is recommended that the heads of these groups,
           the associates for analytics and planning, and the Senior Advisor for Internal Audit
           receive advanced Excel training in analysis tools and be responsible for transferring that
           knowledge to their colleagues as needed.

           Internal Audit

Both positions in internal auditing are currently vacant. It is assumed that since these office
holders will be required to pass the Public Sector Internal Audit Exam, they will possess the
needed basic skills. The World Bank’s Justice Performance, Expenditure and Institutional
Analysis (JPEIR) noted a number of issues with the manner in which auditing is conducted by
the Councils and the courts and PPOs. During the most recent site visit, it was confirmed that
there is inappropriate separation of financial functions (all finance people process and review
payments interchangeably).

           Target Recipients: Once hired, the Senior Advisor and Advisor for Auditing should be
           provided with more advanced training in financial risk assessment. They should in turn
           provide training to PPOs.

6. Leadership and Human Resources Management


In-depth human resources training program is needed by all of the SPC AO’s senior managers. A
shift in focus from administrative procedures to managing people for performance, as discussed
in the 2014 Functional Review, is critical. The SPC’s current human resources capacity relates
primarily to internal and routine SPC AO personnel needs. However, proactive HR management
includes the assessment of personnel needs for prosecutors’ offices as a whole based on the
changing nature of judicial work (new demands, new technologies, and new procedures). The
22
     Some finance and budget staff have pursued training at their own expense.

                                                          8
structural change may require altering job descriptions and qualifications correspondingly,
assessing and redefining prosecutor-to-staff ratios, and identifying new types of expertise
needed in the central and decentralized management units. Overview training in the principles
(e.g., ethical behavior, consistency, fairness, transparency) and skills of human resources
management (e.g., communication skills, prioritization, delegation,, team building, motivational
techniques, conflict resolution, etc.) should be followed by a series of one day trainings in
different technical aspects of human resources management (e.g., developing human resource
policies, planning and managing staff, recruitment and selection, performance management23
and evaluation, and training program development). A focus on appropriate delegation of tasks
in the SPC AO (e.g. from the Council to the Secretary General and on down the organization)
and within PPOs (e.g. from Public Prosecutors to management staff) should be included as
doing so can enhance operational effectiveness and efficiency. Interviews revealed that some
mid-level and non-supervisory SPC AO staff have great untapped potential and more
responsibilities could be delegated to them.

           Target Recipients: Council members should be provided with an HR overview, focused
           on the principles of human resources management. Five managers in the SPC AO should
           receive the more in-depth leadership training, namely the Secretary General, the
           Assistant to the Secretary General (currently vacant), the Heads of the Groups for
           Planning and Execution of PPO Budgets and of Finance and Accounting, and the Advisor
           for General and Personnel Issues. Subsequent, in-house information seminars on human
           resource management approaches and tools should be organized for all the staff to
           ensure their understanding. In addition, ethics training should be provided to all staff, if
           it has not been already.


7. International Project Development and Management


IPA project development and implementation as well as new procurement responsibilities
which are being delegated to IPA recipients require basic knowledge about the European
integration process in the field of judiciary,24 the instruments for pre-accession assistance, IPA
components and the IPA programming process in Serbia. Specific skills needed include project
monitoring, expenditure and outcome reporting and use of automated tools for project
management. Understanding the linkage between PPO and SPC state-supported budgets and
the efforts underway with IPA support is also critical.



23
     Identifying individuals’ strengths and weaknesses and developing training and other improvement plans.
24
     Chapters 23 (judiciary and fundamental rights) and 24 (justice, freedom and security) and the acquis.

                                                          9
       Target Recipients: This training is needed by the Secretary General at a strategic level
       and the Senior Advisor/International Cooperation and Projects and the Assistant to the
       Secretary General at a much more in-depth level. The Procurement Specialist should
       also receive basic training in IPA procurement procedures to be able to support
       management staff. Furthermore, an in-house seminar in IPA programming and
       implementation should be provided to the Head of the Group for Planning and
       Execution of PPO budges, and the Head of the Group for Finance and Accounting to
       insure basic understanding of the concepts and terms used in IPA projects (goals and
       objectives, targets, deliverables, etc.).

8. Situational Understanding of Sector Operations
Carrying out its various and complex responsibilities requires the SPC AO to understand how
PPOs actually work. The AO should consider a program in which SPC AO staff is seconded to a
PPO for a brief period to improve their knowledge of the organization and operations of PPOs.
This approach was successfully used by the California Judicial Council.

       Target Recipients: All Senior Advisors.

9. Performance Evaluation of Public Prosecutors and Deputy Prosecutors


Increasing demands for transparent and clear performance evaluations, promotion and
disciplinary procedures for public prosecutors and deputies has expanded the role of Senior
Advisors in the SPC AO. Joint seminars with disciplinary bodies of the region have been held and
the staff is well versed in the objectives and functions of performance evaluation. However,
clearer instruments for evaluating performance, transparent means of communicating
performance expectations and evaluation results, and automated methods of tracking
performance results are being developed under the auspices of the IPA 2013 project. The staff
of the Sector for Public and Deputy Public Prosecutors will need to be trained in the use of
these new instruments and tools. Enhancing the policy analysis skills of these staff-identifying
patterns of behavior that should be targeted for systemic improvements, developing incentives
to improve performance, and pinpointing rule changes to improve the system -would also
benefit the SPC AO. General human resources management training is also recommended for
these staff as detailed above.

       Target Recipients: General training in this area is needed for four positions: the Senior
       Advisors for Statutory Issues of Public and Deputy Public Prosecutors, for Disciplinary
       Proceedings and for Normative Issues and the Advisor for Monitoring and Analyses of
       Work of PPOs. As the issues involved are similar to those in general personnel affairs,
       the Independent Advisor for General and Personnel Affairs would also benefit from this


                                                    10
            training. The Senior Advisors in the Sector for Issues of Public and Deputy Public
            Prosecutors should in turn provide training to Public and Deputy Public Prosecutors in
            the Rulebook on Disciplinary Proceedings and the responsibilities of Public Prosecutors
            in complaint processing and disciplinary proceedings.



B.          TRAINING TO ENHANCE GENERAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNICAL SKILLS
1. External Communications


The SPC AO would benefit from training to create communication strategies focused on public
awareness of the SPC’s and PPOs’ roles, responsibilities and performance, and the reform
agenda. Training would focus on key aspects of a strategy, including public announcements,
improvements in the SPC’s annual report, website development and communication with
PPOs25. The SPC produces an Annual Report, but its data is presented in a way that precludes
analysis of the performance of the prosecution system.26 There is also a current and pressing
need to publish information on the SPC website and provide public information through other
means. The AO should receive content management training focused on drafting information
relevant to citizens, including answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs). Training is also
needed in free access to public information. Basic training in the application of HTML for
building webpages should be provided to other than the System/Web Administrator.

            Target Recipients: The Spokesperson and the System/Web Administrator will clearly
            need the content and technical training, respectively, once the positions are filled. In
            the interim, the SPC AO should designate and train the Procurement Specialist, who has
            the technical and language skills needed to manage the website.

2. English Skills Related to Justice Sector Operations
The SPC AO’s systematization requires English language skills for the Senior Advisor/
International Cooperation and Projects, the Chief of Cabinet and the Spokesperson. Job-specific
training in English is needed by a few other positions in the SPC AO who work closely with or
must produce documents for the EU or donors or interact frequently with the media. The
number of donor funded projects, including those from IPA, have grown and core staff
members need language capacity to absorb offered technical assistance and read EU and IPA
related strategic and/or operational documents. Courses would focus on the language skills
specifically needed for the positions rather than general language skills.



25
     A new website supported by the World Bank will be launched shortly.
26
     The Annual Report is activity based, reporting on SPC meeting topics and outcomes and PPO statistical information .

                                                                 11
        Target Recipients: the Secretary General, Assistant to the Secretary General, the Senior
        Advisors for Statutory Issues and Disciplinary Proceedings and the Procurement
        Specialist. In addition, one employee in administrative and office affairs (the individual
        who answers the telephone and receives visitors) should receive training in basic English
        language skills.

3. Computer Literacy
Computer literacy is required in the systematization for each job position, but is described too
generally to provide information on the proficiency level or knowledge of specific applications
required. System enhancements and associated training would enhance staff analysis
capacities and eliminate many instances of manual and duplicative record-keeping observed
during the site visit. This training is in addition to the financial system and Excel training
discussed in A.5 above.

        Target Recipients:

        Document and Project Management: Training for the Senior Advisors in the Sector for
        Issues of Public and Deputy Prosecutors, the Senior Advisor/International Cooperation
        and Projects, the Procurement Specialist and the internal audit positions.
        Human Resources Management: Once the HR system is complete,27 training should be
        provided to the Independent Advisor for General and Personnel Issues and the Senior
        Advisors and Advisor in the Sector for Issues of Public and Deputy Prosecutors.
        PowerPoint or other presentation software: The Senior Advisor for International
        Cooperation and Projects, the Senior Advisor for Public and Deputy Public Prosecutors
        and the heads of Groups for Finance and Accounting and Planning and Execution of PPO
        budgets should be provided with training in presentation software.


IV.     TRAINING PROVIDERS


We have preliminarily identified possible sources of training by topic (see Attachment D).

The World Bank will work with the SPC AO and the Twinning Project to identify courses that
may be offered under the Twinning Project or by other donors, especially those courses more
specific to the justice sector which may require more individualization. The Twinning Project
has already identified the following as training they are prepared to offer the SPC: Strategic
Planning, Performance Management and Budgeting, Process Reengineering, Performance
Evaluation/Public and Deputy Prosecutors, and External Communications. MDTF is considering
27
   Under development as part of IPA 2013. All human resources data, including annual personnel forms,
appointments, retirement lists, and prosecutor evaluations – are currently received in manual form and entered
individually in Excel tables.

                                                     12
piloting, through its Program Implementation Unit (PIU) voluntary English conversation classes
at the Judicial Academy in which participants would discuss European jurisprudence, legal
terminology, etc.

While the Training Division of the Government Personnel Management Service (SUK) has not to
date provided training to judicial branch entities, is has indicated that it would be willing to do
so upon request. Although SUK is tasked with programming and delivery of training to civil
servants working only in ministries, bodies within ministries, special organisations, government
services, administrative districts and cabinet offices,28 civil servants from other public sector
authorities are also participating in SUK trainings. Upon requests from the independent bodies,
courts and local government, the SUK agreed to include their staff into the ongoing trainings
whenever possible.29

It is recommended that the SPC identify courses for which it would like SUK’s assistance and
enter into an Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to do so. Recommended areas for
training collaboration between SUK and the SPC include Financial Projections and Data Analysis
Tools, Internal Audit, International Project Management, External Communications, technology
applications in document and project management, human resources and presentation
software and, if not provided by Twinning, the more general management subjects of strategic
planning, budget and finance fundamentals, and human resources management.

In addition, as recommended above, the SPC and RPPO should more proactively identify
courses it would like the Judicial Academy to offer to prosecutorial employees. Training of
judges, public prosecutors and their deputies, judicial and prosecutorial assistants and trainees
and that of judicial and prosecutorial staff is intended to be organised by the Judicial Academy.
The High Judicial Council has taken advantage of the Judicial Academy to provide some staff
training. This is particularly critical when the areas of training are specific to the judicial branch
rather than of general interest to all public sector managers and employees. These later courses
would be most efficiently delivered by SUK instead of requiring the Judicial Academy to create a
parallel track.

The mandate of the SPC/RPPO training and curriculum development committee should be
expanded to include consideration of staff training needs, determine how and by what
institutions staff training is to be provided and develop methods of evaluating the training


28
   While the Law on Civil Servants considers the staff working in courts and prosecutorial office (apart of judges,
prosecutors and deputy prosecutors) as civil servants, the same law tackles the issue of professional
development/training of civil servants working in the central government authorities only.
29
   However, the working draft of the law on the National Academy for Professional Development of Public
considers broad range of public sector staff but would exclude staff whose training is expected to be undertaken
by other authorities, such as the Judicial Academy.

                                                         13
provided. This body would be responsible for communicating with donors, SUK and the Judicial
Academy about staff training needs and for ongoing identification of private training providers.




         Private Training Providers in Serbia



Private providers could also be considered for delivery of training in more general management
topics. On-line research into available trainers identified local privately owned consulting
agencies, branch offices of international companies, training centers within local universities
and professional associations. The research focused on local agencies that indicate they have
provided at least some training to the public sector, but they are primarily focused on the
private sector. Those that mentioned cooperation with the public sector did not provide more
information on the state authorities with whom they worked or whether they have delivered
training specifically to justice sector authorities.

As shown in Attachment D, some of these firms provide services of design and delivery of
trainings identified as relevant to the SPC.

Local training providers are usually focused on one broader topic: general management, finance
management, HRM, and communications. The delivery of training by these private providers
differs widely. They range from:

      one specific topic (such as negotiation, leadership, performance management,
       recruitment, selection, management of teams, time management, management of
       meetings, etc.) over 1-3 days of training,
      a few topics covered under one training session over 2-4 days (e.g. strategic planning
       that includes elements of resource-based management, people management and
       financial issues, basic management training that includes strategic and operational
       planning and project management and management of teams),
      a broad management training programme implemented in modules - a number of 2-3
       days training sessions over a longer period of time (e.g. participants must undertake 4
       out of 6 planned 3 days sessions in order to receive a certificate).

Some specialized agencies provide ICT and English language courses. Advanced Excel trainings
are organized in modules and are based on specific skills (e.g. advanced Excel, pivot tables, or
graphs, programming in Excel). Each module usually lasts 1-2 days, and prices range from 290
to 590 per each module. Discounts are generally provided for participating in more than one


                                                14
training or for having a number of participants from the same institution (e.g., a 10% discount
for more than three participants).

General English language courses are provided upon initial testing of candidates, while course
level and course durations are differently interpreted by different providers (A1, A2, B1, B2, C1,
C2, basic, basic conversation level, advanced conversation, specialized business courses,
number of classes and number of days, etc). Prices significantly differ depending on the
language level, group or individual classes, number of course days, course provider, etc.
(companies with international licenses have significantly higher prices).

Apart from open training programmes, all companies offer specially-designed and delivered
trainings either to individuals or groups. Unfortunately, the information on cost of such
trainings is not readily available; prices can be defined only after providing detailed information
on training needed in direct communication with training providers.

Questions to be considered in evaluating alternative providers include:

      Where are for whom such training courses have been delivered in the past two years?
      Number of training days offered? Number of participants in each course?
      Balance of lectures and practical exercises engaging those being trained?
      What materials were used in the course of the training?
      When was the last time the materials were updated?
      What did course evaluations of participants and their managers reveal about:
           o Knowledge, skills and abilities gained?
           o Ability to apply knowledge on-the-job?
           o Opportunities to bring training back to the work site and train others?
      Per participant cost?


RELATED RECOMMENDATIONS TO STRENGTHEN SPC CAPACITY


Training cannot stand alone; to be effective it must be linked to other aspects of general and
human resources management. Other areas of SPC AO management that should be addressed
in tandem with formal training include:

      Developing a strategic plan for the SPC. Doing so would provide the SPC with a strategic
       vision and an organizational structure that reflects current needs and anticipates
       emerging ones while eliminating unnecessary bureaucracy.



                                                15
        Developing an action plan with associated timelines, milestones, monitoring and
         evaluation mechanisms and financial requirements.
        Creating a revised systematization for undertaking responsibilities envisioned in the
         strategic plan and incorporating essential duties and needed core competencies (e.g.,
         knowledge of English language, skills in legal drafting, and ability to independently make
         decisions) c), and rankings reflecting differences between classifications. The level of
         detail of the systematization needs to be specific enough to set individual performance
         expectations tied to institutional goals and objectives and to identify ongoing training
         needs. To date, systematizations have been used primarily as a basis for making funding
         requests; their value as performance management tools has been overlooked.
        Prioritizing the order in which the SPC AO’s vacant positions30 should be filled, based on
         the strategic and action plan and systematization above.
        Developing a formal orientation program for new SPC AO employees to insure the SPC’s
         mission, goals and objectives and methods of evaluating staff work are understood by
         employees.
        Introducing a formal cross-training plan. While the SPC is small at present, as it
         expands, employees are likely to know less about their colleagues ’ duties and
         responsibilities. Employees should be individually and specifically identified as cross
         trained for functions other than their primary function. Willingness to undergo cross-
         training should be included as a criteria in performance evaluations and promotions.




30
  Chief of Cabinet, Spokesperson, Assistant to the Secretary General, Advisor for Monitoring and Analysis of the
Work of PPOs, System and Web Administrator, and Senior Advisor and Advisor for Internal Auditing. There are
three state employees hired against two positons for administrative and office support; thus, the staffing chart
shows a total of only six vacancies.

                                                        16
