Report No: AUS18011



Caribbean
Caribbean EITI
Recommendations for Guyana’s application to the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)


May 25, 2017




GEEX1
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally
grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a
request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400,
fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should
be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street
NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail
pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                1
                                   INDEX

I. SUMMARY

II. HIGHLIGHTS OF THE G-EITI WORLD BANK TECHNICAL SUPPORT

III. RECOMMENDATIONS

IV. ANNEXES
      a) Agenda of Guyana’s National EITI Symposium
      b) EITI Technical Workshops: List of Participants
      c) EITI Scoping Study: Highlights and Recommendations
      d) G-EITI MSG: Draft Terms of Reference
      e) Guidance and Key Points for Defining an EITI Work plan




                                                                  2
                        G-EITI – World Bank Technical Support

  I.     SUMMARY

The World Bank mobilized funding to provide technical support, between June 27 and
July 8 2016, to Guyana’s efforts to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI). More specifically, the World Bank focused on the fulfillment of requirements three
and four of the EITI standard that have to be met before submitting an application to the
EITI evaluation board – i.e. the creation of a Tripartite Multi-Stakeholder Group (MSG)
and preparing Guyana’s National EITI Work Plan.

According to plan, the World Bank’s technical support consisted primarily in sharing and
promoting a better understanding of EITI and of the EITI candidacy process among
representatives of the public, private and civil society sectors particularly with respect to
the establishment of an EITI multi-stakeholder group and the rights/responsibilities of its
members. To this effect, the World Bank team liaised with the Guyanese Government and
interim G-EITI Steering Committee on the design of the June 2016 National EITI
Symposium; presented at and helped facilitate said symposium, and presented at four
follow-up EITI workshops targeting key representatives of civil society, government,
forestry and mining sectors, respectively.

Additionally, the team shared with the EITI focal point of the Guyanese government at the
time, Darlene Christian, and with the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry of Natural
Resources, Justin McKenzie, several draft documents based on international best
practices that can be used as inputs to the preparation of Guyana’s EITI candidacy,
including draft terms of reference for the G-EITI Multi-stakeholder Group (G-EITI MSG);
guidance and key points of a National EITI Work Plan, and a suggested timeline of steps
that Guyana needed to consider to successfully submit its candidacy within the timeframe
set by Minister Trotman at the National EITI Symposium.

Moreover, following Minister Trotman’s request to facilitate donor coordination, the World
Bank shared with US Embassy representatives an overview of the support provided
during the Technical Support mission, to help inform the assistance that the US
government was planning to provide to the Guyanese government on the EITI process,
between August 2016 and June 2017.

While significant progress was made during the World Bank’s G-EITI Technical Support
in June-July 2016 – for example, Guyana’s civil society launched on July 10 th its process
to identify the sector’s members for the G-EITI MSG - several tasks remained to be
completed. Still, the advice provided by the World Bank informed Guyana’s continued
efforts to submit its EITI candidacy, albeit at a slower rate than expected.

After publicly announcing the position of National Coordinator of Guyana’s EITI
Secretariat in 2016 – a key recommendation by the World Bank team -, the government of
Guyana appointed Dr. Rudy Jadoopat as the National Coordinator of G-EITI on February
1, 2017. Shortly thereafter, on February 17, Prime Minister Moses Nagamootoo officially



                                                                                           3
launched the G-EITI Multi-stakeholder group (MSG). The MSG includes four (4)
representatives each from government (Ministry of Natural Resources, Office of the
Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance and Guyana Revenue Authority), private sector
(forestry, mining and quarrying and oil/gas) and civil society. The G-EITI MSG is being
supported by the National EITI Secretariat in undertaking the remaining requirements
towards fulfilling Guyana’s EITI candidacy. Those include developing terms of reference,
drafting a work plan and finalizing the scoping study which was previously conducted and
reviewed by the World Bank. Guyana is hoping to submit its bid before the end of 2017.

The government of Guyana has requested the World Bank additional support to
Guyana’s EITI candidacy and the team has responded by mobilizing funding through the
multi-donor trust fund Extractives Global Programmatic Support (EGPS). The World Bank
is planning to resume its engagement of Guyana on EITI in June 2017. The support will
focus on building capacity at the G-EITI National Secretariat and at the G-EITI MSG
particularly pertaining the preparation/submission of Guyana’s EITI candidacy.

  II.     Highlights of the G-EITI WB Technical Support

National EITI Symposium
June 29, 2016

The symposium had a good turnout of 60 people, of which 20 were members of
government, 20 representatives of the private sector, 14 of civil society, and 6 from the
diplomatic corps and international organizations, including the US ambassador, the High
Commissioner of Canada, the High Commissioner of Great Britain and the local
representatives of the UNDP and the IADB.

At the event (agenda is in the annex), the Minister of Natural Resources and Guyana’s
EITI National Champion once again reiterated Guyana’s commitment to the EITI and
declared that the country would be officially applying for EITI membership in November
2016.

For Guyana to achieve the goal set by the EITI National Champion, Guyana needed to
take several keys steps, which were described in some detail by Ana Maria Rodriguez
Contreras, World Bank Consultant and EITI Expert, during her participation at the
Symposium. The discussion that ensued particularly with respect to the establishment of
the G-EITI MSG, generated a lot of interest from all those present. Some of the key
concerns that were expressed during the Symposium include:

       Civil society:
           o The EITI initiative forces civil society, private and public sectors to relate in
               ways that are unfamiliar and its success will require the development of
               trust mechanisms linking all stakeholders;
           o Civil society needs to improve its understanding of the EITI standard and
               the EITI candidacy process;




                                                                                            4
          o The Guyanese population (nationwide) needs to be informed/educated on
            the EITI but that will require funding that is not immediately available to civil
            society;
          o Civil society’s involvement in Guyana’s EITI process is essential and should
            be promoted;
          o The EITI process in Guyana should also contemplate/reflect the role of
            gender.

      Private sector:
          o There is a need to improve the general understanding of the EITI standard
             and its requirements within the extractives sector (mining, forestry, oil &
             gas);
          o The Guyanese extractives sector is diverse and ensuring that all main
             actors are well represented in Guyana’s EITI process will be difficult. This is
             particularly true when considering the number of players involved in
             small-scale mining, which has been the main source of gold production in
             Guyana in recent years.

      Public sector:
         o There is a need to carry out a massive awareness campaign to inform
             Guyanese (nationwide) on the EITI;
         o An effort must be made to build trust among all relevant stakeholders;
         o To facilitate the selection of government representatives to the G-EITI
             MSG, Guyana’s EITI National Champion should publicly announce as early
             as possible the number of slots available to each stakeholder group.

To address some of the concerns raised, it was agreed at the Symposium to organize
follow-up EITI technical workshops for different stakeholder groups to improve the
knowledge of the EITI standard and the EITI process. In addition, Guyana’s EITI National
Champion committed to publicly announce the slots available to each sector in the G-EITI
MSG as well as set the deadline for MSG member selection and the establishment of the
G-EITI MSG.

EITI Technical Workshops
July 5-7, 2016

The World Bank team participated in four follow-up EITI technical workshops – for
forestry, mining, civil society and government representatives - that were organized
between July 5th and 7th 2016 (list of participants in the annex). At each workshop, after
providing a general overview of the EITI and of Guyana’s progress towards submitting its
EITI candidacy up to then, the World Bank team focused its remarks on the establishment
and role of the G-EITI MSG in the EITI process. The World Bank team shared
international good practices and experience from other countries, including detailed
information as to how the Dominican Republic and Colombia selected the members of
their respective EITI MSG.




                                                                                           5
These workshops were important steps towards promoting a better understanding of the
EITI and its inner workings in Guyana, generating interest and at times very lively debate
amongst those attending. Several important observations were made during the various
workshops:

      Civil society
       o Mr. McCormack was clearly leading civil society’s participation in the EITI
          process and appeared to have the backing of several civil society
          organizations. He is well versed on the EITI standard/process;
       o Civil society representatives at the workshop decided on the selection process
          to identify the civil society representatives to the G-EITI MSG. They also
          established a clear timeline ending on July 31st 2016 for this selection: the first
          step – public advertisement for vacancy of civil society representatives - was
          completed on July 10th 2016;
       o Civil society representatives agreed that one of the expected four slots being
          granted to civil society in the G-EITI MSG would be “reserved? for indigenous
          peoples. The latter should select their representative as they see fit and then
          submit the name to the Civil Society G-EITI MSG Selection Committee, which
          would then ratify it. It was unclear however what the Civil Society G-EITI MSG
          Selection Committee would do if the selection of the indigenous representative
          does not meet the deadline set for this process;
       o Civil society representatives were concerned with the need for funding to
          support the sector’s active participation in Guyana’s EITI process, including the
          selection/participation in the G-EITI MSG and drafting of the G-EITI National
          Work Plan. Civil society had been able to mobilize government funding to
          support some of its activities – e.g. covering the cost of the public
          advertisement – but more systematic funding might be required;

      Forestry
       o The forestry sector representatives at the forestry workshop showed limited
          understanding of the EITI and of Guyana’s desire to beco me an EITI member
          (and what this decision implies);
       o After being offered a general overview of the EITI, there were clear signs of
          “initiative fatigue?. As a speaker noted, the forestry sector in Guyana is
          overwhelmed by the sheer number of international initiatives it is expected to
          adhere to;
       o The forestry sector representatives also showed concern with the level of detail
          of the information they are expected to share as part of the EITI, because they
          feared that it would generate competition from other players (most likely
          foreign);
       o The forestry sector representatives were also concerned with the limited
          understanding of the EITI amongst its members and the high cost of
          disseminating information/bringing members together to discuss this new
          initiative (since most are scattered in the hinterland);
       o The forestry sector representatives concluded the workshop stating that they
          would have to check more broadly to determine whether the sector wants to



                                                                                           6
          participate in the EITI process at this stage (since it is voluntary). If there is
          general consensus that forestry should indeed participate in the EITI process,
          funding will be needed to cover the costs of improving the understanding of
          EITI and its requirements among those active in the forestry sector (including
          selection of G-EITI MSG representative(s));

      Government
       o The PS of Natural Resources noted that the decision to have Guyana submit its
         candidacy to the EITI had been made at the highest level and is linked to
         on-going discussions between the governments of Guyana and of Norway;
       o The EITI National Champion believed that the four slots that were to be
         allocated to the Guyanese government in the G-EITI MSG should be given to
         representatives of the Ministry of Natural Resources, the Ministry of Finance,
         the Ministry of Business and Commerce and the Office of the Prime Minister;
       o No decision had been made on how the representatives of each government
         body would be selected and what level of seniority they would have (typically
         they are ranked at the Minister or PS level);

      Mining
       o Mr. Shields lead the proceedings of the meeting held at the ‘Guyana Gold and
          Diamond Miners Association’ and demonstrated a very deep understanding of
          the EITI, its process and potential implications for Guyana;
       o Mr. Shields announced at the meeting that the extractives sector would be
          allocated 4 spots in the G-EITI MSG, of which one would be granted to forestry,
          one to oil/gas and one to large scale mining, leaving one to mid- and small
          scale miners. While this allocation seemed reasonable, it was perhaps a bit
          premature to share it with the audience since it created the perception that
          mid-scale and small-scale miners would be underrepresented in the G-EITI
          MSG (particularly in view of their current dominant role in the mining industry
          and persistent mistrust vis-à-vis civil society and government);
       o The miners present – with very few exceptions – questioned the value/process
          of the EITI and the government’s commitment to submit Guyana’s candidacy
          by November 2016;
       o At the end of the meeting, the miners voted and agreed that they would like to
          have access to the draft EITI Scoping Study in the government’s possession
          before deciding whether or not to participate in the G-EITI MSG. Once they are
          granted access and can review the EITI Scoping Study, they would call for
          another meeting – targeting a larger number of miners – and vote on whether to
          participate in the G-EITI MSG. If they decide to participate in the end, they
          would identify/elect a leader (several indicated to us that it wouldn’t be Mr.
          Shields) to represent them in the G-EITI MSG;

In all EITI technical workshops there was a clear lack of trust between stakeholders
(private vs. government, private vs. civil society, etc.), which is not uncommon but could
negatively impact the submission of Guyana’s EITI candidacy. The overall mistrust of the
EITI and lack of an undisputed leadership within the key mid- and small scale mining



                                                                                          7
sector is another factor that may jeopardize the sub-sector’s participation in the G-EITI
process.

G-EITI APPLICATION

In parallel to participating in the aforementioned events, the World Bank team provided
technical advice to the government of Guyana with respect to:

   1. Communications:
        a. For the EITI process to succeed it is essential to make information readily
           available on the EITI and the EITI process as noted in the discussions with
           the communications team at the Ministry of Natural Resources, led by
           Shondell Frances. The government of Guyana could consider the example
           of other countries such as Colombia and create a separate webpage
           dedicated to EITI Guyana, linked to the Ministry of Natural Resources
           webpage (at least initially), where all the key information on the EITI is made
           available to everyone and people can also send their comments (through a
           comments box for example, or a dedicated e-mail);
        b. All major decisions made by Guyana’s EITI National Champion should also
           be communicated to all relevant stakeholders via formal letter or through
           public media. This applies for example to the formal announcement of the
           number of members each sector will have in the G-EITI MSG and the
           deadline by which each stakeholder group has to present their
           representatives to the National EITI Secretariat and/or the National EITI
           Champion. In the discussions with Minister Trotman it was decided that this
           announcement would be made via press release on the week of July 13 th.
           To assist in this process, the team shared on July 5th a similar
           announcement made by the government of the Dominican Republic for
           reference and offered to help further if needed;
        c. Once the G-EITI MSG is installed, communications between the G-EITI
           MSG constituencies and broader stakeholder need to be coordinated,
           either by the government or by a National EITI Secretariat (when
           established).

   2. Record Keeping: To further support Guyana’s EITI candidacy it is important to
      keep a record of the EITI process. This includes compiling lists with
      names/contact/organization of those that participate at EITI-related meetings
      and/or workshops, write minutes or reports of each of said meetings, keep track of
      all the documents linked to the EITI process, etc.

   3. G-EITI MSG: To successfully establish the G-EITI MSG one needs a transparent,
      inclusive and effective member selection process. In some instances, MSG
      members have been selected through open election (particularly for civil society
      representatives) and in order cases they have been appointed by their peers
      through different mechanisms. The continued success of the G-EITI MSG will in
      part depend on its ability to give voice to different segments of each sector –



                                                                                        8
         internal information sharing/discussion mechanisms should be established within
         each group to ensure that the sector’s representatives at the G -EITI MSG are
         informed/aware of the concerns of their diverse constituents. For more on the
         functioning of the G-EITI MSG please refer to the draft Terms of Reference in the
         annex, which draws from international good practices.

   4. EITI Application Form: The EITI Application Form is complex and its completion
      takes a lot of time/effort. Once the most recent version of the EITI Application Form
      is secured through the International EITI Secretariat, it is important to quickly
      initiate completion/ required data collection.

   5. EITI Work Plan: The draft Work Plan that was included as part of the draft EITI
      Scoping Study should be seen as a very preliminary and rough draft of what is
      required. The existing draft Work Plan should be revised taking in consideration
      costing and several other key elements (see guidance note in the annex). If so
      desired, an updated version of the draft G-EITI Work Plan could be shared with the
      World Bank team for comment.

In addition to this support, the team planned to discuss the comments that it had shared –
prior to arrival in the country – on the existing draft EITI Scoping Study. Unfortunately, the
EITI focal point was overwhelmed and not able to have this discussion. The World Bank
team indicated its availability to discuss/clarify the comments (for easy reference a
summary of the comments given in the text in track changes is in the annex).


  III.     RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the data gathered during the technical support mission and international good
practices and experience, the World Bank team prepared a suggested timeline of steps
that needed to be taken so that Guyana could successfully submit its candidacy by
November 2016 the preferred date at the time the technical assistance was provided:


 Category                   Activity                     Product           Responsible       Timeline

               Prepare ToR, budget and hire
               the interim G-EITI National            G-EITI National     EITI National
                                                                                           July 29, 2016
               Secretariat (National                 Secretariat hired    Champion
               Coordinator + one )
               Define the communications             Defined G-EITI
                                                                          EITI National
               strategy and create website/logo      communications                        August 5, 2016
 G-EITI                                                                   Champion
               for Guyana EITI                       strategy
 National
               Request the EITI Application
 secretariat                                                              Interim G-EITI
               form from EITI Intern.                Outline of the                        August 10,
                                                                          National
               Secretariat, review it and identify   application format                    2016
                                                                          Secretariat
               required information
                                                                          Interim G-EITI
               Create formats for meeting
                                                     Formats created      National         August 5, 2016
               minutes/participation lists
                                                                          Secretariat



                                                                                                           9
         Create a dropbox or folders to
         keep track of all the meetings,    Registration          Interim G-EITI
         pictures, press releases or any    mechanism             National         August 5, 2016
         pertinent information/documents    created               Secretariat
         that will support the candidacy
                                                                  Interim G-EITI
         Coordinate and call for G-EITI     Proposed agenda
                                                                  National         August 8, 2016
         MSG meetings                       of meetings
                                                                  Secretariat
         Coordinate with Carter
         Foundation and other               List of potential     Interim G-EITI
                                                                                   August 10,
         donors/partners from the           activities that       National
                                                                                   2016
         international community to fund    could be funded       Secretariat
         the EITI process in Guyana.
                                            Formal
                                            announcement
         Official public communication
                                            via major
         regarding the deadline for                               Ministry of
                                            newspaper and
         selection of each sector´s MSG                           Natural          July 13, 2016
                                            notice on the
         representatives (4 members                               Resources
                                            Ministry of Natural
         each)
                                            Resources’
                                            website
                                            Receive
                                                                  Civil society,
                                            communication
         Selection of 4 G-EITI MSG                                private sector   August 12,
                                            from the sectors
G-EITI   representatives of each sector                           and government   2016
                                            with their selected
MSG                                                               stakeholders
                                            members
                                            Draft G-EITI MSG
         Distribute to the selected
                                            ToRs and
         members of the G-EITI MSG the                            Interim G-EITI
                                            timeline/proposed                      August 15,
         draft ToR for the G-EITI MSG                             National
                                            content of                             2016
         and timeline/proposed content of                         Secretariat
                                            upcoming G-EITI
         its upcoming meetings
                                            MSG meetings
                                            G-EITI MSG
                                            installed and                          August 30,
         Installation of the G-EITI MSG                           G-EITI MSG
                                            G-EITI MSG ToR                         2016
                                            approved




                                                                                                   10
 Category                Activity                      Product           Responsible       Timeline
                                                   Draft of scope,
            Each of the sectors should meet        materiality,
First                                                                   Civil society,
            and produce their own proposals        timeline,
G-EITI                                                                  private sector
            on the scope, materiality,             objectives,
MSG                                                                     and government
            objectives, timeline, activities and   activities and
Meeting                                                                 stakeholders
            costing of the work plan               costing of the
                                                   work plan
            Collect the inputs of the MSG
            representatives and share with all
            MSG members a unified                                       Interim G-EITI
                                                   Unified draft work                    September 30,
            document that includes                                      National
                                                   plan                                  2016
            proposed scope, materiality,                                Secretariat
            timeline, objectives, activities and
            costing of the work plan
            Map/list of donors and
                                                   Draft list of
            international partners that may be
                                                   potential funding
            able to support the                                         Interim G-EITI
                                                   sources for the                       October 10,
            implementation of Guyana’s EITI                             National
                                                   implementation of                     2016
            work plan. This includes a                                  Secretariat
                                                   the G-EITI work
            possible candidacy to the EGPS
                                                   plan
            multi-donor trust fund.
Second      Review unified proposal and
G-EITI      approve the scope, materiality,        Approved G-EITI                       October 17,
                                                                        G-EITI MSG
MSG         timeline, objectives, activities and   work plan                             2016
meeting     costing of the work plan
                                                                        Interim G-EITI
            Distribute the draft G -EITI           Distributed draft                     October 31,
                                                                        National
            application to the MSG members         G-EITI application                    2016
                                                                        Secretariat
                                                                        Civil society,
            Each of the sectors should meet        Comments on
                                                                        private sector
            to review the proposed G -EITI         draft G-EITI
                                                                        and government
            application and prepare feedback       application
                                                                        stakeholders
            Collect the inputs of the G-EITI
                                                                        Interim G-EITI
            MSG representatives and share          Revised draft                         November 14,
                                                                        National
            with all MSG members a revised         G-EITI application                    2016
                                                                        Secretariat
            draft G -EITI application
Third
G-EITI      Discuss and approve G-EITI             Approved G-EITI                       November 21,
                                                                        G-EITI MSG
MSG         application                            application                           2016
meeting
                                                                        Interim G-EITI
            Submit the G-EITI application to       Submitted G-EITI                      November 25,
                                                                        National
            EITI International Secretariat         application                           2016
                                                                        Secretariat

In addition to the suggested timeline above, the World Bank team recommended the
following:

    To keep the momentum going and meet the deadline set by the National EITI
     Champion, it is paramount to establish a team fully dedicated to Guyana’s EITI
     candidacy. This type of focus and 24/7 availability is essential in view of the
     complexity of the tasks at hand and of the ambitious deadline. The government
     could consider establishing in short notice an interim EITI National Secretariat to


                                                                                                       11
       assume these responsibilities, following Colombia’s example. Once the EITI
       candidacy is successfully submitted the G-EITI MSG can decide whether to
       confirm the interim EITI National Secretariat or nominate another.

     To ensure that all relevant stakeholders are adequately informed on the EITI
      standard, the EITI candidacy process and the G-EITI MSG, it would be advisable
      to hold meetings/workshops – similar to those held during the G-EITI World Bank
      Technical Support Mission - for the large-scale mining sector1, the oil and gas
      sector2 and for key government agencies3, all of which had already shown interest
      in the process.

     To promote good will and address some of the underlying mistrust among
      stakeholders a revised draft EITI Scoping Study should be broadly shared as soon
      as possible. The draft version to be shared should not include the MoU (which is
      obsolete) and the Work Plan that is to a certain extent incomplete.

     The planned activities of the Carter Foundation support that were set to launch in
      August 2016 should be revised to take in consideration the work that has already
      been done and the evolving circumstances on the ground. Focus of the support
      perhaps could be on providing civil society and the private sector with the
      financial/logistics support that they will need to reach out to their constituents.
      Active coordination should be in place between the government/interim EITI
      National Secretariat and donors to avoid duplication and confusion that will only
      make an already challenging process even more difficult.




1
  The companies to be invited to participate would include, among others, the Bauxite Company of Guyana
Inc., Bosai Minerals Group Guyana Inc., Correia Mining Co.; Guyana Goldfields Inc., Guyana Industrial
Minerals Inc., Troy Resources; Baracara Quarries Ltd., Linden Quarries; BK Quarries Inc. and Toolsie
Persaud Quarries Inc.
2
  The companies to be invited to participate would include, among others, Anadarko Guyana Company,
Esso Exploration and Production Guyana Ltd, CGX Resources Inc., Repsol Exploration SA; Canacol
Energy Guyana Inc.
3
  The entities to be invited to participate would include, among others, the Guyana Geology and Mines
Commission, the Guyana Gold Board, the Guyana Revenue Authority and the Environmental Protection
Agency.



                                                                                                     12
                                    IV.   ANNEXES

        A. Guyana: National Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
                                      Symposium

                                      AGENDA

Chairperson: Mr. Rudy Collins

8:30    Registration

Opening Ceremony

9:00    Introductory Remarks & Video – Chair

9:05    Opening Remarks
                 - Mr. Mike McCormack, Civil Society Representative
                 - Mr. Hilbert Shields, Private Sector Representative
                 - Hon. Raphael G.C. Trotman, Minister of Natural Resources

10:00    Coffee/ Tea Break

10:20 Overview and Disscussion on Role, of Government, Civil Society and Companies
in Guyana in the Multi Stakeholders Group (MSG) and Q&A
             - Ms. Ana Maria Rodriguez, Consultant, World Bank

12:00 Lunch

13:00 Shared Experience: Colombia and Dominican Republic’s preparation of the
      Candidacy, Lessons Learnt and Best Practices

              -   Ms. Ana Maria Rodriguez, Consultant, World Bank

14:15 Coffee/Tea Break

14:40 Update on Next Steps- Follow Up Meetings

15:00 Close of Symposium

15:30 Cocktail Reception




                                                                                   13
          B. Follow-up EITI Technical Workshops: List of participants

                            July 5, 2016: Civil Society

Present

  1) Guyana Environment Initiative (GEI)
  2) Guyana Citizen Initiative (GCI)
  3) Rights of the Child (ROC)
  4) National Toshaos Council (NTC)
  5) Transparency Institute Guyana Inc. (TIGI)
  6) Jesuits Guyana
  7) EITI World Bank Consultant
  8) Amerindian Peoples Association (APA)
  9) Policy Forum Guyana (PFG)
  10) East Coast Clean-up Committee (ECCC)
  11) Guyana Human Rights Association (GHRA)
  12) Conservation International Guyana (CI)

  Apologies for being unable to attend:

  13) World Wildlife Fund (WWF)
  14) Guyana, Red Thread
  15) Ursuline Sisters
  16) Guyana Organization of Indigenous People (GOIP)
  17) Community Based Rehab
  18) Rotaract
  19) UG Students Society (UGSS)
  20) Moruca Village Council
                             July 6, 2016: Government




Document of the World Bank
July 6, 2016: Forestry Commission




                                    2
                           July 7, 2016: Gold and Diamond Mining Association



     Name                   Contact information
1    Alfro Alphonso         640-4582
2    Ana Maria Rodriguez    Anamariarodriguez.contreras@gmail.com
3    Andron Alphonso        670-1088
4    Azeem Baksh            226-9492
5    Carl Baldie            226-6317
6    Carol Loncke           653-8270
7    Cyrilda De Jesus       226-9859
8    Dabria Marcus          603-0333
9    David Bacchus          drbacchus@aol.com
10   Dominic O'Sulivan
11   Donna Charles
12   Edward Hopkinson       623-4552
13   Kashif Amsterdam       614-0166
14   Kevin Lopes            603-9509
15   Kristian Jeffrey
16   Lavern Hudson
17   M. Alphonso
18   M. Heera               231-2993
19   Martin Leitch
20   Nicholas               672-5281
     Chuch-A-Sang
21   Norma Harris           688-5615
22   Norma Van-De-Cruz
23   Ohio Thompson          622-2452
24   P. Persaud
25   Partick Harding        626-0297
26   Roger Boyce
27   Shawn King             225-1522
28   Susana Moreira         smoreira@worldbank.org
29   T. D'Anjon             624-2004
30   Terrence Adams         642-1009
31   Tom Dalgety            641-0814/690-7433
32   Urica Primus           686-4207
33   William Woolford       dcwhw@yahoo.com
34   Wyette Amsterdam




                                                                               3
                      C. EITI Scoping study: Highlights and Recommendations


The scoping study provides great information on the context and legal framework on Guyana that is very
useful to the implementation of the EITI process in the country.

There scoping study also highlighted important limitations in the existing information available, including:
         statement of revenues collected from Guyana Revenue Authority (IRD and CED
           Departments)
         disaggregated revenue data by licensee (mining companies) collected by GGB and GGMC
         Disaggregated Production data by licensee (mining companies).

A key issue moving forward will be Guyana’s data disclosure rules and regulations. To prepare its bid for
the EITI, Guyana should assess how currently data is being disclosed and how the current
rules/regulations will impact the country’s ability to meet the requirements set by the new EITI Standard.
In the short- to mid-term the government of Guyana may want to consider a regulatory reform that will
allow Guyana’s disclosure rules/regulations to meet the requirements set by the EITI standard
(particularly with respect to beneficial ownership).

Another important issue is the decision whether or not to use the principle of progressiveness in the
definition of G-EITI’s scope and work plan. International good practices suggest that Guyana should not
try to meet all of EITI’s standard’s requirements immediately but instead do so progressively, as the
country/sectors build the capacity needed to do so.

Regarding the scope of the EITI process in Guyana one could recommend to include the following
payment flows for the mining and oil/gas sectors:

                                                                Government Mining Petroleum
                N° Payments flows
                                                                Entity     sector sector
                1   Royalties                                   GGMC/GGB    √
                2   Annual Rental Fees                          GGMC        √     √
                3   Permit and Licences Fees                    GGMC/GGB    √     √
                    Application, Transfer, registration   and
                4                                               GGMC        √
                    Training Fees
                5   Annual Training Fees                        GGMC              √
                6   Fines                                       GGMC        √
                7   Application Fees                            EPA         √     √
                8   Environmental Permit Fees                   EPA         √     √
                9   Construction Permits                        EPA         √
                10 Income Tax                                   GRA (IRD)   √     √
                11 Withholding Tax                              GRA (IRD)   √     √
                12 Value added tax (VAT)                        GRA (IRD)   √     √
                13 Customs Duty                                 GRA (CED)   √     √
                14 Property Tax                                 GRA (IRD)   √     √
                15 Capital Gain Tax                             GRA (IRD)   √     √
                16 Transfer tax                                 GRA (IRD)   √     √
                17 Stamp duty                                   GRA (IRD)   √     √
                18 Dividends                                    MoF         √     √
                19 Revenues from share disposal                 MoF         √     √

                                                                                                  4
                  20 Social security contributions                     NIS   √    √
                         Mandatory    and     discretionary   social
                  21                                                   (*)   √    √
                         expenditure
       (*) Unilateral disclosure by companies

If forestry is to be included in the scope of Guyana’s EITI, a similar exercise as the table above should be
conducted to identify all relevant fees.

On a final note, it is important to highlight that the MoU included in the EITI Scoping Study is obsolete and
should be taken out or revised. Also the draft work plan included in the study is rather incomplete and
should perhaps be taken out of this document or at least revised to reflect international good practices and
the evolving realities on the ground in Guyana. The revised version of the draft work plan should ultimately
be shared with the G-EITI MSG, which will be responsible for its final review and approval.




                                                                                                  5
 D. Guyana Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Multi-stakeholder Group (G-EITI MSG)
                               DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE

Background

Example:
Guyana’s economy has demonstrated strong growth over recent years, despite the global financial crisis.
It has been boosted, at least in part, by high international gold prices. The Extractive Industries Sector has
attracted investment, both domestic and international, fuelled increases in exports, and developed related
sectors.

Guyana announced its commitment to implement the EITI programme in May 2010. In May 2012, the
Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment (MoNRE) and the EITI International Secretariat
signed a Memorandum of Understanding to assist Guyana in its preparation for EITI candidacy. The work
of the Guyana Extractive Industries Transparency (G-EITI) will be a significant challenge for all involved.

I. Objectives and Mission of Guyana EITI

EITI Guyana seeks to introduce greater transparency and accountability in the way Government collects
and companies pay taxes and other revenues from extractive industries. Furthermore, EITI Guyana seeks
to promote open and permanent dialogue among all relevant stakeholders from the private, public and
civil society sectors.

The Guyana Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Multi-Stakeholder Group (G-EITI MSG)
provides a platform for companies and civil society stakeholders to engage government in the
implementation of EITI in Guyana. In the MSG, all participants are treated as partners in an inclusive
decision-making process and are provided the opportunity to participate in the design, development,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Guyanese EITI Work Plan. To this end its mandate will
encompass:

      Ensuring sustained political commitment for the initiative and mobilizing resources to sustain its
       activities and goals;
      Setting the strategic direction required for effectively implementing the initiative in Guyana;
      Assessing and removing barriers to its implementation;
      Setting the scope of the EITI process;
      Ensuring that the initiative is effectively integrated in the legal context of the natural resources and
       any other related government reform agenda.

II. Principles of Engagement

Engagement between government, companies and civil society stakeholders in the Group will be based
on the following principles:

      Local ownership and inclusive dialogue – provide an environment where all participants can
       engage freely and openly;
      Transparency – provide all parties, as well as the general public, timely, access to relevant and
       verified information/data, subject to the limits set by law;
      Accountability – abide by the policies, standards and guidelines of engagement that may be
       agreed upon, and fulfil commitments;
      Integrity – adhere to moral and professional standards in fulfilling our commitments
                                                                                                    6
      Inclusivity – freely appoint their own representatives, bearing in mind the desirability of pluralistic
       and diverse implementation;
      Partnership – cooperate, share responsibilities and uphold mutual respect to ensure that the
       objectives of the engagement are achieved;
      Consultation, Capacity-Building and Empowerment – enhance knowledge-sharing and
       continuing dialogue;
      Respect for Internal Processes – understand and abide by the limitations of stakeholders with
       respect to the nature of information to be disclosed and the extent of involvement based on
       institutional/legally imposed limitations;
      Sustainability – ensure continuing engagement by instituting progressive policies and operational
       mechanisms that will promote an environment of mutual trust; and
       National Interest – uphold the national welfare above the interests of organizations or
       individuals.

III. The Multi-Stakeholder Group: Guyana-EITI MSG

The Guyana EITI multi-stakeholder group is an inclusive decision making body that is led by the National
EITI Champion. The direction, programs and activities of EITI Guyana will be set by Guyana-EITI MSG. It
will be supported by a National Secretariat that will be organized and supported by national government.

Specifically, Guyana-EITI MSG will have the following functions:

      Ensure the commitment of the different stakeholders to the implementation of EITI;
      Define the strategic direction and scope of EITI in the Guyana;
      In consultation with key EITI stakeholders, craft and publish a fully costed work plan;
       Endorse the Country Work Plan for approval;
      Establish a mechanism for the EITI reconciliation process;
      Select and appoint the third party validator as prescribed in the EITI Rules;
      Oversee the implementation of the EITI and its Work Plan;
      Direct and supervise the secretariat in its various activities; and
      Through its members, conduct outreach to various sectors in support of the Work Plan
      Communicate and build awareness about EITI, its objectives, the experience and gains of other
       countries in implementing this, and the progress of its implementation in Guyana

Issues to be discussed within Guyana-EITI MSG shall be limited to those related to EITI, unless
otherwise agreed upon by consensus of the MSG.

IV. National Secretariat to support Guyana-EITI MSG

a) The National EITI Secretariat, known as the Guyana Secretariat, is set up by the Minister of Natural
Resources to support the MSG by carrying out the day-to-day activities related to EITI implementation
while the MSG assumes a strategic and oversight role over the EITI implementation.

b) The Guyana EITI Secretariat is accountable to the MSG.

c) The Guyana EITI Secretariat shall be housed within and staffed by the Ministry of Natural resource or
any other Institute to be determined by the Ministry responsible for EITI implementation. The activities of
the Guyana Secretariat shall be financed at the beginning from the budget of operational activities of the
work plan for the country and for the following periods it needs to be decided what the financing
mechanism will be. One suggestion is to secure financing from the Ministry of Natural Resources.


                                                                                                   7
d) The Guyana EITI Secretariat will have the following functions:

   o Support the MSG Chair and all members of the MSG, including but not limited to providing
     administrative support in convening MSG meetings and follow-up;
   o Coordinate communication activities to promote the use of EITI data, including hosting an EITI
     website and manage relations with media; The Guyana Secretariat will keep a central record of
     events and publicity on EITI;
   o Coordinate communications between MSG constituencies and broader stakeholders;
   o Draft and lead consultations on Guyana EITI MSG work plans;
   o Seek funding, and allocate resources for EITI activities;
   o Manage the process for recruiting the Independent Administrator;
   o For practical reasons, the contract to appoint the Independent Administrator will be between the
     Ministry of Natural Resources and the Independent Administrator. The national Secretariat will
     manage the contract on behalf of the Guyana EITI MSG. The Ministry of Natural Resources shall
     act on behalf of the Guyana EITI MSG, as owner of Intellectual Property Rights in the GEITI
     Report.

V. Composition of Guyana-EITI Multi-Stakeholder Group

Guyana-EITI MSG will be composed of the following:

Four (4) Government Representatives (senior officials) from the following offices/ institutions:
   ? Ministry of Natural Resources
   ? Ministry of Finance
   ? Ministry of Business and Commerce
   ? Office of the Prime Minister

Four (4) Private Sector Representatives
    To be selected through a process initiated by the private sector with the support of the Guyana-EITI
       Secretariat

Four (4) Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) Representatives
    To be selected through a process initiated by CSOs with the support of the Guyana-EITI
       Secretariat

Each organization shall formally designate a permanent and alternate representative to Guyana-EITI
MSG. The alternate member is expected to participate in the G-EITI MSG meetings only in the absence of
the permanent representative.

Each organization, upon the decision of its members and through its own independent process, can
replace their representatives in the MSG anytime following their own governance mechanisms.

Guyana-EITI Multi-Stakeholder Group will be chaired by the designated representative selected from the
group of MSG, who will be responsible for convening the group. In addition, the Chair will be responsible
for organizing a secretariat, which will coordinate the Guyana´s EITI- work and organize other related
activities.

VI. Guyana EITI-MSG sub-committees

a) MSG may decide that particular issues should be developed by a sub-committee. The Guyana-EITI
MSG may create such sub-committees. Each such sub-committee must be led by an EITI Guyana MSG

                                                                                                   8
member who will be supported by one or more other MSG members. The sub-committee’s leader may
also invite outside experts to participate in the sub-committee, but only with the agreement of all EITI
Guyana MSG sub-committee members.
b) The sub-committees shall provide its recommendation to the EITI Guyana MSG members who will
consider those recommendations and will seek to make a decision on the basis of consensus.

VII. Roles of the Members of Guyana-EITI Multi-Stakeholder Group

General Roles of the MSG members:
   Ensure an open and transparent functioning of Guyana-EITI
   Address confidentiality concerns in implementing EITI
   Communicate and provide linkages and facilitate dialogue with the different organizations and
     groups regarding related issues
   Help determine parameters of EITI implementation
   Be involved in communicating updates and results to their respective constituencies and to the
     general public
   Implement capacity building and other knowledge exchange activities for those less familiar with
     EITI

Role of Government Representatives:
    Provide political leadership and support such as creating a unit which will provide secretariat and
      technical support to Guyana EITI
    Ensure the full participation of national government agencies and local government units in the
      implementation of EITI and create an enabling policy environment for the same
    Ensure the full participation of extractive companies
    Encourage the full participation of civil society
    Provide a legal basis for implementation of EITI as well as identify and address legal barriers and
      regulations that block the proper implementation of EITI
    Disclose government revenues and relevant data in an accurate and timely manner and at a level
      of detail to be agreed upon by the MSG

Role of Private Sector Representatives:
    Help ensure the full participation of extractive companies
    Disclose payments and relevant data to government, IPs and other stakeholders in an accurate
      and timely manner at a level of detail to be agreed upon by the MSG
    Communicate to relevant industry stakeholders the progress of the EITI process in Guyana

Role of CSO Representatives:
    Communicate and consult widely with a diverse set of stakeholders including those outside the
      steering group and build capacities on EITI
    Ensure full participation of relevant CSOs
    Monitor the disclosures done by the government and extractive companies


VIII. Terms of the Members of Guyana EITI Multi-Stakeholder Group

The Chair should be appointed after an election between the members of the MSG and shall serve for a
period of one report (one year) until his/her replacement by another elected member.




                                                                                              9
All members of the MSG shall serve for a term of 3 years or the equivalent of 2 reporting cycles. This is to
ensure that there will be institutional memory within the MSG. Representatives may be reappointed: the
members of each sector shall identify who among them shall continue for subsequent terms.



IX. Code of conduct

a) All G-EITI MSG members, whether principal members or alternates shall at all times act in the best
interest of the EITI and not for interests such as personal and private benefits or financial enrichment.

b) All attendees to G-EITI MSG meetings, whether principal members, alternates, observers, experts or
nominated people shall respect and not discuss outside of the MSG meetings any information, which is
not already in the public domain, and is deemed confidential.

c) Any attendees, whether principal members, alternates, observers, experts or nominated people should
declare any conflict of interest to the Chair a week before attending a G-EITI MSG meeting.

d) All Members of the G-EITI MSG, whether principal or alternate, should excuse and abstain themselves
from discussion or decisions on matters in which they have a conflicting interest, unless resolved
otherwise by the remaining members of the MSG. This fact shall be appropriately recorded.

e) Members hereby undertake to uphold the core values of transparency, integrity and enterprise in all
dealings on behalf of G-EITI and to ensure that they have sufficient time available to devote to their duties
as G-EITI MSG Members.

f) In the event that any G-EITI MSG Member assumes a position or duties incompatible with the
independence and objectivity of their membership and function on the G-EITI MSG, they shall
immediately notify the remaining members of the G-EITI MSG through the Chairperson.

h) In the spirit of openness, the G-EITI MSG has chosen to rely on the International EITI’s Code of
Conduct which says:

Confidentiality: EITI Office Holders shall not use any information that is provided in his or her role as EITI
Office Holder and which is not already in the public domain in any manner other than in furtherance of his
or her duties. EITI Office Holders continue to be bound by this obligation for two years after termination of
their mandate.

i) This will be in addition to the Openness Policy which is included in the EITI Standard. All instances of
failure to adhere with these principles would be reviewed by the G-EITI MSG and may result in exclusion
from any further participation in G-EITI MSG meetings.

X. Guyana-EITI Multi-Stakeholder Group Meetings and Decision Making

The Multi-Stakeholder Group will meet once every two months or as often as necessary. The Chair will
call and preside the MSG meetings while notices shall be sent out by the Guyana-EITI Secretariat a
minimum of one week before the date of the meeting. The secretariat shall also handle the documentation
and preparations of the minutes of the meetings. The highlights, agenda, minutes of the meetings and all
supporting documents shall be circulated to the members of the group one week after the meeting. The
members will also have one week to send their comments and no comment will be considered approval.
Implementation of the decisions made by the MSG will be reported by the Secretariat and will be
discussed in the subsequent MSG meeting.

                                                                                                   10
For urgent matters where decision is needed, necessary information shall be circulated through email so
that decisions can be made electronically, also by consensus.

Fifty percent (50%) of the members, with at least one representative from the government, CSOs and
business sector, shall represent the quorum of the Multi-Stakeholder Group. The MSG will, in good faith,
make decisions by consensus.

In cases where general agreement cannot be reached, a formal vote will be taken at the discretion of the
Chair and voting rules will be applied. While consensus is not always possible, decision-making principles
are designed to build the greatest possible consensus.

The Decision-making will occur by a system as follows:

A. Consensus. The Chair will seek to achieve consensus for all decisions. If this is not achieved, then
modified consensus will be sought.

B. Modified Consensus. The decisions of the MSG shall be made by two third of votes of members
present and includes a minimum of 2 representatives from each constituency. In any case in which there
is an equality of votes, the Chair or the member appointed to preside over the meeting, as the case may
be, shall in addition to an original vote, cast the deciding vote.

If this is not achieved, a working group will be formed comprising equal representation from each
constituency, to discuss and negotiate a recommendation to proceed to the MSG. This may occur at the
meeting; post meeting (with the intention to provide a recommendation by the next MSG) to be considered
out-of-session. Once the sub-group has provided its recommendation, the MSG will seek to make a
decision on the basis of consensus or modified consensus.

If a modified consensus is not possible, then a consensus is not possible.




                                                                                                11
                     E. Guidance and Key Points for Defining an EITI Work Plan

Note:        For      the    full  document       with   more          detailed      information      go      to:
https://eiti.org/files/Guidance-Note-workplan-final_EN.pdf

What is the EITI Work plan:

      Based on the EITI Standard and discussions about challenges and priorities for the extractive
       industries, the multi-stakeholder group, in consultation with key stakeholders, should develop a
       work plan that sets out why the EITI is being implemented and what issues the EITI process will
       seek to address.
      Requirement 1.4 of the EITI Standard sets out a number of requirements on what the work plan
       must contain.
      Work plan shall include: (1) Identify national priorities for the extractive sector; (2) Define objectives
       for implementation; (3) Agree the activities needed to achieve the objectives; (4) Endorse and
       publish the work plan; and (5) Monitor and revise.
       EITI work plan requirements:

Requirement 1.4 of the Standard requires that the multi-stakeholder group maintains a current
work plan, fully costed and aligned with the EITI reporting and Validation deadlines established
by the EITI Board.

The work plan must:
   a) Set EITI implementation objectives that are linked to the EITI Principles and reflect national
      priorities for the extractive industries. The multi-stakeholder group is encouraged to explore
      innovative approaches to extending EITI implementation to increase the comprehensiveness of
      EITI reporting and public understanding of revenues, and encourage high standards of
      transparency and accountability in public life, government operations and in business.
   b) Reflect the results of consultations with key stakeholders, and be endorsed by the
      multi-stakeholder group.
   c) Include measurable and time bound activities to achieve the agreed objectives. The scope of EITI
      implementation should be tailored to contribute to the desired outcomes and impact that have been
      identified during the consultation process.
   d) Assess and outline plans to address any potential capacity constraints in government agencies,
      companies and civil society that may be an obstacle to effective EITI implementation;
   e) Address the scope of EITI reporting, including plans for addressing technical aspects of reporting,
      such as comprehensiveness and data reliability (Requirements 4 and 5); and
   f) Identify and outline plans to address any potential legal or regulatory obstacles to EITI
      implementation, including, if applicable, any plans to incorporate the EITI Requirements within
      national legislation or regulation.
   g) Identify domestic and external sources of funding and technical assistance where appropriate in
      order to ensure timely implementation of the agreed work plan.
   h) Be made widely available to the public, for example published on the national EITI website and/or
      other relevant ministry and agency websites, in print media or in places that are easily accessible
      to the public.
   i) Be reviewed and updated annually. In reviewing the work plan, the multi-stakeholder group should
      consider extending the detail and scope of EITI reporting including addressing issues such as
      revenue management and expenditure (3.7-3.8), transportation payments (4.1.f), discretionary
      social expenditures (4.1.e), ad-hoc subnational transfers (4.2.e), beneficial ownership (3.11) and
      contracts (3.12). In accordance with Requirement 1.3 (g)(viii), the multi-stakeholder group is
      required to document its discussion and decisions.
                                                                                                      12
  j) Include a timetable for implementation that is aligned with the reporting and Validation deadlines
      established by the EITI Board (see 1.6, below) and that takes into account administrative
      requirements such as procurement processes and funding.
Source: EITI Standard, p. 14-15

SIMPLY PUT, THE WORKPLAN SHOULD DEFINE AND EXPLAIN:

1. What the MSG wants to achieve through the EITI.; Which issues does the MSG want to address and
why? How does the MSG aim to meet the requirements of the EITI Standard?

2. How the MSG plans to achieve these objectives: which actions will it take, which activities it will
organize, how it will surpass obstacles, and which assistance may it need

3. When the MSG plans to undertake these activities

4. Who is responsible for the activities?

5. How much the implementation activities are expected to cost and how the process will be financed

OVERALL THE WORK PLAN MUST:

1. Identify national priorities for the extractive sector
        Set EITI implementation objectives that are linked to the EITI Principles and reflect national
            priorities for the extractive industries? (Requirement 1.4.a) and “reflect the results of
            consultations with key stakeholders? (Requirement 1.4.b). In order to identify national priorities
            for the extractive sector, the MSG is advised to:
        Identify and consult EITI stakeholders regarding their views on the priorities for the
            management of the extractive sector. Consultations could be conducted through national or
            regional workshops, or through an active and open invitation to all citizens through national
            and local media.

2. Define objectives for EITI implementation
        Based on the priorities identified, the MSG should develop objectives for implementation.
          These objectives must set out what the MSG wants to achieve through EITI, and reflect
          priorities identified. When formulating the objectives have in mind these methodologies:
              o Consider applying a SMART (is the objective Specific, Measurable, Achievable,
                   Relevant, Time-bound) design.
              o Consider complementing the objectives with a short narrative explaining the rationale.




                                                                                                   13
3. Agree on the activities needed to fulfill the objectives and priorities including:
        Ensure that the work plan reflects activities related to the various aspects of EITI reporting,
          including disclosure of contextual information, technical aspects of reporting,
          comprehensiveness and data reliability and plans for communicating and disseminating EITI
          data.
        Identify any potential constraints (capacity, finance, legal, administrative) that may affect the
          implementation of the activities.
        Assign responsibilities for the various activities and products
        Elaborate a time frame for implementing the activities. The time frame must take into account
          deadlines by the EITI Board for production of EITI Reports, annual activity reports and
          Validation.
        Estimate the cost of the activities and how they will be funded.




4. Endorse and publish the work plan
 EITI requests that “the work plan must be made widely available to the public, for example published on
 the national EITI website and/or other relevant ministry and agency websites, in print media or in places
 that are easily accessible to the public?.
 MSG may find helpful to organize the work plan in a format easy to use, monitor and revise such as a
 table of diagram.

The MSG may decide that they wish to attach narrative reports, or other complementing documents to
the work plan such as:
   o Ghantt chart presenting the project schedule
   o Long term work plan and one-year excerpt
   o Running calendar with dates, activities and events.
   o Key performance indicators to monitor progress
   o A communications plan

5. Monitor and revise the work plan annually and look for progressivity , meaning that each revision
   considering including requirements or other activities that were not stablish in the previous work plan.




                                                                                                 14
Proposed Template for the work plan




                                      15
